THE REVISED
CORPORATION CODE
OF THE PHILIPPINES
ANNOTATED
HECTOR S. DE LEON
LL.B., University of the Philippines
Former Associate Professor, Far Eastern University

and

HECTOR M. DE LEON, JR.

A.B., LL.B., University of the Philippines
LL.M., University of Michigan
Managing Partner, SyCip Salazar Hernandez & Gatmaitan

TWELFTH EDITION
2022

Published & Distributed by

REX Book Store
»56 Nicanor Reyes, Sr. St
Tel. Nos.: 8736-0567^733-6746
2161-65 Freedom Bkig., CM Redo Avenue
Tel Nos.: 852fe«2V«22-41107

ManHa, ftiappinee
WWWJWLC<XTLp(l

Philippine Copyright 2022

BOOKS BY:
HECTOR S. DE LEON and HECTOR M. DE LEON, JR.

AND
HECTOR M. DE LEON, JR.

A.

Civil Law
1. Comments and Cases on Property
2. Comments and Cases on Succession
3. Comments and Cases on Obligations and Contracts
4. Comments and Cases on Sales and Lease
5. Comments and Cases on Partnership, Agency, and Trusts
6. Comments and Cases on Torts and Damages
7. Comments and Cases on Credit Transactions

B.

Commercial Law
1. The Philippine Negotiable Instruments Law (and Allied Laws) Annotated
2. The Insurance Code of the Philippines Annotated
3. The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated

ISBN 978-621-04-4274-8
No portion of this book may be copied or
reproduced in books, pamphlets, outlines or notes,
whether printed, mimeographed, typewritten, copied
in different electronic devices or in any other form, for
distribution or sale, without the written permission of
either of the authors except brief passages in books,
articles, reviews, legal papers, and judicial or other
official proceedings with proper citation.
Any copy of this book without the corresponding
number and the signature of either of the authors on
this page either proceeds from an illegitimate source
or is in possession of one who has no authority to
dispose of the same.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
BY THE AUTHORS

NO.

2481

Reprinted: February 2023

ISBN 978-621-04-4274-8

.

05-CM-O0130-0

Printed by:

WE VALUE YOUR FEEDBACK.

REXjiRlnrlnq compflML Inc.

•Creative Uthegrephy

M P FlawUno SI. SU. Mm«

w-nn

Wta

Qutmn Oy

For your comments, suggestions, or
Inquiries, email our Customer Interaction
Center at clcsupportOrex.com.ph.
For more Information on our products and
services, ptease visit www.rex.com.ph.
Shop online at www.nexeetore.com.ph.

C

Political Law
1. Philippine Constitutional Law: Principles and Cases (Vols. 1 and 2)
2. Administrative Law: Text and Cases
3. The Law on Public Officers and Election Law
D. Taxation and Agrarian Reform
1. The Fundamentals of Taxation
2. The Law on Income Taxation
3. The Law on Transfer and Business Taxation
4. Comprehensive Review of Taxation
5. The National Internal Revenue Code Annotated (Vols. 1 and 2)
6. Textbook on Agrarian Reform and Taxation*
E. Business Law (for Commerce Students)
1. The Law on Obligations and Contracts
2. The Law on Partnerships and Private Corporations
3. The Law on Negotiable Instruments (with Documents of Title)
4. The Law on Sales, Agency, and Credit Transactions
5. The Law on Insurance (and Allied Laws)
6. Comprehensive Review of Business Law
F. Constitution (For College Students and Other Readers)
1. Textbook on the Philippine Constitution
2. Students Manual on the Constitution
3. Constitution Made Simple
4. Aklat-Aralin sa Bagong Konstitusyon

*By HECTOR S. DE LEON

PREFACE
This humble work (which is now on its 12th edition) is intended
primarily as a textbook for law students in Corporation Law. However,
members of the Bench and the Bar will find the book a useful reference.
In preparing the book, the authors have endeavored to make the
discussion comprehensive (as our corporation law covers a very wide
field), and yet brief. The applicable rulings in important and leading
cases, commentaries of recognized writers on the subject, and issuances
of the Securities and Exchange Commission amplifying and explaining
the law are cited or quoted under the pertinent sections of the Revised
Corporation Code. Whenever necessary, the purpose or rationale of the
legal provisions, particularly the new ones, is given and illustrations
showing their practical application in specific situations are utilized for
such manner of presentation greatly facilitates understanding of the
meaning of the law.
HECTOR S. DE LEON
HECTOR M. DE LEON, JR.

January 2022

iv

CONTENTS
THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES
(ILA. No. 11232)

1

INTRODUCTION
Different forms of business organization; Theories as to origin of
corporations; Rise and development of corporations.

Title I
GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

—
—

..

Section 1. Title of the Code.
Historical background of the Revised Corporation Code; Salient
changes introduced in the Revised Corporation Code; Guide
to the changes.
Sec. 2. Corporation defined.
Statutory definition of corporation; Judicial definitions of
corporation; Attributes of a corporation; Doctrine of corporate
entity; Corporation as an artificial personality; Corporation
as a person, resident or citizen; Corporation as a collection
of individuals; Doctrine of piercing the veil of corporate
entity; Instances where doctrine applied; Application of the
"instrumentality" or "alter ego" rule; Acquisition by court
of jurisdiction over corporation or corporations involved;
Corporation as a creation of law or by operation of law;
Right of succession of a corporation; Powers, attributes,
and properties of a corporation; Distinctions between
a partnership and a corporation; Similarities between a
partnership and a corporation; Corporation as a partner;
Corporation as incorporator; Advantages of a business
corporation; Disadvantages of a business corporation.
Sec. 3. Classes of Corporations.

—

Classification of corporation under the Revised Corporation
Code; Other classifications of corporations; Important
distinctions between public and private corporations; Dual
status of public corporations.
Sec. 4. Corporations Created by Special Laws or Charters.
Incorporation of a private corporation by a special act; Governing
law; Government as a stockholder of a corporation.

—

vi

vii

10

17

57

55

—

Sec. 5. Corporators and Incorporators, Stockholders and Members.
Components of a corporation; Three other classes; Agreement or
contract with a corporation.
Sec. 6. Classification of shares.
Power to classify shares; When classification of shares may
be made; Classification to comply with constitutional or
legal requirements; Shares presumed to be equal in all
respect; Capital stock and capita) explained; Capital stock
and capital distinguished; Capital stock and legal capital
distinguished; Stock or share of stock defined; Capital stock
and share of stock distinguished; Nature of share of stock;
Certificate of stock defined; Share of stock and certificate
of stock distinguished; Situs of shares of stock for certain
purposes; Classes of shares in general; Par value share; No¬
par value share; Voting share; Non-voting share; Common
share; Preferred share; Promotion shares; Share in escrow;
Convertible share; Convertibility of shares; Nature of par
value/book value/market value; Presumption as to value of
corporate stock; Statutory restrictions regarding the issuance
of no par value shares; Consideration for no-par value shares;
Advantages of par value shares; Disadvantages of par value
shares; Advantages of no-par value shares; Disadvantages
of no-par value shares; Kinds of preferred shares; Preference
among preferred shares; Preferred stockholders not creditors
of corporation; Limitations regarding issuance of preferred
shares; Authority of board of directors to fix terms and
conditions of preferred shares; Kinds of preferred shares as
to dividends.
Sec. 7. Founders' Shares.
..
Founders' shares.
Sec. 8. Redeemable Shares.

——

—
—
—

Redeemable shares.
Sec. 9. Treasury Shares.
Treasury shares.

67

70

—

—

——

101

103

108

Title II
INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION OF PRIVATE
CORPORATIONS
Sec. 10. Number and Qualifications of Incorporators.

—

Incorporation of a private corporation a mere privilege;
Advantages of the corporate form; Corporations and
associations distinguished; Concept of franchise; Primary
franchise and secondary franchise defined and distinguished;
Transferability of franchise; Steps in creating a corporation;
Promotion of corporations; Promoters of corporation;
viii

Stages in corporate promotion; Nature of relations of
promoters; Liability of corporation for promotion fees;
Liability of corporation on promoter's contracts; Liability of
promoters for failure to organize corporation; Underwriting
agreements; Incorporation distinguished from creation;
Incorporation distinguished from corporation; Steps in
incorporation; Substantial compliance with requirements;
Number of incorporators; Qualifications of incorporators;
Juridical persons as incorporators; Signatories of the articles
of incorporation.
Sec. 11. Corporate Term.
Perpetual corporate term; Change in corporate term for a specific
period; Effect of extension /expiration of term; Guidelines on
corporate term; Petition for revival of corporate existence.
Sec 12. Minimum Capital Stock Not Required of Stock Corporations. ...
Capital stock requirement; Minimum subscription and paid-up
capital; Subscription of corporations.
Sec. 13. Contents of Articles of Incorporation.
Sec. 14. Form of Articles of Incorporation.
Meaning of corporate charter; Distinguished from franchise;
Components of corporate charter; Nature of corporate
charter; Meaning of articles of incorporation; Contents and
form of articles of incorporation; Filing of the articles of
incorporation; Power of SEC to reject articles of incorporation;
Purpose or purposes of the corporation; Purpose or purposes
must be lawful; Purpose or purposes must be stated with
sufficient clarity; Primary purpose must be stated; Purposes
must be capable of being lawfully combined; Reasons for
statement of purpose or purposes; Effect where primary
purpose /second ary purposes unauthorized; Effect where
corporation engages in its secondary instead of its primary
purpose; Place where principal office of corporation located;
Incorporating directors or trustees; Capital stock/capital
and subscribers /contributors; Where shares with par value;
Where shares without par value; Where shares with par
value and without par value; Where business of corporation
reserved for Filipino citizens; Filipino percentage ownership
requirement regarding corporate capital; Acknowledgment,
signature, and verification.
Sec. 15. Amendment of Articles of Incorporation.
Reserved power of State to amend corporate charter; Power of
stockholders or members and the board to amend articles
of incorporation; Necessity of stockholders' or members'
meeting for amendment; Limitations on power of corporation
to amend articles of incorporation.

114

—

ix

141

143
145

i

169

—

Sec. 16. GroundsWhen Articles of Incorporation or Amendment May be
Disapproved.
Grounds for disapproval of articles of incorporation or
amendment thereto; Suspension or revocation of certificate
of registration of corporations.
Sec 17. Corporate Name.
Name of the corporation; Limitations upon use of corporate
name; Rules on the use of corporate name; Use of changed or
abandoned corporate name; Remedy of corporation whose
name has been adopted by another; Change of corporate
name; Effect of misnomer of a corporation.
Sec. 18. Registration, Incorporation and Commencement of Corporate

—

—

Existence.
Issuance of certificate of incorporation; Acquisition of juridical
personality.
Sec 19. De Facto Corporations.
De jure corporation /de facto corporation defined; Requisites of
a de facto corporation; Existence of law; Bona fide attempt
to incorporate; Colorable compliance with the law; Use of
corporate powers in good faith; Basis of de facto doctrine;
Questioning validity of corporate existence; Direct attack/
collateral attack of corporate existence defined; Rule
against collateral attack; Where organization not even a de
facto corporation; Proof of corporate existence; Powers and
liabilities of a de facto corporation; Liabilities of officers and
members of a de facto corporation.
Sec. 20. Corporation by Estoppel.
Estoppel to deny corporate existence; Corporation by estoppel
without de facto existence; Estoppel of persons dealing with a
corporation; Persons liable as general partners.
Sec. 21. Effects on Non-Use of Corporate Charter and Continuous
Inoperation.
Statutory requirements before and after incorporation; Mandatory
and directory provisions explained; Conditions precedent
explained; Conditions subsequent explained; Formal
organization and commencement of business.

—

—

—

rule in
BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS
Sec. 22. The Board of Directors or Trustees of a Corporation;
Qualification and Terms.
Structure of the corporate organization; Corporate powers
exercised by board of directors or trustees; Reason for the
rule; Extent of judicial review; Nature of powers of board
of directors or trustees; Limitations on powers of board of
directors or trustees; Powers exercised by board of directors

—

x

173

176

or trustees as a board; Reasons for the rule; Exceptions to
the rule; Power of directors or trustees to delegate authority;
Terms of office of directors or trustees; Number of directors
or trustees to be elected; Election of less than the required
number; Qualifications of directors or trustees; Natural
persons contemplated by law; Citizenship and residence
requirements; Stock ownership requirement; Reason for the
requirement; Additional qualifications in the bylaws; Effect
of want of eligibility; Election of independent directors.
Sec. 23. Election of Directors or Trustees.
Election of directors or trustees; Where directors or trustees
merely designated; Time of annual election; Postponement
of the election; Methods of voting; Right of stockholder to
use cumulative voting; Situations involving cumulative
voting; Arguments for cumulative voting; Arguments
against cumulative voting; Voting in a nonstock corporation;
Separate voting by zones or regions not allowed; Segregation
of votes for regular and independent directors.
Sec. 24. Corporate Officers.
Corporate officers; Need for express mention of corporate office
in bylaws; Corporate employees; Election of officers by the
board; Compensation, terms of office, and removal; Positions
concurrently held by same person; Acceptance of office and
taking of oath of office; Sources of powers or authority of
corporate officers; Extent of powers or authority of corporate
officers; Classification of powers or authority of corporate
officers; Extent of authority of particular officers; Another
corporation as director or trustee.
Sec. 25. Report of Election of Directors, Trustees and Officers, Non-Holding
of Election and Cessation from Office.
Report of elections and vacancies; Objective of Section 25;
Emergency quorum.
Sec. 26. Disqualification of Directors, Trustees or Officers.
Disqualification of directors/trustees or officers; De facto
directors/ trustees or officers; Powers and rights of de facto
officers in general; Validity of contracts and acts of de facto
officers.
Sec. 27. Removal of Directors or Trustees.
Power of stockholders or members to remove directors or trustees;
Power of the SEC to remove directors or trustees; Power of
the board to remove a member; Power of court to remove
directors or trustees; Requisites for removal of directors or
trustees; Requirement of notice of meeting; Resignation of
directors or trustees; Abandonment of office and failure to
attend meetings.

—

188

190

—

200

—

207

213

—

—

239

254

277

279

283

—

Sec. 28. Vacancies in the Office of Director or Trustee; Emergency Board.
Vacancies in the office of director or trustee; Filling of vacancies;
Successor to serve for unexpired term of predecessor.
Sec 29. Compensation of Directors or Trustees.
Compensation of directors or trustees; Directors without authority
to grant themselves compensation; Limit to compensation;
Per diems of directors or trustees; Compensation of corporate
officers.
Sec. 30. Liability of Directors, Trustees or Officers. ....
Nature of director's/ trustees' position; Cases when directors/
trustees or officers liable for damages; Liability of directors/
trustees or officers for bad faith or gross negligence; Liability
of directors /trustees or officers for secret profits.
Sec. 31. Dealings of Directors, Trustees or Officers with the Corporation.
Self-dealing directors/ trustees or officers.
Sec 32. Contracts Between Corporations with Interlocking Directors.
Contracts between corporation with interlocking directors; Evils
of interlocking directorates.
Sec 33. Disloyalty of a Director.
Doctrine of "corporate opportunity"; When doctrine not
applicable; Ratification by stockholders of disloyal act.
Sec. 34. Executive, Management, and Other Special Committees.
Executive, management, and other special committees.

—

—

—

— ...

—

—

290

295

300

306
308

311

314

Title IV

POWERS OF CORPORATION

—

Sec 35. Corporate Powers and Capacity.
Meaning of powers of a corporation; Distinguished from its
franchise and objects; Relative powers of natural persons/
partnerships and corporations; Classification of corporate
powers; Determining whether an act or contract within scope
of corporate powers; Express powers explained; Implied
powers explained; Implied powers classified; Incidental or
inherent powers explained; Construction of powers granted;
Application of rules; Ratification of corporate acts; Effect of
ratification retroactive; Mode of exercising powers; Power to
sue and be sued; Power to adopt and use a corporate seal;
Power to acquire and convey property; Power to acquire
shares or securities; Corporation as stockholder or member;
Power to contribute to charity; Power to establish pension,
retirement, and other plans; Power to act as guarantor.

318

—

Sec. 36. Power to Extend or Shorten Corporate Term.
Power to extend or shorten corporate term; Appraisal right of
dissenting stockholders.
Sec. 37. Power to Increase or Decrease Capital Stock; Incur, Create, or Increase
Bonded Indebtedness.
Power to increase or decrease capital stock; Limitations on the
power; Necessity for increasing capital stock; Necessity
of new subscription for increase; Effectivity of increase or
decrease; Over-issue of shares; Unauthorized increase of
capital stock; Subscription requirement in case of increase
in capital stock; Ways of increasing or decreasing authorized
capital stock; Increase by way of stock dividends; Par value
or no-par value shares for the authorized increase; Reduction
of capital stock; Effect of reduction on liability for unpaid
subscription; Distribution of surplus on reduction; Persons
entitled to question increase or decrease of capital stock;
Meaning of bonded indebtedness; Power to incur, create, or
increase bonded indebtedness; When obligations constitute
bonded indebtedness; The corporate bond contract; Bond
terminology; Type of bonds.
Sec. 38. Power to Deny Preemptive Right.
Right of preemption of stockholders; Reason for the grant of right;
Non-availability of preemptive right; Shares to which right
not available; Applicability to qualifying shares; Offering
of remaining unsubscribed shares; Time within which the
right may be exercised; Preemptive right as to treasury
shares; Price of new stock offerings; Availability of right to
additional issue of originally authorized shares.
Sec. 39. Sale or Other Disposition of Assets.
Power to sell, lease, etc. all or substantially all corporate assets;
Authority of the board; Shareholders' approval of sale, etc.
of corporate assets; When sale considered as involving all or
substantially all of corporate assets; Shareholders' approval
on sale of corporate assets in publicly-listed companies;
Appraisal right of dissenting stockholder; Liability of
purchasing corporation in case of asset sales; Liability of
purchasing corporation in case of stock sales; Business
enterprise transfer.
Sec. 40. Power to Acquire Own Shares.
Power to acquire own shares; Conditions for the exercise of the
power; Trust fund doctrine; Effects of purchase on corporate
creditors; Effects of purchase on remaining
stockholders.
Sec. 41. Power to Invest Corporate Funds in Another Corporation
or
Business or for Any Other Purpose.
Power to invest funds in other corporations or for other
purposes;
Purpose of the investment; Ratification of defective

—

344

—

364

—

373

—
—

investment.

xii

342

xiii

381

389

—

-

Sec. 42. Power to Declare Dividends.
Concept of dividends; Valuation of, and share in, dividends,
Concept of profits; Dividends distinguished from profits or
earnings; Nature of dividends received by a corporation;
Power to declare dividends; Payment of dividends;
Dividends payable only out of unrestricted retained
earnings; Reasons for the rule; Rule as to no-par value
stock; Dividends from property in which capital is invested;
Unrestricted retained earnings explained; SEC rules; 1982
rules on redeemable shares; Existence of actual profits or
earnings; Deduction of expenses; Distribution of paid-in
surplus as dividends; Distribution of the revaluation surplus
as dividends; Declaration of dividends; Discretion of the
board of directors to declare dividends; Limit on retained
earnings; Action to enforce declaration of dividends;
Time for declaration of dividends; Validity of dividend
determined at time of declaration; Payment of subscription
from dividends; Liability of stockholders and directors for
illegally received dividends; Remedies of corporate creditors;
Persons entitled to dividends; Right of stockholders after
declaration of dividends; Time for payment of dividends;
Equal participation in the distribution of dividends; Total
subscription basis of share in dividends; Other modes of
division of dividends; Classes of dividends; Ordinary and
extraordinary dividends; Effect of declaration of cash or
property dividend; Effect of declaration of stock dividend;
Effect of declaration of bond or scrip dividend; Distinctions
between cash dividend and stock dividend; Stock dividend
from issue of additional shares; Distribution or reissue of
treasury stocks; Stock splits; Distinction between distribution
in liquidation and ordinary dividend; Applicability to

partnerships.

—

Sec. 43. Power to Enter into Management Contract.
Power to enter into management contract; Limitations on the

power.

Sec 44. Ultra Vires Acts of Corporations.

—

Ultra vires and intra vires acts explained; Ultra vires acts
distinguished from other acts; Ratification of ultra vires acts;
Effects of ultra vires acts which are not illegal; Contracts ultra
vires in part only; Acts presumed to be within corporate
powers; Ultra vires acts as the acts of the corporation;
Invocation of ultra vires; Who may invoke ultra vires; Estoppel
to deny corporate power to contract; Corporation liability for
torts, crimes, and other violations.

393
Title V
BYLAWS

—

Sec. 45. Adoption Bylaws.
Meaning of bylaws; Power to adopt bylaws; Function and
nature of bylaws; Necessity of adopting bylaws; Time and
procedure for the adoption of bylaws; Effect of failure to file
bylaws; Construction, application, and effectivity of bylaws;
Validity of bylaws; Must be consistent with law; Must be
consistent with public policy; Must not impair obligation of
contracts; Must be general and not directed against particular
individuals; Must be consistent with the charter or articles of
incorporation; Must be reasonable; Binding effect of bylaws;
Waiver of bylaws.
Sec. 46. Contents of Bylaws.
.
Contents of bylaws.
Sec. 47. Amendment to Bylaws.
Amendment and repeal of bylaws and adoption of new bylaws;
Revocation of delegated power of board of directors or
trustees; Bylaws and resolutions distinguished; Resolution
adopted as a bylaw; Articles of incorporation and bylaws
distinguished; Filing and effectivity of amended or new
bylaws.

—

—

456

469
472

Title VI
Sec. 48. Kinds of Meetings.

436

439

MEETINGS

—

—

Sec 49. Regular and Special Meetings of Stockholders or Members.
Kinds of meetings; Necessity of meetings; Exceptions to the rule;
Requisites for a valid meeting of stockholders or members;
Notice of meetings; Other matter on notices; Meeting via
remote communications; Non-holding of meeting
Sec. 50. Place and Time of Meetings of Stockholders or Members.
Place and time of meetings of stockholders or members;
Proper
person to call meeting; Notice of every meeting required;
Requisites of notice of meeting; Substantial compliance with
requirement; Statement of purpose of meeting; Effect
of
failure to comply with requisites for meeting.
Sec. 51. Quorum in Meetings.
Quorum required in stockholders' and
members'
Postponement of stockholders, or members' annualmeetings;
meeting;
Payment of compensation for attendance at
or members' meeting; Matters in which the stockholders'
law requires
minimum number of votes; Greater voting requirement;
Waiver of right to vote.

—

—

xv

480
480

488

494

—

Sec. 52. Regular and Special Meetings of Directors or Trustees; Quorum.
Place and time of meetings of directors or trustees; Notice of every
meeting required; Requisites for board meeting; Quorum;
Proxy in board meetings not allowed; Board meeting through
tele/video conferencing.
Sec. 53. Who Shall Preside at Meetings.
Presiding officer at meetings.
Sec 54. Right to Vote of Secured Creditors and Administrators.
Right to vote in stock corporations; Right to vote in nonstock
corporation; Manner of voting; Representative voting; Voting
rights for shares of stock of a deceased stockholders.
Sec. 55. Voting in Case of Joint Ownership of Stock.
Voting where share owned by two (2) or more persons.
Sec. 56. Voting Right for Treasury Shares.
Voting right for treasury shares.
Sec 57. Manner of Voting; Proxies.
Meaning of proxy; Purpose and use of proxies; Voting by proxy;
Who may be a proxy; Nature of proxies; Limitation on proxies
of stockholders or members; Form and execution of proxies;
Extent of authority of proxy; Denial of right to vote by proxy
in the bylaws; Restrictions on right to vote by proxy in the
bylaws; Proxy given to two (2) or more persons; Revocation
of proxies; Duration of proxy.
Sec 58. Voting Trusts.

—

—

—

—

—

—

501

507

508

516
516
517

527

Corporate control devices; Combination and pooling agreements
among stockholders; Voting and other rights under a voting
trust agreement; Voting trust certificates; Powers or rights of
voting trustees; Purpose of voting agreement; Limitations on
voting trust agreement; Proxy and voting trust distinguished.

—

—

Revocability of pre-incorporation subscription contract; Effect of
filing of articles of incorporation.
Sec 61. Consideration for stocks.
Sources of corporate capital; Power to issue stock; Power lodged
in board of directors; Approval of SEC for issue of shares;
Different modes by which shares may be issued; Original
issue of stock contemplated; Consideration for issue of
stocks; Amount of consideration; Consideration other than

—

cash; Nature of property which may be taken for stock;
Services as consideration for stock; Issuance of stock to
offset corporation's indebtedness; Issuance of stocks in
consideration of profits; Fixing of issued price of no-par
shares; Consideration for issue of bonds.
Sec 62. Certificate of Stock and Transfer of Shares.
Nature of a certificate of stock; Issuance of certificate of stock;
Delivery essential to issuance of certificate; Remedies of
stockholders where corporation refuses to issue certificate;
Effect of over-issuance of shares; Unauthorized or forged
certificates; Requirements for transfer of stock; Right to
transfer fully paid shares of stock; Sale of subscription
rights; Restrictions on transfer of stock; Option to purchase
shares offered for sale; Modes of stock transfer; Validity of
stock transfer; Reasons/ purpose for requiring registration of
stock transfer; Right of corporation to refuse registration of
transfer; Basis of transferee's right to registration; Remedy
of stockholder where corporation refuses to register transfer;
Only absolute transfers need to be registered; Effects of an
unregistered transfer of shares; Nontransferability of unpaid
stock on corporate books.
Sec. 63. Issuance of Stock Certificates.
Full payment of subscription required for issuance of certificate
of stock; Purpose of prohibition in Section 63; Nature
of relation of stockholder to the corporation; Rights of
stockholders; Rights of heirs of deceased stockholders;
Rights of stockholders may be changed or restricted; Rights
of dissenting minority; Actions by stockholders or members;
Derivative suit explained; Nature of derivative suit;
Importance of derivative suits; Type of wrong contemplatedRequisites for bringing derivative suit; Requisites under
the Interim Rules; Exhaustion of intra-corporate remedies;
Reasons given for not allowing direct individual suit;
Individual suit explained; Derivative suit and individual

—

538

suit distinguished; Representative suit explained;
Derivative
suit and representative suit distinguished;

Liabilities of

stockholder.
xvi

547

—

Title VII
STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS
Sec 59. Subscription Contract.
How participation in a corporation acquired; Subscri prion
contract; Kinds of subscription; Subscription and purchase
of stock; Stock option; Liability of stockholders on unpaid
subscriptions to corporate creditors; Release of subscriber
from liability for unpaid subscription; Refund of subscription
payments in excess of that stated in call; Refund where
proposed increase in capital stock abandoned.

Sec 60. Pre-incorporation Subscription.

xvii

548

565

593

—

Sec. 64. Liability of Directors for Watered Stocks.
Meaning of watered stock; Issue of watered stock prohibited;
Basis or theory of liability; Prohibition refers to original issue;
Liability for watered stock; Suit by the State.

617

Sec. 65. Interest on Unpaid Subscriptions.
Liability of stockholder for interest on unpaid subscriptions.
Sec. 66. Payment of Balance of Subscription.
Remedies to enforce payment of stock subscription; Statutory
sanctions on stock delinquency; Remedies limited to
delinquent subscription; Payment of unpaid subscription
or percentage thereof; Call and assessment defined and
distinguished; Requisites for a valid call; Power of board of
directors to make call; Necessity and purpose of call; When
call necessary; Payment without call; Necessity of notice of
call.
Sec. 67. Delinquency Sale.
Procedure for the sale of delinquent stocks; Meaning of highest
bidder; Right of corporation to reject highest bid; Purchase by
the corporation of delinquent stock; Forfeiture of delinquent
stock not authorized; Shares to be sold in case of delinquency.
.Sec. 68. When Sale May Be Questioned.
Recovery of stock unlawfully sold.
Sec. 69. Court Action to Recover Unpaid Subscription.
Judicial remedy to recover unpaid subscription.
Sec. 70. Effect of Delinquency.
Effects of stock delinquency; Denial of voting rights.
Sec. 71. Rights of Unpaid Shares, Nondelinquent.
Rights of unpaid shares.
Sec. 72. Lost or Destroyed Certificates.
Lost, stolen, or destroyed stock certificates; When publication
requirement may be dispensed with.

621

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

-

to inspect corporate books; Right to inspection not absolute;
Extent of the right of inspection; Right of stockholder to
demand a list of stockholders; Right of stockholder to
demand a detailed auditing of business operations; Right of
stockholder to examine books of corporation's subsidiary.
668

622

Right of stockholder or member to financial statements; Duty of
board to present annual financial report.
Title IX
MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

——

630

636
637

638

Sec. 75. Plan of Merger of Consolidation.
Sec. 76. Stockholders' or Members' Approval.
Sec. 77. Articles of Merger or Consolidation.
Sec. 78. Effectivity of Merger or Consolidation.
Corporate combinations in general; Common forms of corporate
combinations; Advantages of stock acquisition over asset
acquisition; Procedure for effecting a plan of merger or
consolidation.
Sec. 79. Effects of Merger or Consolidation.
Legal effects of merger and consolidation; Merger and
consolidation distinguished from sale of assets;
Reorganization of a corporation; Quasi-reorganization of a

——

—

Title X

Sec. 73. Books to be Kept; Stock Transfer Agent.

—

Books and records to be kept by corporations; Requirements of
keeping books mandatory; Entries to be made in stock and
transfer book; Beneficial ownership transparency guidelines;
Beneficial ownership of foreign corporations; Books and
records, and entries therein as evidence; Persons given /not
given the right to inspect corporate books; Remedies and
sanctions for enforcement of right; Basis and purpose of right
xviii

•

APPRAISAL RIGHT
Sec. 80. When the Right of Appraisal May Be Exercised.

—

Sec. 81. How Right is Exercised.

—

Procedure for exercise of right; Determination of fair value of
645

693

Appraisal right of a stockholder, Instances when appraisal right
available; Amendment of articles of incorporation changing
stockholders rights; Limitations on the exercise of appraisal

right.

Title VIII
CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

683

corporation.

640
641

671
671
672
673

shares.

Sec. 82. Effect of Demand and Termination of Right.

—

Effect of exercise of right; Payment of shares.
Sec. 83. When Right to Payment Ceases.
Extinguishment of right to payment.
Sec. 84. Who Bears Cost of Appraisal.
Liability for costs and expenses of appraisal.

—

—

xix

696

698
699
700

—

Sec. 85. Notation on Certificates; Rights of Transferee.
Notation on certificate of shares of dissenting stockholder;
Transfer of dissenting shares.

Sec. 98. Effects of Issuance or- Transfer of Stock in Breach of Qualifying
Conditions.
Issuance or transfer of stock in breach of qualifying conditions.
Sec. 99. Agreements by Stockholders.

—

—
stockholders.

Tide XI

NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

—

.....
Sec 86. Definition.
Sec. 87. Purposes.
Definition of nonstock corporation; Characteristics of nonstock
corporations; Power to make profits and engage in business;
Applicable provisions.

—

702
702

•

— MEMBERS
.—
..
Right to Vote. —
—
Nontransferability of Membership. — .
— ~ 90. Termination of Membership. —
Chapter II — TRUSTEES
OFFICERS
_
Chapter I

88.
89.

706
707
707

AND

—

Sec 91. Election and Term of Trustees.
Sec. 92. List of Members and Proxies Place of Meetings.

—

707
707

ASSETS IN NONSTOCK
— DISTRIBUTION
CORPORATIONS
Sec
Rules of Distribution. —
708
Sec.
Plan of Distribution of Assets.
708
Chapter III

OF

93.
94.

—

Rules applicable only to nonstock corporations; Membership in a
nonstock corporation.
Tide XII
CLOSE CORPORATION

—

Sec 95. Definition and Applicability of Title.
Definition of close corporation; Peculiarity of a close corporation;
Meaning of term under the Revised Corporation Code;
Applicable provisions; Need for the special rules for close
corporation.
Sec. 96. Articles of Incorporation.
Permissible provisions in articles of incorporation.
Sec. 97. Validity of Restrictions on Transfer and Shares.
Restriction on transfer of shares; Right of first refusal; Need for
stock transfer restrictions in close corporations; Scope of
restrictions.

—

—

Valid agreements by
Sec. 100. When a Board Meeting is Unnecessary or Improperly Held. ....
Action taken by directors without meeting or at improperly
called meeting.
Sec. 101. Preemptive Right in Close Corporations.
~
Preemptive right of stockholders.
Sec. 102. Amendment of Articles of Incorporation.
Amendment of the articles of incorporation.
Sec. 103. Deadlocks. —
Arbitration of intra-corporate deadlocks by the SEC; Dissolution
in the event of deadlock.
Sec. 104. Withdrawal of Stockholder or Dissolution of Corporation. —
Right of stockholder to withdraw or to have the corporation
dissolved.

—

—
—

730
731
734

735

736
736

739

Tide XIII
SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

Chapter I — EDUCATIONAL CORPORATIONS
Sec 105. Incorporations.
..
Educational corporations defined; Laws applicable; Incorporation;
Term.
Sec. 106. Board of Trustees.
Board of trustees or directors.

_

—

—
CORPORATIONS
—
—
— —
—
—
—
—
—

741

742

Chapter II

718

RELIGIOUS
107. Classes of Religious Corporation.
108. Corporation Sole.
109. Articles of Incorporation.
110. Submission of the Articles of Incorporation.
111. Acquisition and Alienation of Property.
112. Filling of Vacancies.
113. Dissolution.
114. Religious Societies.
Definition of religious corporation; Applicable provisions; Classes
of religious corporations; Corporation sole.
'

723
726

xxi

744
744
744
745
745
74g

7^
747

Chapter III

— ONE PERSON CORPORATIONS (N)

Sec. 115. Applicability of Provisions to One Person Corporations.
Applicability of other provisions.
Sec. 116. One Person Corporation.
Definition; Incorporator; Number and qualifications.
Sec. 117. Minimum Capital Stock Not Required for One Person
Corporation.
Minimum capital stock not required; Term of existence.

—

—

—

—

Title XIV

755

756

757

Sec. 118. Articles of Incorporation.
Only articles of incorporation needed.

758

Sec. 119. Bylaws.
••
••
Bylaws not required.
Sec. 120. Display of Corporate Name.
Display of corporate name.
Sec. 121. Single Stockholder as Director, President.
Sec. 122. Treasurer, Corporate Secretary, and Other Officers.
Sec. 123. Special Functions of the Corporate Secretary.
Officers of the OPC.
Sec. 124. Nominee and Alternate Nominee.
Sec. 125. Term of Nominee and Alternate Nominee.
Sec. 126. Change of Nominee or Alternate Nominee.
Designation of nominee and alternate nominee required.

759

—

—

— —
—

—

—

——

Sec. 127. Minutes Book.
Sec. 128. Records in Lieu of Meetings.
Minutes books and records.
Sec. 129. Reportorial Requirements.
Reportorial requirements.
Sec. 130. Liability of Single Shareholder.
Liability of single stockholder.
Sec. 131. Conversion from an Ordinary Corporation to a One Person
Corporation.
Conversion to OPC of an ordinary corporation.
Sec. 132. Conversion from a One Person Corporation to an Ordinary Stock
Corporation.
Conversion to ordinary stock corporation of OPC.

—
—

—

—
—

noi

..

759
759
759

760

761
762
762
763
763
764

765

766

767

DISSOLUTION

—

Sec. 133. Methods of Dissolution.
Meaning of dissolution; Power to dissolve corporation; De
jure and de facto dissolution; Two legal steps in corporate
dissolution; Methods or causes of corporate dissolution;
Methods exclusive.
Sec. 134. Voluntary Dissolution Where No Creditors Are Affected.
Voluntary dissolution of corporations; Voluntary dissolution
where no creditors are affected; Sale of assets in anticipation
of voluntary dissolution; Right of minority stockholders to
oppose dissolution.
Sec. 135. Voluntary Dissolution Where Creditors Are Affected, Procedure
and Contents of Petition.
Voluntary dissolution where creditors are affected.
Sec. 136. Dissolution by Shortening Corporate Term.
Dissolution by shortening of term; Dissolution by expiration of
term; Dissolution by legislative enactment; Dissolution by
failure to formally organize and commence transaction of
business; Effect of change of name on corporate existence;
Effect of insolvency or bankruptcy on corporate existence;
Effect of alienation of all assets on corporate existence; Effects
of death, etc. of stockholders or members on corporate
existence; Effect of want of officers on corporate existence;
Effect of concentration of stock on corporate existence.
Sec. 137. Withdrawal of Request and Petition for Dissolution.
Sec. 138. Involuntary Dissolution.
Dissolution by order of the SEC; Effect of revocation of registration;
Dissolution by quo warranto proceedings; Rights of minority
stockholders to sue for dissolution; Effects of dissolution.
Sec. 139. Corporate Liquidation.
Meaning of liquidation; Nature of liquidation; Methods of
corporate liquidation; Liquidation by the corporation
itself; Liquidation by a receiver; Appointment of
receiver
discretionary; Liquidation by a trustee; Effect of dissolution
on corporate power to enter into contracts; Distribution of
corporate assets; Priority of application of assets; Refund to
stockholders of their investment.

—

—

—

—

—

—

xxiii

769

772

776
778

785
786

792

Title XV

FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

—

Sec. 140. Definition and Rights of Foreign Corporations.
Definition of foreign corporation; Corporation may operate
within jurisdiction of another State; Objectives of regulation
of foreign corporations; License and certificate of authority
required of foreign corporations; Nationality of corporations
with foreign equity.
Sec. 141. Application to Existing Foreign Corporations.
Where license issued before effectivity of the
Revised Corporation Code.
Sec. 142. Application for a License.
..
Sec. 143. Issuance of a License.
Application for the issuance of license; Conditions subsequent
to issuance of license; Securities deposit; Types of entities;
Purpose of law in requiring license; Meaning of transacting
business based on jurisprudence; Meaning of phrase under
investment laws; Doing business through websites; Penal

—

—
—

——

sanction.

—.

Sec. 144. Who May Be a Resident Agent.
Sec. 145. Resident Agent; Service of Process.
Resident agent.
Sec. 146. Law Applicable.
Laws applicable to foreign corporations; Powers of a foreign
corporation subject to Philippine laws.
Sec 147. Amendments to Articles of Incorporation or bylaws of Foreign
Corporations.
Amendment of articles of incorporation and bylaws.
Sec. 148. Amended License.
When amended license required.
149.
Sec.
Merger or Consolidation Involving a Foreign Corporation
Licensed in the Philippines.
Merger or consolidation involving a foreign corporation.
150.
Sec
Doing Business Without a License.
Effects of doing business without a license; Suit by an unlicensed
foreign corporation; Suit against an unlicensed foreign
corporation; Facts showing capacity to sue; Validity of
contracts of unlicensed foreign corporations.
Sec. 151. Revocation of License.
Sec. 152. Issuance of Certificate of Revocation.

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

xxiv

810

Revocation of license of foreign corporation; Effects of revocation.
Sec. 153. Withdrawal of Foreign Corporations.
Withdrawal of a foreign corporation; Suits against a foreign
corporation that has ceased to do business.

—

868

Title XVI
INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES, AND PENALTIES (N)

821

821
823

846
846
849

851
852

853

855

—

Sec. 154. Investigation and Prosecution of Offenses.
Sec. 155. Administration of Oaths, Subpoena of Witnesses and
Documents.
Sec. 156. Cease and Desist Orders.
Sec. 157. Contempt.
..
Investigative powers of the SEC.
Sec. 158. Administrative Sanctions.
Administrative powers of the SEC.
Sec. 159. Unauthorized Use of Corporate Name; Penalties.
Sec. 160. Violation of Disqualification Provision; Penalties.
Sec. 161. Violation of Duty to Maintain Records, to Allow their Inspection
or Reproduction; Penalties.
Sec. 162. Willful Certification of Incomplete, Inaccurate, False, or
Misleading Statements or Reports; Penalties.
Sec. 163. Independent Auditor Collusion; Penalties.
Sec. 164. Obtaining Corporate Registration Through Fraud; Penalties. ..
Sec. 165. Fraudulent Conduct of Business; Penalties.
Sec. 166. Acting as Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt Practices;
Penalties.
Sec. 167. Engaging Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt Practices;
Penalties.
Sec. 168. Tolerating Graft and Corrupt Practices; Penalties.
Sec. 169. Retaliation Against Whistleblowers.
Sec. 170. Other Violations of the Code; Separate Liability.
Sec. 171. Liability of Directors, Trustees, Officers, or
Other Employees.
Sec. 172. Liability of Aiders and Abettors and Other Secondary Liability.
Offenses and penalties; General penalty.

—

—

870

—

870
870
871

—

872

—
—

—

——

—

—

—

—

— ——

—

—

872

872
873
873
873
874
874

874
875
875

875
875
37g

876

Title XVII

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
866
867

Sec. 173. Outstanding capital stock defined.

—

XXV

878

Outstanding capital stock defined; Distinguished from issued
and subscribed shares.
Sec. 174. Designation of Governing Boards.
Designation of governing boards.
Sec. 175. Collection and Use of Registration, Incorporation and
Other Fees.
Collection of fees.
Sec. 176. Stock Ownership in Corporations.
Limitation of stock ownership in corporations vested with public
interest; Illegal monopolies and combinations in restraint of

—

— -

—

880

-

-

880

—

trade.

—

Sec 177. Reportorial Requirements of Corporations.
Submission of the audited annual financial statements;
Corporations covered by the requirement.
Sec 178. Visitorial Power and Confidential Nature of Examination
Results.
Visitorial power in general; Visitorial power granted certain
governmental agencies; Judicial supervision, generally.
Sec 179. Powers, Functions, and Jurisdiction of the Commission.
The SEC; Powers and functions of the SEC; Jurisdiction of
Commission over corporations; Indemnification and
responsibilities of Commissioners; Jurisdiction over cases
transferred to ordinary courts; Jurisdiction over intra¬
corporate controversies; Rule-making power of the SEC.
Sec. 180. Development and Implementation of Electronic Filing and

—

—

—

-

Monitoring System.
Electronic filing and monitoring system.
Sec 181. Arbitration for Corporations.
Arbitration by corporation.
Sec 182. Jurisdiction over Party-List Organizations.
Jurisdiction over party-list organizations.
Sec. 183. Applicability of the Code.
Sec. 184. Effect of Amendment or Repeal of this Code, or the Dissolution
of a Corporation.
Limitations on legislative power to amend or repeal.
Sec 185. Applicability to Existing Corporations.
Applicability of Code to existing corporations.
Sec. 186. Separability Clause.
Effect of invalidity or unconstitutionality of certain provisions.

——

—

—

—

—

—

xxvi

881

885

887

890

—

Sec. 187. Repealing Clause.
Former Corporation Code repealed; Repeal of other laws.
Sec. 188. Effectivity.
Effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code.

—

912
914

APPENDICES
Appendix A
Guidelines on the Number and Qualifications of Incorporators
under the Revised Corporation Code (SEC Memo.
Circ. No. 16-19, Series of 2019, July 30, 2019.)

915

Appendix B
Guidelines on Corporate Term (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 22-20,
Series of 2020, August 18, 2020.)

919

Appendix C
Guidelines on the Revival of Expired Corporations (SEC Memo.
Circ. No. 23-19, Series of 2019, November 21, 2019.)

924

Appendix D
Amended Guidelines and Procedures on the Use of Corporate and
Partnership Names (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 13-19,
Series of 2019, June 21, 2019.)

933

Appendix E
907

Shareholders' Right to Put Items in the Agenda for Regular /Special
Stockholders' Meetings (SEC Memo. Circ No. 14-20,
Series of 2020, April 28, 2020.)

939

908

Appendix F

909
910
911
911

912

Guidelines on the Attendance and Participation of Directors,
Trustees, Stockholders, Members, and Other Persons of
Corporations in Regular and Special Meetings through
Teleconferencing, Video Conferencing and Other Remote
or Electronic Means of Communication (SEC Memo.
Circ. No. 06-20, Series of 2020, March 12, 2020.)

941

Appendix G

Amendment of SEC Memorandum Circular No. 17, Series of 2018 on
the Revision of the General Information Sheet (GIS) to Include
Beneficial Ownership Information (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 15-19,
Series of 2019.)
xxvii

gen

Appendix H
Guidelines in the Filing, Investigation, and Resolution of
Complaints for Violation of the Right to Inspect and/or
Reproduce Corporate Records (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 25-20,
Series of 2020, August 20, 2020.)

Appendix I •
Guidelines for the Conversion of Corporations Either to a One
Person Corporation or to Ordinary Stock Corporation
(SEC Memo. Circ. No. 27-20, Series of 2020, August 25, 2020.)

975

986

Appendix J
Filipino-Foreign Ownership
the
with
Guidelines on Compliance
the
Constitution and/or Existing
in
Prescribed
Requirements
Laws by Corporations Engaged in Nationalized and Partly
Nationalized Activities (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 08-13,
„
Series of 2013, May 20, 2013.)

996

Appendix K
Revised Guidelines on Securities Deposit of Branch Offices of
Foreign Corporations (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 17-19,
..
Series of 2019, July 31, 2019.)

998

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE
OF THE PHILIPPINES
(RA No. 11232)

INTRODUCTION
Different forms of business organization.

With the development of business enterprise, there has been
a gradual evolution in the form of business organization. Various
influences and considerations enter into the selection of the business
form for any particular business enterprise.

—

(1) Individual or sole proprietorship.'
The primitive form
of business is that of the individual proprietor. The individual
generally operates a small business, usually with the limited capital,
and is responsible alone for its success or failure, without acquiring
juridical personality separate and distinct from that of the owner of
the enterprise;
(2) Partnership.
The partnership is the first step towards a
wider field of operation and a more complex organization. Often, it
is a family affair. The business of the individual grows too large for
his sole management and he takes his child or some other member
of the family into partnership. In other cases, two (2) persons in the
same business unite their capital to secure and equate capital for the
conduct of their business.

—

Whatever the motive and the circumstances, the partnership is
almost invariably a larger business unit than the proprietorship. As
a form of business organization, it is losing ground;
'The Revised Corporation Code allows the formation of One Person Corporations,
thus, providing a viable alternative for sole proprietors with small capital to incorporate
and be governed under the Revised Corporation Code (Secs. 115-132.) in order to avail of
the advantages of conducting business through a corporate vehicle.
xxviii

1

2

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

—

The joint stock company is a form
(3) Joint stock company.
of business organization at one time frequent in coruiection with
larger enterprises, which, so far as the United States is concerned,
is now almost extinct. This form of company was highly popular in
England during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
The joint stock company can be best considered as a combination
the
partnership because it is formed under a contract and requires
of
no special sanction from the State. The members are liable, jointly and
severally, for all the company's debts. It resembles the corporation in
control and management. The members do not control the company
but choose a board of directors who were the authorized agents and
managers. Thus, while membership in the company might change
thru death or transfer of membership interest, the company is not
dissolved;

—

(4) Cooperative association.
It represents another form of
business organization which proved more popular in Europe than
in America. This form of organization is not of sufficient interest or
importance to the business world to require consideration in this
text;

—

(5) Business trust.
Another form of business organization
less widely known is the business trust, sometimes called the
"Massachusetts trust."2The main feature of this form of organization
is that it is formed by a contract and that the title to property and the
conduct of business is in the hands of trustees who act for a large
group of beneficiaries.

—

(6) Corporation. It is now the dominant form of organization
in modem business. The corporation is a creature of law and all
its rights, powers, and duties are derived from legislation. In some
forms of business of a public or quasi-public nature like that of public
utilities, railroads, insurance companies, and banking institutions, it
is almost the exclusive form of business organization. In other fields
of enterprise, the corporation competes with other forms of business

organization;
’Membership depends entirely upon the ownership of shares rather than on the

agreement of the associates in the partnership. The death of a "partner" does not dissolve
the firm. The trustees (managers) have a legal title to its property and act as principals
for the stockholders who have all the legal status of a cesti que trust (beneficiaries). It bears
such a close resemblance to a corporation that it is or has been frequently considered as
a corporation. (Chester Rohlich, Organizing Corporate and Other
Business Enterprises
[1953], p. 155.) But it is not a corporation.

3

INTRODUCTION

—

(7) Other business forms. They arise where different enterprises,
whether organized in the same form or different forms, unite for
a common purpose. The purpose may be temporary in character,
giving us the syndicate, or it may contemplate more permanent
associations, giving us varying forms of combinations, "the trust,"
the holding company, and the like.
(a) The distinguishing characteristic of the syndicate is that
it is temporary alliance of individuals, firms, or corporations,
usually to finance an enterprise. After the purpose of organization
has been accomplished, the syndicate is dissolved. It is a form of
organization used largely by bankers for underwriting purposes.
Syndicates reflect the general state of business when business
is at a standstill, there is obviously little need for them and few

—

are formed.
(b) Combinations take varying forms. Their primary purpose
is to secure the savings and other advantages which result from

consolidation and large-scale operation. In the first phase, such
combinations were really "trusts" in the sense above described,
except that corporations formed the constituent elements and
beneficiaries of the trust. This form of association having been
in some instances declared to be illegal by the courts, resorts has
been had to other methods.
(c) The practice followed in some cases is to organize a new
corporation which buys the individual plants it wishes to bring
into the combination and which thus becomes a single owner of
all the establishments. In the largest combinations, however, the
stock of the constituent companies is all brought by a unifying
company called a holding company. The constituent companies
retain their organization intact. They are controlled by the
central corporation as a stockholder which has power to elect
directors and officers at will and thus have complete power over
the management.

Though trusts as combinations of corporations have long
ceased to have any existence, popular phraseology continues
to use the word "trust" to designate any large
aggregation
of capital under unified direction and control, (see
C.W.
Gestenberg," Organization and Control," in 3 Modem Business
[1919], pp. 3-8.)

4

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

The Revised Corporation Code allows a single shareholder to
form a One Person Corporation, a new type of corporation where a
single shareholder is also the president and sole director.
Theories as to origin of corporations.

—

(1) Ethnological theory.
There is authority for the statement
that the concept of collective entity antedates that of the individual;
that "groups of men united by the reality or fiction of blood
relationship" into families, clans or tribes were recognized units of
primitive society even before the individual was so regarded.
(a) Upon this assumed ethnological predicate has been
erected the theory that the basic principle of corporate
organization, the embodiment of which is now described as a
fictitious, intangible person, created by law and existing only
in contemplation thereof, is in reality but a manifestation of the
gregarious instinct in man, existing inchoate from earliest times
and before law itself became an effective social force. The law, it
is argued, has done no more than to recognize the existence of
this phase of human activity, guide its development, and define
its functions and relations.
(b) Instead of the role of creator, assumed by the law for its
own convenience, the relation would be more aptly described

by assigning to the law the part of one who, having discovered a
foundling upon his doorstep, clothes and feeds it and thereafter
treats it as his own. Under this theory, the corporate idea,
therefore, is the product of no one people and no one country,
but, on the contrary, developed more or less independently, in
varying forms among the several ethnological units.
(2) Imitative theory.
The other theory as to the origin of
corporations is the imitative theory of jural development.
(a) This theory traces the genesis of the modem corporation
to the Greece of Solon (638-559 B.C.), citing the writings of Gaius
on Roman Law and passages from the Pandects of Justinian,
as authority for the assertion that laws fathered by the great
Hellenic jurist permitted the formation of private corporations
for certain purposes, upon condition they do not operate in
violation of the laws of the state.

—

;

INTRODUCTION

5

(b) Blackstone, however, ascribes the birth of the corporation
to the political necessities of Numa Pompilius (715-672 B.C.)
who, upon his accession to power in Rome, desiring to end the
disrupting influence of the private war being waged between the
Sabrine and the Roman factions, "thought it a prudent and politic
measure to subdivide these two into smaller ones by instituting
separate societies of every manual trade and profession. (1

Fletcher, Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations, Perm

Ed., p. 3, footnote No. 3, quoting Blackstone, 1 BL Comm. 468,
469.)

Rise and development of corporations.

—

(1) In Roman times.
Corporations, like most other forms of
business organization, take their rise in Roman times. Probably the
earliest form is that of the Collegium or college of priests. This body
had many of the rights and privileges which the law gives to the
modem corporation. The Collegium could hold property; it could
sue and be sued; the rights of the corporate body were separate
from those of individual members; it existed in perpetuity, and it
was autonomous.

Besides the Collegium, other Roman organizations such as
municipalities, official societies engaged in state administration,
military groups, and trade and societies took on corporate form.

—

(2) In medieval times. In medieval times, something akin to the
Roman Collegia appeared in the municipal and guild organizations
which were often closely related. Like the nonstock corporations of
the present day, they embodied the idea of the group working as
a whole thru chosen representatives, and so exhibit on of the chief
characteristics of a corporation from the legal standpoint.

Though the guilds are spoken of as trade and industrial
corporations and were intimately concerned with business affairs,
it would be a mistake to assume that they were like the present¬
day corporations business units operating in any given trade or
industry for the joint profit of those who composed them. If one can
imagine a voluntary association of retailers or manufacturers in any
given line, clothed not only with the desire but full legal authority
to regulate the business practices of its members, one has a muck
closer analogy to the real nature of the guild. It can be understood
too, how, under such circumstances, the guilds became so autocratic

—

6

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES
1 1

in their proceedings that as time went on, they became a hindrance
rather than a help to progress.

—

(3) In England.
At a later period, the regulated company
such as The Plymouth Company, the Hudson Bay Company, and
the East India Company, became a dominant factor in British trade,
particularly in foreign trade. Chartered by the government and
granted special privileges by their charters, these organizations
were forerunners of modem corporations. In some instances, the
trading company was hardly a company at all as we understand
it. It considered a grant of the right to carry on a certain kind of
business in a certain place conferred upon a group of persons. Any
member of the group or a number of members jointly might exercise
the right, and only those who participated in the particular venture
would be entitled to its profits. This was a frequent form of the
trading company.
Other companies conducted their operations as a unit and all
the associates shared in the common profit. They became in effect
and often in name joint stock companies and in the early part of the
last century, this was the common form of organization for larger
business units in Great Britain.

INTRODUCTION

7

in general made provision for it. At the same time, the principle
of limited liability was generally recognized. This principle was
not adopted in England until 1855 when Parliament passed a
statute providing that only such companies which announce
that their stockholders' liability is limited shall escape the
common-law rule that stockholders shall be liable as partners.
This is usually done by the use of the abbreviation "Ltd." after
the name of the company. (C. W. Gestemberg, op. cit., pp. 94-97.)

—

(a) It was not until the beginning of the 19th century, with the
growth of manufacturers brought about by the Napoleonic wars
and a consequent rise of an investing class, that the corporation
began to make strides. In 1800 up to 1815, many manufacturing
companies and turnpike companies were incorporated and
between the latter year and 1835, a large number of canal and
railway companies. Within this period too, banking institutions
spread rapidly over the country so that the corporate form of
organization became established.

(5) In the Philippines. "During the Spanish regime and prior to
the enactment of the former Corporation Law (Act No. 1459.), there
existed in the Philippines several forms of commercial companies,
associations, and partnerships.
(a) The concept of a corporation not having introduced
yet, these named associations and partnerships were the most
common entities by which business was generally conducted
during that time. Among these were the sociedad en comandita
(limited partnership) and the sociedad regular collective (general
partnership), which were governed by Articles 116 to 150 and
160 to 174 of the Code of Commerce which became effective in
these Islands on December 1, 1888.
Most known among these associations, however, was the
sociedad anomina then governed by Article 151 to Article 159 of
the Code of Commerce. There was also a sociedad de cuentas en
participacion (joint account participation) governed by Articles
239 to 243 of the same Code of Commerce.
(b) Of these Spanish commercial entities, the one which
could remarkably compare to the present-day concept of
corporate entity is the sociedad anomina. This is not to say,
however that the sociedad anomina exactly corresponded
to the notion of corporation in English and American law
particularly in matters concerning organization of the
enterprise, the distribution of dividends, and those in which
equity intervenes for the benefit of the stockholders (Harden
vs. Benguet Consolidated Mining Co., 58 Phil. 145 [1933].) but
that his, of all the then existing commercial entities, most nearly
approached the concept of a corporation.3

(b) While New York, in 1811, was the first
state to provide
for incorporation under general laws for
business purposes, it
was not until about the middle of the last century that
the States

partnership and the sociedades anominas, the business associations then
existing, were created by mere agreements.

—

(4) In the United States.
In the American colonies before the
Revolution, corporations were mostly educational, religious, or
military. They had not been introduced into business affairs. The
company as it was then known in the mother country smacked of
exclusive privilege and carried the idea of a monopoly granted by

the Crown.

—

8

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

(c) With the passage of the former Corporation Law on
March 1, 1906, and the later enactment of the new Civil Code,
all these societies and associations were abolished with the sole
exception of the sociedad de cuentas en participation. The sociedad
en comandita and sociedad regular colectiva were abolished when
Articles 116 to 150 and 160 to 174 of the Code of Commerce were
repealed by Article 2270 and superseded by the provisions on
Partnership in Title IX, Book IV of the new Civil Code." (C.G.
Alvendia, The Law of Private Corporations in the Philippines
1967 Ed., pp. 1-2.)
(d) In the Philippine Bill of 1902, which was approved on
July 1, 1902 after the Philippine Islands passed to the sovereignty
of the United States, the Congress of the United States inserted
certain provisions intended to control the law-making power in
the Philippine Islands in the matter of granting of franchises,
privileges and concessions. These provisions were found in
Sections 74 and 75 of the Bill.

The provisions of Section 74 were suspended by Section
28 of the Act of Congress of August 29, 1916, but in Section 75,
there is a provision referring to mining corporations which then
remained the law, as amended. The provision, in its original
form, read as follows: "... it shall be unlawful for any member
of a corporation engaged in agriculture or mining and for any
corporation organized for any purpose except irrigation, to
be in any wise interested in any other corporation engaged in

agriculture or in mining."

(e) Under the guidance of the Philippine Bill of 1902 and
certain other acts enacted by the U.S. Congress, including some
American state corporation laws, the Philippine Commission,

then the law-making body in the Philippines, subsequently
approved on March 1,1906, Act No. 1459, the former Corporation
Law, providing for the organization of corporations in
the
Philippines. The Act took effect on April 1, 1906.
(f) Before the passage of the Corporation
Code of the
Philippines on May 1, 1980 (Batas Pambansa Big. 68), numerous
statutes were enacted affecting corporations. Among them are
laws creating government corporations, and those
or relating to special types of corporations, such as governing
the General

9

INTRODUCTION

Banking Act (R.A. No. 337.)* Rural Banks Act (R.A. No. 720. X,
Investment Company Act (R.A. No. 2629.), Savings and Loans
Association Act (R.A. No. 3779.), Private Development Banks Act
(R.A. No. 4093.), Financing Company Act (R.A. No. 5980.), die
Investment Houses Law (P.D. No. 129.), Pawnshop Regulation
Act (P.D. No. 114.), and the Insurance Code of the Philippines.
(P.D. No. 612.)
(g) The Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines
was published in the Official Gazette on February 21, 2019
and became effective on the same date. It expressly repealed
the 1980 Corporation Code. While the old Corporation Code
has remained mostly intact, the Revised Corporation Code
introduced significant changes in corporation law and principles.

—

(6) Corporations in modern business.
The merits of the
corporation so far overshadow its drawbacks that today it is the

representative type of modem business organization. Its growth
within the past one and a half century has been by leaps and bounds.
In some fields particularly in public utilities, insurance, banking,
and manufacturing, it has, practically, exclusive possession.
(a) In the first place, its form is flexible. By means of various
kinds of stocks and bonds and thru the judicious drafting
of charter and bylaws, the control of the corporation can be
scientifically determined, the risk equitably apportioned and
the income distributed among the owners and creditors.
(b) The corporation assembles huge quantities of capital
gathered from many different quarters and then provides the
means for efficiently administering it. It secures in this way all
the advantages which are a part of large-scale production.46
(c) Moreover, it possesses a degree of permanence that
carries on its business beyond the span of any one generation.
It usually outlives the men who make and manage it. (C. W.
Gestenberg, op. cit., p. 14.)

— —
oOo

4Now, General Banking Act of 2000. (R.A. No. 8791.)
’Now, Rural Banks Act of 1992. (R.A. No. 7353.)
‘This is true in the case of big corporations which usually have numerous

stockholders.

Sec. 1

(b) Section 191 of the Act repealed the pertinent provisions
of the Code of Commerce (Secs. 151-159 thereof.) governing
sociedades anonimas with the proviso that "those which elect to
continue their business as such sociedades anonimas" instead of

Title I

GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEFINITIONS
AND CLASSIFICATIONS
Section 1. Title of the Code. — This Code shall be known
as "The Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines.”

Historical background of the Revised
Corporation Code
(1) Business associations under the Code of Commerce.
Prior to
1906, the business associations existing were the partnerships and
the sociedades anonimas which were created by mere agreements.
There was no entity in the Spanish law corresponding to the
corporation in American law. Its attention drawn to this fact, the
Philippine Commission, the legislative body of the Philippines
during the American regime, enacted on March 1, 1906, Act No.
1459, a genera] law authorizing the creation of corporations in the

—

Philippine Islands.
(2) Business associations under the former Corporation Law.
With the enactment of Act No. 21459, popularly known as the
Corporation Law, which took effect on April 1, 1906, providing
for the organization of corporations in the Philippines, it became
necessary to make certain adjustments because of the existence
of the Spanish sociedades anonimas organized and existing in the
Philippines.

—

(a) Accordingly, Section 75 of the Act was inserted under

which sociedades anonimas were made subject to the Corporation
Law "so far as such provisions may be applicable" and were
given the "option to either continue business as such corporation
or to form and organize under and by virtue of the provisions of
this Act."
10

11

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

reforming and organizing "under the Corporation Law shall
continue to be governed by the Code of Commerce" in relation
to their organization and method of transacting business and to
the rights of members thereof as among themselves." However,
"their relations to the public and public officials shall be
governed by the provisions of this Act."
Thus, the old Corporation Law recognized the difference
between sociedades anonimas and corporations. (Phil. Products
Co. vs. Primatera [Phils.], Inc., 15 SCRA 301 [1965].)

(c) The evident purpose of the Philippine Commission in
enacting Act No. 1459 was to introduce into the Philippines the
American corporation as the standard commercial entity and
to hasten the day when the sociedad anonimas of the Spanish
law would become obsolete. This rather elaborate Philippine
legislation is a sort of a codification of American corporate laws.
(Harden vs. Benguet Consolidated Mining Co., 58 Phil. 141
[1933].) It remained practically intact except for some repeals or
amendments until the enactment of B.P. Big. 68.
(3) Business corporations under the old Corporation Code.
The
law governing private corporations in the Philippines was embodied
in B.P. Big. 68, the old Corporation Code' of the Philippines, which
took effect on the date of its approval on May 1, 1980.
The old Code supplanted Act No. 1459, as amended. It
reproduced with amendments many provisions of the old
Corporation Law. In its explanatory note, Cabinet Bill No. 3 which
became B.P. Big. 68, states:

—

"This bill is intended to supplant the present Corporation
Law, Act No. 1459, as amended, and to be hereafter known as
the Corporation Code of the Philippines.
'A code, in modem times, is a systematic, complete, written collection of laws
arranged logically with index and table of contents and covering fully one or more
subject of law. It is a written compilation of statutory laws of general and permanent
importance, eliminating clerical errors and obsolete provisions, expressly repealing all
prior laws inconsistent with the compilation and occasionally including
amendments
and new provisions, (see Webster's 3rf New International Dictionary, 1976 Ed.,
p. 437.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 1
Sec. 1

The proposed Code seeks to establish a new concept of
business corporations so that they are not merely entities
established for private gain but effective partners of the National
Government in spreading the benefits of capitalism for the social
and economic development of the nation.
Significant changes have been introduced in the proposed
Code in order to update the provisions of our present
Corporation Law. Among the significant changes in this Code
is the grant of ample powers to the Securities and Exchange
Commission to enable it to exercise adequate supervision over
the operations and activities of private corporations. The other
innovative provisions constitute definite improvements to make
the proposed Code more responsive to the plans and policies of
the Government."

—

(4) Business corporations under the Revised Corporation Code.
Private corporations are now governed by R.A. No. 11232 which
became effective on February 23, 2019. (See SEC Notice dated
February 28, 2019.)

The Revised Corporation Code introduces new corporate
concepts and rules, with the aim, among others, to encourage the
creation of new business vehicles, particularly sole proprietorships
and small to medium sized enterprises, contribute to ease of doing
business, promote corporate governance and the protection of
minority investors, and strengthen the powers and authority of the
SEC to enforce the new law.
Section 16 of Article XU (National Economy and Patrimony) of
the Constitution provides:

"The Congress shall not, except by general law, provide
for the formation, organization, or regulation of private
corporations, Government-owned or -controlled corporations
may be created or established by special charters in the interest
of the common good and subject to the test or viability."
The Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines implements
the above provision of the Constitution.

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

13

Salient changes introduced in the Revised Corporation Code.
Among the most notable amendments are:
(1) Allowing not only natural persons but also juridical persons
("partnerships, associations, or corporations") to be incorporators
(Sec. 10.);
(2) Removing the minimum number of incorporators (Sec. 10.);
(3) Removing the minimum limit on the number of directors or
trustees (Sec. 13[f].);
(4) Deleting Section 13 of the old Code requiring at least 25%
of authorized capital stock subscribed and at least 25% of the
subscription fully paid-up, although retained in case of increase

under Section 37;
(5) Giving perpetual existence to corporations unless their
articles of incorporation provide otherwise (Sec. 11.);
(6) Providing stricter rules on the use of corporate names (Sec.
17.);

(7) Extending the period of non-use that will give rise to the
revocation of the certificate of incorporation from two (2) years to
five (5) years (Sec. 21.);
(8) Requiring corporations vested with public interest with
higher voting threshold (Sec. 31[a].) and higher reportorial

requirements (Secs. 22, 177.);

(9) Requiring corporations vested with public interest to have
independent directors (Sec. 22.) and a compliance officer (Sec. 24.);

(10) Allowing election of directors or trustees by remote
communication or in absentia (Secs. 23, 26, 49, 52, 57.);
(11) Removing the requirement that majority of directors must
be Philippine residents but requiring the treasurer to be a resident
and the secretary to be a resident citizen (Sec. 24.);

(12) Granting the SEC the power to order the removal of a
director or trustee with a disqualification (Sec. 27.);
(13) Authorizing the creation of an emergency board when

a vacancy prevents the remaining directors or trustees from
constituting a quorum and emergency action is necessary (Sec. 28.);

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

14

Sec 1

(14) Granting stockholders or members the right to have
information about compensation and other remuneration of
directors or trustees (Sec. 29.);

(15) Expanding the provision on self-dealing to cover
contracts of the corporation with spouses and relatives within the
4th degree of consanguinity or affinity of a director, trustee or officer
(Sec. 31.);

(16) Granting corporations the power to enter into contracts
with partnership, joint venture, or any commercial agreement (Sec.
34.);
(17) Giving the stockholder or member the right to nominate a
director or trustee (Sec. 23.) and to propose the holding of a special
meeting and the items to be included in the agenda (Sec. 49.);
(18) Requiring beneficial owners of shares to be identified and
recorded in the principal office of the corporation (Sec. 73.);

(19) Requiring a director or trustee who has a potential interest
in any related party transactions to abstain from voting on the
approval of said transactions (Sec. 52.);
(20) Allowing the formation of One Person Corporations with
a single stockholder (Secs. 115-132.);

(21) Adding new provisions entitled "Investigations, Offenses,
and Penalties" that include new offenses under the Revised
Corporation Code including making retaliation against whistle
blowers a punishable offense (Title XVI, Secs. 154-172.);
(22) Allowing the adoption of alternative dispute resolution
mechanism for intercorporate disputes (Sec. 181.); and
(23) Expanding the powers, authority and jurisdiction of the
SEC to enable it to effectively enforce the Revised Corporation

Code. (Secs. 25, 27, 73, 154-159, 175-180.)

Guide to the changes.
(1) Principal aims of changes.

—

The changes seek:
(a) to encourage the formation of new businesses, especially
small and medium sized-enterprises in the local market; to
improve the ease of doing business; and to stimulate both

Sec 1

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

15

domestic and foreign investments by removing numerous and
stringent incorporation and regulatory requirements;
(b) to strengthen good corporate governance (particularly
in corporations vested with public interest which are subject
to additional regulatory conditions that do not apply to other
corporations) by prescribing restrictions /requirements to
insure transparency in corporate management and transactions;
to deter corporate abuses and frauds; and to afford greater
protection to minority investors; and
(c) to expand the powers, authority and jurisdiction of the
SEC so that it can effectively enforce the new law and implement
its rules and regulations.
(2) Identification of the changes.
For the convenience of the
reader, only the major or important amendments in the Revised
Corporation Code are underscored. Minor changes are not indicated.
They are those that do not materially affect the meaning or intent of

—

the law.
(a) Examples of minor changes are:
,
1) Words with hyphens, e.g., "by-laws," "non-stock,"
"non-assessable," "pre-emptive," are now spelled as one (1)
word without hyphen;
2) Some words or phrases are deleted, modified,
or changed such as: "any such" to "such," "as may be
applicable" to "as applicable," "not inconsistent with," to
"consistent with," or "in accordance with," "not less than"
to "at least," "such" to "the," "except" to "other than," etc.;
3) Some words, phrases, and paragraphs are merely
rearranged or relocated; and
4) Practically all section numbers have been changed
and subparagraph numbers, to letters.
(b) New sections or new provisions in a section are indicated
with "(N)" at the end thereof; those substantially amended, with
"(SA)"; and those with insignificant amendments, with "(A)."
(c) Insertions in a section in the old Code are underscored
in the Revised Corporation Code;
(d) If the entire chapter consisting of many sections is new,
"(N)" is placed after the Title of the Chapter; and

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec I

(e) Important deletionseffected by the Revised Corporation
Code of provisions in the old Code are touched in the comments.
(3) Changes in Section numbering. The changes were principally
the result of the addition of many new provisions in the Revised
Corporation Code.

—

(a) Title I (General Provisions) to Title XIII (Special Corporations)

OLD
Secs. 14-106
Less 1
Note: Sec. 107
Sec. 108
repealed
Less 2
Secs. 109-116
One Person
Corporation
(b) Title XIV (Dissolution)

—

Plus 16

Secs. 117-121

Plus 17

Sec. 122

NEW

Secs. 13-105
Sec. 106
Secs. 107-114

Secs. 115-132

Secs. 133-137
Sec. 138
Sec. 139

Less 2
Sec. 108
Sec. 106
(c) Title XV (Foreign Corporations)
Plus 17
Secs. 123-136
Secs. 140-153
(d) Title XVI (Investigations, Offenses, and Penalties)

—

—

Plus 36

Secs. 137-143
Sec. 144

Plus 39

Sec. 145
Sec. 146
Sec. 147
Sec. 148
Sec. 149

Secs. 154-172

(e) Title XVII (Miscellaneous Provisions)

Plus 37
Plus 39

Secs. 173-179
Sec. 170
Secs. 180-183
Sec. 184
Sec. 187
Sec. 186
Sec. 185
Sec. 188

Sec- 2

•'

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

17

Sec. 2. Corporation defined. — A corporation is an
artificial being created by operation of law, having the right
of succession and the powers, attributes and properties
expressly authorized by law or incidental to its existence.

Statutory definition of corporation.

Section 2 defines the term ''corporation." The statutory definition
refers only to private corporations or to corporations organized
under the Revised Corporation Code.1

Judicial definitions of corporation.
A corporation was early defined by the Supreme Court of
the United States as "an artificial being, invisible, intangible, and
existing only in contemplation of law." (Dartmouth College v.
Woodward, 4 Wheat [U.S.] 518, 4 L. ed. 629.)
Other judicial definitions of a corporation aggregate are:
(1) An artificial being created by law, and composed of individuals
who subsist as a body politic under a special domination, with the
capacity of perpetual succession, and of acting, within the scope of
its charter, as a natural person (Fietsam v. Hay, 122 HI.293, 13 N.E.

501.);

(2) An artificial intellectual being, the mere creature of the law,
composed generally of natural persons in their natural capacity, but
which may also be composed of persons in their political capacity of
members of other corporations (Bank of United States v. Deveaux, 5
Cranch [U.S.] 61, 3 L. ed. 38.);
(3) A collection of many individuals, united in one body under
a special denomination, and vested by the policy of the law with
the capacity of acting in several respects as an individual (State v.
Standard Oil Co., 49 Ohio St. 137, 30 N.E. 279.); and
'For income tax purpose, the term "corporation'' includes OPCs, partnerships, no
matter how created or organized, joint companies, joint accounts (cuentas en participation),
associations or insurance companies, but does not include general professional
partnerships and a joint venture or consortium formed for the purpose of undertaking
construction projects or engaging in petroleum, coal, geothermal and other energy
operations pursuant to an operating or consortium agreement under a service
contract
with the Government General professional partnerships are partnerships formed by
persons for the sole purpose of exercising their common profession, no part of the
of which is derived from engaging in any trade or business. (Sec. 22(b), National income
Internal

Revenue Code.)

18

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 2
Sec. 2

(4) A legal institution devised to confer upon the individuals
of which it is composed powers, privileges, and immunities which
they would not otherwise possess, the most important of which are
continuous legal identity and perpetual or indefinite succession
under the corporate name, notwithstanding successive changes by
death or otherwise in the corporation or members of the corporation.
(Coyle v. McIntire, 7 Houst (Dell] 4, 30 A728.)

But though the terminology varies, the elements are usually the
same. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 548-549.)
Attributes of a corporation.
An analysis of the definition in Section 2 reveals these attributes
of a corporation:
(1) It is an artificial being;

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

19

the creator's personal or undisclosed convenience, so long as that
purpose is the equivalent of business activity or is followed by the
carrying on of business of the corporation, the corporation remains
a separate entity.
(3) Disregard of the doctrine. The doctrine is one of substance
and validity. (9-A Words and Phrases 385 [1960 ed.].) It is confined
to legitimate cases and equitable limitations. The courts will, in
proper cases, disregarding forms and looking to substance, ignore
the legal fiction of corporate entity to prevent its being used for
unfair, fraudulent, or illegal purposes. (Infra.) The basic question is
whether and to what extent the separate existence of a duly formed
corporation should be ignored to do basic justice or avoid the
frustration of the public policy and purpose behind the creation of
corporations.

—

(2) It is created by operation of law;

Corporation as an artificial personality.

(3) It has the right of succession; and

As a consequence of this legal concept of a corporation as an
artificial entity independent of the stockholders:

(4) It has only the powers, attributes, and properties expressly
authorized by law or incidental to its existence.

Doctrine of corporate entity.
A corporation, whether stock or nonstock, is a legal or juridical
person with a personality separate from its owners or investors and
from any other legal entity to which it may be connected or related.
(1) Fundamental characteristics of corporations. Its being a body
or entity separate from its stockholders or members vested with
"powers, attributes and properties" of its own, is the fundamental
characteristic of corporations. It is not in reality a person but the
law treats it as though it were a person by process of fiction thus
facilitating the conduct of corporate business in its own name much
in the same way that a "real" person could. The stockholders or
members who, as natural persons, are merged in the corporate
body, compose the corporation but they are not the corporation.
(2) Useful purpose of the doctrine. This doctrine
of "corporate
entity fills a useful purpose in business life, and whether the purpose
be to gain an advantage under the law of the state of
incorporation
or to avoid, or to comply with the demands of creditors
or to serve

—

—

—

(1) Liability for acts or contracts.
The rule is that obligations
or debts incurred by a corporation, acting through its authorized
agents, are its sole liabilities. Similarly, a corporation may not
generally be made to answer for acts or liabilities of its stockholders
(or members) or those of the legal entities to which it may be
connected and vice-versa. (Creese vs. Court of Appeals, 93 SCRA 483
[1979]; Palay, Inc. vs. Clave, 124 SCRA 638 [1983]; ARB Construction
Co., Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 332 SCRA 427 [2000]; Tupaz IV vs.
Court of Appeals, 475 SCRA 398 [2005].)
(a) A suit against certain stockholders of a corporation
cannot ipso facto be a suit against the unpleaded corporation
itself without violating the fundamental principle that a
corporation has a legal personality distinct and separate from its
stockholders. Failing to implead the corporations as defendants
and merely annexing a list of such corporations to the complaint
is a violation of their right to due process for it would in
effect be disregarding their separate personality without a
hearing. (Presidential Commission on Good Government vs.
Sandiganbayan, 290 SCRA 639 [1998]; Booc vs. Bantuas, 354
SCRA 279 [2000]; PCGG vs. Sandiganbayan, 365 SCRA 538

[2001].)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

20

Sec. 2

(b) A corporate officer is not personally and solidarily
liable with the corporation for the money claims of discharged
or retrenched employees unless he acted with evident malice
or bad faith in terminating their employment.2 (Business Day
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 221 SCRA 9 [1993];
MAM Realty Development Corp. vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 244 SCRA 797 [1995]; Asionics Phils., Inc. vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 290 SCRA 164 [1998].)
The separate personality of a corporation is a shield against
personal liability of its officers, except only when the veil of
corporate fiction is being used as a cloak or cover for fraud or
illegality, in which case the law will regard the corporation as an
association of persons.
(c) All contracts entered into in its name by its regular
appointed officers and agents are the contracts of the corporation
and not those of the stockholders or members. A corporation
cannot be held liable for the personal indebtedness of a
stockholder even if he should be its president. (Smith & Co., Inc.
vs. Ford, 63 Phil. 786 [1936].)
(d) The stockholder's debt or credit is not the debt or credit
of the corporation, nor is the debt or credit of the latter that of
the former. (Good Earth Emporium, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
supra.; Mendoza vs. Banco Real Development Bank, 470 SCRA
86 [2005].) This protection from liability for shareholders is the
principle of limited liability personnel. (Phil. National Bank vs.
Hydro Resources Contractors Corp., G.R. No. 167530, March 13,
2013.), i.e., the shareholders risk only what they have invested
or agreed to invest and no more if the corporation is ultimately

liable.

(e) For the same reason, the president and the manager
of a corporation who entered into and signed a contract in his
official capacity, cannot be made liable in his individual capacity
’Since a corporation is an artificial person, it must have an officer who can be
presumed to be the employer, being the "person acting in the interest of the employer."
In order words, the corporation, in the technical sense only, is the employer. The
manager
of a corporation falls within the meaning of an "employer" as
contemplated
by the
Labor Code, who may be held solidarily liable for the obligations of
the corporation to
its dismissed employees. (NYK International Knitwear Corporation
vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 397 SCRA 607 (2003).)

Sec. 2

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

21

absent stipulation to that effect. (Rustan Pulp Paper Mills, Inc.
vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 213 SCRA 665 [1992]; see
Consolidated Bank and Trust Corporation vs. Court of Appeals,
356 SCRA 671 [2001].)
(f) Corporate officers cannot be held personally liable
with the corporation, whether civilly or otherwise, for the
consequences of their acts, for as long as they are found acting
for and on behalf of the corporation, within the scope of
their authority and in good faith. (Solidbank Corporation vs.
Mindanao Ferroalloy Corporation, 463 SCRA 409 [2005]; Price
vs. Innodata Phils., Inc., 567 SCRA 269 [2008]; Dy-Dumalasa vs.
Fernandez, 593 SCRA 656 [2009]; Laborte vs. Pagsanjan Tourism
Consumer's Cooperative, 713 SCRA 536 [2014].) Absent
negligence, malice or bad faith, or a specific provision of law
making a corporate officer liable, such corporate officer cannot
be made personally liable for corporate liabilities. (Pantranco
Employees Assoc, vs National Labor Relations Commission,
581 SCRA 598 [2009]; see Sec. 30.) The corporate officer must be
impleaded in the case filed against the corporation.
(g) A corporation is vested by law with a personality
separate and distinct from its stockholders, including its officers
and from that of any other legal entity to which it may be related.
Thus, a company manager acting in good faith within the scope
of his authority in terminating the services of certain employees
cannot be held liable for damages. (Sunio vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 127 SCRA 390 [1984]; Pabalan vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 184 SCRA 495 [1990];
Malayang Samahan ng Manggagawa vs. Ramos, 326 SCRA 428
[2000].) The act of the president of a corporation in dismissing
an employee, done as such officer in good faith, cannot result in
his private liability. (Cebu Filveneer Corp. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 286 SCRA 556 [1998]; AMA Computer
College vs. Ignacio, 590 SCRA 633 [2009].)
(h) In cases of illegal dismissal, corporate
directors and
officers are solidarily liable with the corporation, where
terminations of employment are done with malice or bad faith.
The fictional veil of separate corporate entity may be pierced.
(Acesite Corporation vs. National Labor Relations
Commission,
449 SCRA [2004]; Petron Corporation vs. National
Labor
Relations Commission, 505 SCRA 596 [2006].)

n

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 2
Sec. 2

(i) The property of the corporation is not the property
of the stockholders or members and may not be sold by the
stockholders or members without express authorization of its
board of directors or trustees. (Woodchild Holdings, Inc. vs.
Roxas Election & Construction Company, 436 SCRA 235 [2004];
Sec. 23.) Their interest, if any, is indirect, contingent and inchoate.
(Asia's Emerging Dragon Corp. vs. Dept, of Transportation and
Communications, 579 SCRA 44 [2008].)

third party or for wrongful ends.
There is no law that prohibits a corporate officer from binding
himself personally to answer for a corporate debt. (Toh vs. Solid
Bank Corporation, 408 SCRA 544 [2003].)

—

(3) Right to sue.
A corporation may incur obligations and
bring civil and criminal actions (Sec. 35[a]; see Art. 46, Civil Code.)
in its own name in the same manner as a natural person.
(a) A corporation has no personality to sue for and in
behalf of its stockholders or members to recover property which
belongs to stockholders or members in their personal capacities.
(Sulo ng Bayan, Inc. vs. G. Araneta, Inc., 72 SCRA 347 [1976].)

(b) Since the legality of a seizure can be contested only by
the party whose rights had been violated, the right to object to
the seizure of papers and documents of the corporation belongs
to the corporation as a separate entity and not to its stockholders
as such. (Stonehill vs. Diokno, 20 SCRA 383 [1967].)
(c) Whatever mental anguish, wounded feelings, etc.
(see Art. 2217, Civil Code.) the stockholders and officers of a

corporation may suffer cannot be considered equally felt by
the corporation, for a corporation is a personality separate and

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

23

’ distinct from that of its stockholders and officers. Besmirched

reputation cannot cause mental anguish to a corporation unlike
in the case of a natural person, for a corporation has no reputation
in the sense that an individual has, and besides, it is inherently
impossible for a corporation to suffer mental anguish, (see The
Insular Life Assurance Co., Ltd. vs. Court of Appeals, 428 SCRA
79 [2004]; Rural Bank of Makati, Inc. vs. Municipality of Makati,

—

Personal
(2) Liability when exceptional circumstance warrant.
or solidary liability may be incurred by corporate agents acting
on behalf of the corporation only when exceptional circumstances
warrant. Thus, it may validly attach when the director/ trustee or
officer acted maliciously or in bad faith, or with gross negligence
(see Secs. 31, 65.), or agreed to hold himself personally and solidarily
liable with the corporation, or made, by specific provision of law,
personally liable for corporate action, or it is proven that the officer
has used the fiction of separate corporate personality to defraud a

• '• 1 1

1

433 SCRA 362 [2004].)
(d) As a rule, a juridical person like a corporation, is not
entitled to moral damages’ because, not being a natural person,
it cannot experience physical suffering or such sentiments as
wounded feelings, serious anxiety, mental anguish, or moral
shock. Mental suffering can be experienced only by one having
a nervous system. However, a corporation may have a good
reputation which, if debased or besmirched resulting in social
humiliation, may be a ground to recover moral damages and
attorney's fees. (Mambulao Lumber Co. vs. Phil. National Bank,
22 SCRA 359 [1968]; People vs. Manero, Jr., 218 SCRA 85 [1993];
LBC Express, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 236 SCRA 602 [1994];
Acme Shoe, Rubber & Plastic Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 260
SCRA 714 [1996]; Solid Homes vs. Court of Appeals, 275 SCRA
267 [1997].) Although moral damages may be allowed in certain
situations, the grant is not automatic. The claimant must prove
the factual basis of the damage and the causal relation to the

’Moral damages include besmirched reputation which a corporation may possibly
suffer. (Art. 2217, Civil Code.) A corporation whose credit reputation is not
exactly
something to be considered sound and wholesome cannot be entitled to a big amount
of moral damages. (Asset Privatization Trust vs. Court of Appeals, 300
SCRA 579 [1998).)
While courts may allow the grant of moral damage to corporations, there
must be proof
of the factual basis of the damage and its causal relation to the
defendants acts. This is
so because moral damages though incapable of pecuniary estimation,
of an award designed to compensate the claimant for "actual injury" are in the category
suffered and not to
impose a penalty on the wrongdoer. (Crystal vs. Bank of the Phil. Islands,
572 SCRA 697
[2008].)
"The fiction where corporations are granted both legal personality
separate from its
owners and a capacity to act should not be read as endorsing
corporations with a single
mind. In truth, a corporation is a hierarchical community of
the governing board and in management. Corporations havegroups of persons both in
different minds working
together including its employers, auditors, and in some cases, their
compliance officers.
To grant the argument that a corporation, like a natural person,
was
confused or not
in bad faith is to extend to it too much analogy and
to endow it more of the human
characteristics beyond its legal fiction." (Makati Tuscany Condominium
Corporation vs.
Multi-Realty Development Corp., 861 SCRA 448 [2018].)

24

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2

defendant's acts. (Ren Transport Corp. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 794 SCRA 498 [2016]; Manila Electric
Corporation vs. Nordec Philippines, 861 SCRA 515 [2018].)
(e) For purposes of venue, the place of business of the
suing corporation is considered as its residence. The residence
of the president is not the residence of the corporation because a
corporation has a personality separate and distinct from that of
its officers and stockholders. (Sy vs. Tyson Enterprises, Inc., 119
• SCRA 367 [1982].)
A corporation may
(4) Right to acquire and possess property.
(Sec.
35[g]; Art. 46, Civil
kinds.
all
of
acquire and possess property
Code.) Property conveyed to or acquired by the corporation is in
law the property of the corporation itself as distinct legal entity (Art.
44[3], ibid.) and not that of the stockholders or members as such and

—

vice-versa.
(a) Where real properties in the inventory of the estate of
a decedent are in the possession of and are registered in the
name of the corporation, absent any cogency to shed the veil of
corporate fiction, the presumption of conclusiveness of the titles
in favor of the corporation should stand undisturbed. (Lim vs.
Court of Appeals, 323 SCRA 102 [2000].)
(b) Stockholders or members are in no legal sense the
owners of corporate property (or credits) which is owned by the
corporation as a distinct person. (Traders Royal Bank vs. Court
of Appeals, 177 SCRA 788 [1989]; Magsaysay-Labrador vs. Court
of Appeals, 180 SCRA 266 [1989]; Good Earth Emporium, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 194 SCRA 655 [1991].) and may not be sold
by them without express authorization from the corporation's
board of directors or trustees, (see Sec. 24.)
(c) While a share of stock represents a proportionate interest
in the property of the corporation, it does not vest the owner
thereof (even if it/he is the controlling shareholder) with any
legal right or title to any of the properties of the corporation
owned by the latter as a distinct juridical person. (Saw vs.
Court of Appeals, 195 SCRA 740 [1991]; Silverio, Jr. vs. Filipino
Business Consultants, Inc., 466 SCRA 584 [2005].) The ownership
of that property is in the corporation and not in the holders of
shares of stocks. (Fisher vs. Trinidad, 43 Phil. 973 [1922]; Mobilia
Products, Inc. vs. Umezawa, 452 SCRA 736 [2005].)

Sec 2

•

. n-'!

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

25

(d) The interest of shareholders in corporate property is
purely inchoate and, therefore, does not entitle them to intervene
in a litigation involving corporate property. (Ibid.)
(e) That one is president of a corporation does not render the

property he owns or possesses the property of the corporation,
since the president, as an individual, and the corporation, are
separate entities. The power to "pierce the veil of corporate
entity" belongs to the court and the sheriff usurps this power
when he enforces a writ of execution, not against the property
of the corporation, the judgment debtor, but against that of its
president because they are one and the same. (Cruz vs. Dalisay,
152 SCRA 482 [1987]; see Rosario vs. Bascar, Jr., 206 SCRA 678
[1992]; Booc vs. Bantuas, 354 SCRA 279 [2001].)

(f) A tax exemption granted to a corporation cannot be
extended to include the dividends paid by such corporation
to its stockholders. (Manila Gas Corporation vs. Collector of
Internal Revenue, 71 Phil. 513 [1941].)

(g) The agreement of co-shareholders to mutually grant
the right of first refusal to each other, by itself, does not
violate the constitutional provision limiting land ownership to
Filipinos and Filipino corporations. If the foreign stockholders
of a landholding corporation exceed 40%, it is not the foreign
•i stockholders' ownership which is adversely affected but
the
capacity of the corporation to own land, i.e., the corporation
becomes disqualified to own land. The corporation and its
shareholders being separate juridical entities, the right of first
refusal over shares pertains to the shareholders whereas the
capacity to own land pertains to the corporation. (J.G. Summit
Holdings, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 450 SCRA 169 [2005].)
(5) Acquisition by court of jurisdiction.
Where the appearance
in court of the president of a corporation was in the capacity of
counsel of another corporation and not as representative or counsel
of the first corporation, such appearance cannot be construed
as a
voluntary submission of the corporation to the court's jurisdiction.
The personality of the president of a corporation is distinct from
that of the corporation itself. In the absence of summons on the
corporation, a judgment against it is valid for lack of jurisdiction
and lack of due process. (Trimica, Inc. vs. Polaris Marketing
6 Coro
P’'
60 SCRA 321 [1974].)

—

26

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 2

The participation by the general manager of a corporation in an
action involving the corporation cannot equate to participation by
another corporation in the same proceedings, merely because the
general manager of the first corporation is also the chairman of the
board of the second corporation. (Padilla vs. Court of Appeals, 370
SCRA 208 [2001].)

—

Likewise, as an entity
(6) Changes in individual membership.
distinct from its members or stockholders, a corporation remains
unchanged and unaffected in its identity by changes in its individual
membership. The corporation, as an artificial person, continues to
exist as such "in like manner that the River Thames is still the same
river though the parts which compose it are changing every instant."
(1 Fletcher, pp. 18-19; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 28-08/ December 15,
2008.)
n

Corporation as a person, resident
or citizen.

A corporation is regarded as a "person," "resident," or "citizen"
within the purview of those terms as used in constitutional or
statutory provisions, whenever this becomes necessary to give
full effect to the purpose or spirit of the Constitution or statute.
The tendency is to regard corporations, as far as their inherent
nature will permit, as on the same footing as ordinary individuals.
Consequently, whether corporations are included within a statute
depends largely upon its object. (1 Fletcher, Sec. 53.)

—

(1) As a person. Persons are divided into natural and artificial
persons. The term "person" prima facie includes both and, therefore,
as a general rule, includes corporation (18 Am. Jur. 2d 568.) but in a

figurative sense only.
(a) A corporation has been held to be included by the word
"person" in statutes concerning attachment, taxation, usury,
insolvency and bankruptcy, limitations, prior notice to bring
suit, right to appeal, allowing action of trespass, prohibiting
the banking business, conferring a cause of action for wrongful
death, allowing suit against usurpation of a public office or
‘Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 19 [2003].

Sec. 2

. , i.

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

27

franchise, allowing a petition to quiet title, and offering public
lands for appropriation "by all persons" who enter upon them.
(b) The word "person" has also been deemed to apply to a
corporation as used in statutes providing for suit because of the
wrongful exercise of a franchise by a "person," punishing "any
person" employing a minor child, and providing for a civil action
against "any person" unlawfully holding a franchise. Where the
word "person" is used in a definition of libel, corporations are
included. (1 Fletcher, pp. 70-71.)
(c) A corporation is a "person" within the meaning of
Section 1, Article Ill (Bill of Rights) of the Constitution that "no
person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due
process of law" and that it is entitled to the equal protection of
the laws in like manner as other persons in the same situation,
provided the corporation is "within the jurisdiction" of the State
the protection of which is demanded.
(d) Insofar as liberty is concerned, however, a private
corporation is held not to be a person within the language of the
constitutional provision, the liberty guaranteed is the liberty of
natural, not artificial, persons. Neither is it a person within the
protection of Section 17, Article III of the Constitution against
self-incrimination. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 570-571.)

Thus, while an individual may lawfully refuse to answer
incriminating questions unless protected by an immunity
statute, it does not follow that a corporation, vested with special
privileges and franchises, may refuse to show its hand when
charged with an abuse of such privileges. (Bataan Shipyard &
Engineering Co., Inc. vs. PCGG, 150 SCRA 181 [1987].)
(e) But a corporation comes within the protection of Section
3 of the same Article insuring the right of the people to be secured
in their persons against unreasonable seizures and searches. A
corporation is, after all, but an association of individuals under
an assumed name and with a distinct legal entity. In
organizing
itself as a collective body, it waives no constitutional immunities
appropriate to such body. Its property cannot be taken without
compensation. It can only be proceeded against by due process
of law, and is protected against unlawful discrimination. (Bache
& Co. [Phils.], Inc. vs. Ruiz, 37 SCRA 823 [1971].)

28

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sec. 2

—

(2) As a resident or non-resident. Since a corporation is a person
in the law, it is also to be deemed a resident or a non-resident of a
particular state or country within the meaning of a statute, it if is
within the purpose and intent of the statute, as in the case of statutes
defining the jurisdiction of the courts, or relating to venue, taxation,
etc. (18 C.J.S. 388.)
(a) A corporation formed in one State may be, for certain
purposes, domiciled or a resident in another State in which it has
its offices and transacts business, notwithstanding the fiction of
the law that a corporation dwells only in the State of its creation
and cannot migrate therefrom. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 694.)

Thus, in a case, it was held that a foreign corporation
licensed to do business in the Philippines (see Sec. 140.) is not a
non-resident within the meaning of Section 424 (par. 2.) of the
Code of Civil Procedure (now Sec. 1[f], Rule 57, Rules of Court.)
which allows the attachment of the property of the defendant in
an action where such defendant "resides out of the Philippines,
or on whom summons may be served by publication" as to make
its property subject to attachment under the section. (Claude
Neon Lights, Inc. vs. Phil. Advertising Corp, and Santamaria,
57 Phil. 607 [1932].)
(b) For taxation, a foreign corporation may be either a
resident or non-resident, the former referring to a "foreign
corporation engaged in trade or business within the Philippines,"
and the latter, to a "foreign corporation not engaged in trade
or business in the Philippines." (see Sec. 22[H], [I], National
Internal Revenue Code.)

—

(3) As a citizen. "Citizenship" is the status of a citizen with its
rights and privileges and corresponding duties and obligations. The
term "citizen," as it is commonly understood, implies membership
in a political body and, therefore, does not ordinarily include a
corporation, unless the general purpose and import of the statute in
which the term is found seem to require it. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 569.)
(a) There is no absolute and inflexible rule that a corporation
cannot be deemed a citizen for certain purposes. (Ibid.) A
corporation is a citizen within the meaning of a statute conferring
rights, defining the jurisdiction of courts, or otherwise relating
to citizens, if the purpose and intent of the statute renders it

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

29

applicable, and for such purpose it is, as a general rule, a
citizen of the State or country by or under the laws of which it
was created and exists without regard to the citizenship of its
stockholders or members. (18 C.J.S. 388.)
(b) "Most often when the term 'citizenship' is used in
connection with corporations, it is not used in the sense under
Political Law, but more in the sense of indicating the country
under whose laws the corporations were organized. In this
respect, 'citizen,' as used in connection with corporations, is
synonymous with domicile or residence. In fact, our Corporation
Law requires that the principal office of the corporation must be
located in the Philippines.
However, when the term 'citizenship' is used synonymously
with residence or domicile, said use is for jurisdictional
purposes only, for a corporation is subject to the jurisdiction of
the country under whose law it was organized. Therefore, the
citizenship of a corporation is not looked into unless citizenship
is an important factor in the determination or the enjoyment of
a privilege, exercise of a right or even the legality of a contract
into by the corporation." (C.G. Alvendia, op. tit., pp. 10-11.)
Corporation as a collection of individuals.
(1) True in actual fact. Although the doctrine that a corporation
is an artificial entity and a person in law, distinct from the members
who compose it, will always be recognized and given effect, both
at law and in equity, in cases within its reason and when there is
no controlling reason against it, a corporation is an aggregation
of peoples or a collection of individuals. In the case of modem
private corporations, it is really the individuals composing it who
own its property and carry on the corporate business, through
the corporation and its officers and agents, for their own profit or

—

benefit.
The idea of the corporation as a legal entity or person apart
from its members (individuals or corporate) is a mere fiction of the
law introduced for convenience in conducting the business in
this
privileged way. (14 C.J.S. 59.) While courts, as a general rule, cannot
disregard this theory of separate entity, under certain circumstances,
as when the privilege is misused by Hie corporation, the fictive
veil
of corporate personality may be pierced. (Infra.)

30

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2

—

This conception of a
(2) Recognized for many purposes.
corporation as a collection of individuals owning the corporate
property and doing business through the corporation and in the
corporate name has always been recognized for many purposes as
between the stockholders or members themselves and as between
them and the corporation, to enforce and protect their rights. Thus,
the stockholders of a corporation are entitled to the profits by way
of dividends and may enforce their rights in this respect. They are
entitled to insist that the corporation shall keep within the powers
and purposes for which it was formed, and may sue in equity, if
necessary, to compel it to do so.
It is not only in cases like these that the law recognizes that a
corporation is in reality a collection of individuals and the corporate
entity a mere fiction, but the fiction also may be and often is
disregarded even for the purpose of giving effect to the acts of the
stockholders or members individually as the acts of the corporation.
(18 C.J.S. 379-380.)
Doctrine of piercing the veil of corporate
entity.

—

The doctrine that
(1) Fiction of distinct corporate legal entity.
law,
distinct from the
a corporation is a legal entity or a person in
persons composing it or any other corporation to which it may be
related, is merely a legal fiction for purposes of convenience and
to subserve the ends of justice. This fiction, therefore, cannot be
extended to a point beyond its reason and policy, (see 13 Am. Jur. 2d
559.) Peculiar situations or valid grounds may exist to warrant the
disregard of its independent being and the piercing of the corporate
veil. (China Banking Corp. vs. Dyne-Sem Electronics Corp., 494
SCRA 493 [2006].) The facts of each case are important.

—

(2) When legal fiction to be disregarded.
Being a mere creature
of the law, a corporation may be allowed to exist solely for lawful
purposes but where the fiction of corporate entity is used as a cloak or
cover for fraud or illegality, or "to defeat public convenience, justify
wrong, protect fraud, or defend crime" (Yutivo Sons Hardware Co.
vs. Court of Tax Appeals, 1 SCRA 160 [1961].) or for ends subversive
of the policy and purpose behind its creation, especially where
the corporation is a closed family corporation (Emiliano Cano
Enterprises, Inc. vs. Court of Individual Relations, 13 SCRA 290

Sec 2

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

31

[1965].), on equitable considerations, this fiction will be disregarded
and the individuals composing it or two (2) corporations will be
treated as identical. (Liversey vs. Binswanger Philippines, Inc.,’ 719
SCRA 433 [2014].)
(a) The law will not recognize separate corporate existence
with reference to the particular transaction involved. This nonrecognition is sometimes called the doctrine of piercing the veil
of corporate entity or disregarding the fiction of corporate entity (see
Claparols vs. Court of Industrial Relations, 65 SCRA 613 [1965];
Republic vs. Razon, 20 SCRA 234 [1967]; A.D. Santos, Inc. vs.
Vasquez, 22 SCRA 1156 [1968]; Liddel & Co., Inc. vs. Collector, 2
SCRA 632 [1961].) or the doctrine of corporate alter ego. (9-A Words
and Phrases 377.)
The rationale is to remove the barrier between the corporation
from the persons comprising it to thwart the fraudulent and
illegal schemes of those who use the corporate personality as a
shield for undertaking certain proscribed activities. (Velarde vs.
Lopez, Inc., 419 SCRA 422 [2003]; Francisco Motors vs. Court of
Appeals, 309 SCRA 72 [1999].)
(b) The doctrine allows a corporation's corporate
personality to be disregarded under certain circumstances so
that a corporation and its stockholders or members, or another
related corporation could be treated as a single entity (Veltroos
Federation of the Phil. vs. Montenego, 847 SCRA 1 [2017], It
requires the court to see through the protective shroud which
exempts its stockholders from liabilities that ordinarily they
could be subject to, or distinguishes one corporation from a
seemingly separate one, were it not for the existing corporate
fiction. (Lim vs. Court of Appeals, 323 SCRA 102 [2000];
Marubeni Corporation vs. Lirag, 362 SCRA 620 [2001].)
(c) For the corporate legal entity to be disregarded,
the
wrongdoing must be clearly and convincingly established (see
Del Rosario vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 187
SCRA 777 [1990]; Matuguina Integrated Wood Products, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 263 SCRA 490 [1996]; Complex Electronics
Employees Assoc, vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
310 SCRA 403 [1999]; Solidbank Corporation vs. Mindanao

’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines, p. 26 [2006].

32

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec2

Ferroalloy Corporation, 464 SCRA 409 [2005]; China Banking
Corp. vs. Dyne-Sem Electronics Corp., supra.) The application of
the doctrine is frowned upon. Any piercing of the corporate veil
has to be done with caution. (Reynoso IV vs. Court of Appeals,
345 SCRA 335 [2005]; Jardine Davies, Inc. vs. JRB Realty, Inc., 463
SCRA 555 [2005]; Kukan International Corporation vs. Reyes,
631 SCRA 596 [2010].) The wrongdoing cannot be presumed;
otherwise, an injustice never intended may result from an
erroneous application (Sarona vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 663 SCRA 394 [2012]; Heirs of Fe Tan Uy vs.
International Exchange Bank, 690 SCRA 519 [2013]; Rosales vs.
New A.N.J.H. Enterprises, 767 SCRA 149 [2015].)
(d) Even if fraud is established, this alone cannot justify the
piercing of the corporate fiction where it is not sought to hold the
officers and stockholders personally liable for corporate debt.
Thus, where the petitioners are merely seeking the declaration
of the nullity of a foreclosure sale, piercing the corporate veil is
not the proper remedy, for such relief may be obtained without
having to disregard the legal corporate entity, and this is true
even if grounds exist to pierce it. (Umali vs. Court of Appeals,

supra.)
(e) The presumption is that the stockholders or officers
and the corporation are distinct entities. The burden of proving
otherwise is on the party seeking to have the court pierce the
veil. (Ramoso vs. Court of Appeals, 347 SCRA 463 [2000]; Land
Bank of the Phils, vs. Court of Appeals, 364 SCRA 375 [2001].)
For reasons of public policy and in the interest of justice, the
corporate veil will justifiably be impaled only when it becomes
a shield for fraud, illegality or inequity committed against third
persons. (Phil. National Bank vs. Hydro Resources Contractors
Corp., G.R. No. 167530, March 13, 2013.)

(f) When the veil of corporate fiction is pierced, the
corporate character is not necessarily abrogated. The corporation
continues for legitimate objectives. However, it is pierced in

order to remedy injustice. (Reynoso IV vs. Court of Appeals, 345
SCRA 335 [2000].)

—

(3) Effect as to liability. In any of the cases where the separate
corporate identity is disregarded to protect the rights of third parties,

Sec.2

। ' i

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

33

tire corporation will be treated merely as an association or collection
of persons or individuals undertaking business as a group and the
stockholders or members will be considered as the corporation,
that is, liability will attach personally or directly to the officers and
stockholders (Umali vs. Court of Appeals, 189 SCRA 529 [1990].)
or, where there are two (2) corporations, they will be merged into
one, treating them as identical or as one and the same the one being
merely regarded as the instrumentality, agency, conduit or adjunct
of the other to protect the rights of third persons. (Koppel [Phils.],
Inc. vs. Yatco, 77 Phil. 496 [1946]; Cease vs. Court of Appeals, 93
SCRA 483 [1979]; Mayor vs. Tiu, 810 SCRA 256 [2016].)
(a) The transactions or acts of the real parties shall be dealt
with as though no corporation had been formed. (Republic vs.
Sandiganbayan, 266 SCRA 515 [1997].) The corporate character,
however, is not necessarily abrogated. The corporation
continues for other legitimate objectives. (Pamplona Plantation
Co., Inc. vs. Tingkil, 450 SCRA 421 [2005].) But absent proof that
the corporation's separate and distinct personality was used as
a protective shield for any fraud or wrongdoing, the general
rule on corporate liability, not the exception, should be applied.
(Soriano vs. Court of Appeals, 174 SCRA 195 [1989]; BayerRoxas vs. Court of Appeals, 211 SCRA 470 [1992].)
(b) Piercing the veil of corporate fiction is allowed, and
,
responsible persons may be impleaded, and be held solidarity
liable even after final judgment and on execution, provided that
such persons deliberately used the corporate vehicle to unjustly
evade the judgment obligation, or resorted to fraud, bad faith,
or malice in evading their obligation. (Dutch Movers, Inc vs
Lequin, 809 Phil. 438-453 [2017].)
(4) Application of doctrine in three (3) areas. —The
doctrine applies
only in three (3) basic areas or instances, namely:
(a) defeat of public convenience as when the
corporate
fiction is used as a vehicle for the evasion of an existing

obligation;
°
(b) fraud cases or when the corporate
entity is used to
justify a wrong, protect fraud, or defend a crime; or
(c) alter ego cases, where a corporation is
merely a farce
since it is a mere alter ego or business conduit of a person,
or

34

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sec.2

where the corporation is so organized and controlled and its
affairs are so conducted as to make it merely an instrumentality,
agency, conduit or adjunct of another corporation, (see Prisma
Construction & Development Corp. vs. Menchavez, 614 SCRA
590 [2010]; see Sarona vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
663 SCRA 394 [2010]; WPM International Trading, Inc. vs.
Libayen, 735 SCRA 297 [2014]; De Castro vs. Court of Appeals,
805 SCRA 265 [2016].)
Instances where doctrine applied.
The question of piercing the corporate veil is essentially a matter
of proof.6
In the instances given below and to further the ends of justice to
protect the rights of third persons, the courts have pierced the veil
of corporate entity, considering the corporation and the individual
or individuals owning all its stock and assets as identical, or, in the
case of two (2) corporations, merging them into one.
(1) Where the transaction was entered into by the president
who was also the treasurer and general manager of a close family
corporation where the incorporators and directors belong to one single
family, the corporation is liable for the contract and it cannot claim
it was entered into without the knowledge and consent of the other
members of the board. (M.R. Dulay Enterprises, Inc. vs. Court of
Appeals, 225 SCRA 678 [1993]; Camelcraft Corp. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 186 SCRA 393 [1990].)
(2) Where a corporation functions to benefit a single person who has
complete control over the funds and the said person is the sole owner
thereof. In such case, the corporate entity is but an alter ego or the

business conduit of the owner and the property of the corporation
may be considered the property of the controlling individual and
‘The determination of the existence of any of the circumstances that would warrant
the lifting of the veil of corporate fiction is purely a question of fact which cannot be
the subject of a petition for review on certiorari under Rule 45 of the Rules of Court
Nevertheless, the Supreme Court can take organizations of factual issues if the findings
of the lower court are not supported by the evidence on record or are based on a
misapprehension of facts. (Heirs of Fe Tan Uy vs. International Exchange Bank, 690 SCRA
519 (2013); Phil. National Bank vs. Hydro Resources Contractors Corporation, 693 SCRA
294 [2013]; Pioneer Insurance & Surety Corporation vs. Morning Star Travel and Tour,
Inc, 762 SCRA 283 (2015).)

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

35

may be seized in an action against the latter. (Marvel Bldg. Corp,
vs. David, 94 Phil. 376 [1954]; Collector vs. University of Visayas, 12
SCRA 193 [1964]; National Marketing Corporation vs. Associated
Finance Company, Inc., 19 SCRA 962 [1967]; Collector vs. Norton
& Harrison Co., 11 SCRA 714 [1964]; see Valderrama vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 256 SCRA 466 [1996].)
(a) The mere fact, however, that a corporation owns 50%
of the capital stock of another corporation (Manila Hotel Corp,
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 343 SCRA 1 [2000].)
or the mere majority ownership of the stocks of a corporation is
not per se a cause for piercing the corporate veils (Republic vs.
Sandiganbayan, 346 SCRA 760 [2000].), nor the mere fact that a
corporation owns all of the stocks of another corporation, taken
alone, sufficient to justify their being treated as one entity. (MR
Holdings, Ltd. vs. Bojar, 380 SCRA 617 [2002]; Borromeo vs.
Court of Appeals, 550 SCRA 269 [2008].)
(b) The mere fact that all or nearly all of the capital stock of
one or more corporations are owned and controlled by the same
or single stockholder or by another corporation, or have the
same president is not in itself sufficient ground for disregarding
separate corporate entities. There are three (3) elements, all
of which must be present for the ground (i.e., being a mere
instrumentality or alter ego) to stand. (Infra.)
(c) It is lawful to obtain a corporation charter, even with a
single substantial stockholder, to engage in a specific activity
and such activity may co-exist withother private activities of the
stockholder. If the corporation is substantial, conducted lawfully
and without fraud on another, its separate activity or
personality
is to be respected, (see Liddel & Co., Inc. vs. Coll, of
Internal
Revenue, 25 SCRA 632 [1961]; Palay, Inc. vs. Clave, 124
SCRA
638 [1983]; Sunio vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 127
SCRA 390 [1984]; EPG Construction Company, Inc. vs. Court of
Appeals, 210 SCRA 230 [1992]; Traders Royal Bank vs. Court of
Appeals, 269 SCRA 15 [1997]; Asionics Phils., Inc. vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 290 SCRA 164 [1998]; Complex
Electronics Employees Assoc, vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 310 SCRA 403 [1999]; Francisco vs. Mejia, 362
SCRA 738 [2001]; Secosa vs. Heirs of E.S. Francisco, 433 SCRA
273 [2004]; Construction & Development Corp, of the Phils
vs.

36

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sec2

Cuenca, 466 SCRA 714 [2005]; Union Bank of the Phils, vs. Ong,
506 SCRA 256 [2006]; "G" Holdings, Inc. vs. National Mines and
Allied Workers Union, 604 SCRA 73 [2009].)

(d) Likewise, substantial identity of the incorporators of two
corporations does not necessarily imply fraud. Again, for the
separate juridical personality of a corporation to be disregarded,
the wrongdoing must be clearly and convincingly established. It
cannot be presumed. (Del Rosario vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 187 SCRA 777 [1990]; Development Bank of the
Phils, vs. Court of Appeals, 363 SCRA 307 [2001]; Construction
& Development Corp, of the Phils, vs. Cuenca, supra.) But the
shield of corporate fiction will be disregarded if it is shown that
it is designed as a mean to perpetuate an illegal act or as a vehicle
for the evasion of existing and binding obligations. (Pabalan vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 184 SCRA 495 [1970].)
(3) Where the corporation is a mere instrumentality of the individual
stockholders, the latter must individually answer for corporate
obligations. To hold the stockholders liable for the corporate
obligations is not really to ignore the corporation's separate entity
but merely to apply the established principle that such entity cannot
be invoked or used for purposes that could not have been intended
by the law that created that separate personality. (McConnel vs.
Court of Appeals, 1 SCRA 722 [1961]; also Ramirez Telephone
Corp. vs. Bank of America, 29 SCRA 191 [1962]; AS] Corporation vs.
Evangelista, 545 SCRA 300 [2008]; Phil. Commercial & International
Bank vs. Custodio, 545 SCRA 367 [2008].)

(4) Where a corporation is merely an instrumentality, an adjunct,
business conduit, or alter ego of another corporation, the separate
personality of the corporation may be disregarded. (Tan Boon Bee &
Co. vs. Jarencio, 163 SCRA 153 [1988]; Heirs of Ramon Durano, Sr. vs.
Sps. Uy, 344 SCRA 238 [2000]; Lipat vs. Pacific Banking Corporation,
402 SCRA 339 [2003]; Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. Menguito,
565 SCRA 461 [2008].) The liability of the parent corporation and
the subsidiary will be confined to those arising in their respective
business. The courts may, in the exercise of judicial discretion, step
in to prevent the abuses of separate entity privilege and pierce
the veil of corporate entity. (Philippine National Bank vs. Retratto
Group, Inc., 362 SCRA 216 [2001].)

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

37

The corporate mask may be removed and the two seemingly
separate entities treated as one entity only. Thus:
(a) Where sales of cars are made by corporation X to
corporation Y which are later sold to the public at a higher price
and it appears that both corporations are owned and controlled
by the same taxpayer and corporation Y was the medium created
by corporation X to reduce the price and the sales tax liability
of corporation X on original sales of cars under the National
International Revenue Code, there is sufficient justification to
disregard the separate corporate identify of one from the other.
(b) Where three (3) security agencies are managed through
X Corporation with all their employees drawing their salaries
and wages from the latter entity, the agencies have common and
interlocking incorporators and officers, and their employees have
a single Mutual Benefit System and followed a single system of
compulsory retirement, with security guards of one (1) agency
being able easily to transfer to another and then back again by
simply filling up a pro forma slip called "Request for Transfer,"
the veil of corporate fiction of the three (3) agencies should be
lifted to allow their employees to form a single labor union
without need of filing three (3) separate petitions for certification
election. (Phil. Scout Veterans Security & Investigation Agency
vs. Torres, 224 SCRA 682 [1993]; see Guatson International
Travel & Tours, Inc. vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
230 SCRA 815 [1994]; see Enriquez Securities Services, Inc. vs.
Cabotaje, 496 SCRA 169 [2006].)

(c) Where it appears that three (3) business enterprises
engaged in the same line of business (construction of public
roads and bridges) and using the same equipment including
manpower services are owned, conducted and controlled by the
same parties, both law and equity will, when necessary to protect
the rights of third persons (illegally dismissed employees),
disregard the legal fiction that the three (3) corporations are
distinct entities and treat them as identical and extend the
liability of the corporations to the responsible officers acting in
the interest of the corporations for the monetary awards due from
the corporations for illegal dismissal. (Tomas Lao Construction
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 278 SCRA 716 [1997];
see Vicmar Development Corporation vs. Elareosa, TT1 SCRA
238 [2015].)

38

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sec 2

(d) Where two corporations have identical incorporation
and directors and are headed by the same official, only one
office and one payroll, and are under one management, a suit
by the employees against one corporation should be deemed
as a suit against the other. The attempt to make the two (2)
corporations appear as two (2) separate entities, insofar as the
workers are concerned, should be viewed as a devious but obvious
means to defeat the ends of the law. The corporate fiction must
yield to truth and justice.
(e) The mere fact, however, that:

the businesses of two or more corporations are
interrelated (Diatagon Labor Federation vs. Opie, 101
SCRA 534 [1980]; China Banking Corporation vs. Dyne-Sem
Electronics Corp., 494 SCRA 493 [2006].); or
2) a common director sits on the boards of directors
of all three (3) companies organized as separate corporate
entities (Sesbreno vs. Court of Appeals, 222 SCRA 466
[1993].); or
1)

3) even where some employees of one corporation

are the same persons manning and providing for auxiliary
services to the units of the other corporation and that
the physical plants, offices and facilities are in the same
compound (Indo-Phil. Textile Mill Workers Union vs. Calica,

205 SCRA 697 [1992].); or

4) two corporations are admittedly sister companies
and sharing personnel and resources (Padilla vs. Court of

Appeals, 370 SCRA 308 [2001].); or

5) the mere existence of interlocking directors (see
Sec. 33.), corporate officers and shareholders (Velarde vs.
Lopez, Inc., 419 SCRA 422 [2003]; Jardine Davies, Inc. vs.
JRB Realty Inc., 463 SCRA 555 [2005]; "G" Holdings, Inc.
vs. National Mines and Allied Workers Union, 604 SCRA
73 [2009]; Hacienda Luisita, Inc. vs. Presidential Agrarian
Reform Council, 660 SCRA 525 [2011]; Pioneer Insurance &
Surety Corporation vs. Morning Star Travel & Tours, Inc.,
762 SCRA 283 [2015].) especially where the two
corporations
have distinct business locations and distinct business
purposes (Malixi vs. Maxicare Philippines, 792 SCRA 586

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

39

[2016].) absent clear and convincing proof showing that the
corporate entity was purposely used a shield to defraud
creditors and third persons of their rights, or perpetrate
wrong, or other public policy considerations, is not enough
justification for disregarding their separate personalities or
establish an alter ego relationship. (Infra.)
(f) Similarly, not because two foreign corporations came
from the same country and closely worked together on certain
projects (i.e., first corporation as the supplier and contractor of
the project hired and subcontracted the project to the second
corporation), would the conclusion arise that one was the
conduit of the other, thus justifying the piercing of the corporate
veil. (Marubeni Corporation vs. Lirag, 362 SCRA 620 [2001];
Martinez vs. Court of Appeals, 438 SCRA 130 [2004].)

(g) The fiction of distinct corporate entities cannot be
disregarded where there is not the least indication that the
second corporation is a dummy or serves as a client of the first
corporate entity. (Yu vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
245 SCRA 134 [1995].) The legal corporate entity is disregarded
only if it is sought to hold the officers and stockholders directly
liable for a corporate debt or obligation. (Umali vs. Court of
Appeals, 189 SCRA 529 [1990].)
(h) Where a subsidiary company is created by a parent company
merely as an agency of the latter especially if the stockholders or
officers of the two corporations are substantially the same or
their system of operations unified (Annotation: 1 A.R.L. 612; also
Yutivo Sons Hardware Company vs. Court of Appeals, 1 SCRA
160 [1961].); or where parent company assumes complete control of
the operation of its subsidiary's business, the separate corporate
existence of the subsidiary must be disregarded. (Phil. Veterans
Investment Development Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 181 SCRA
669 [1990]; see Reynoso vs. Court of Appeals, 35 SCRA 335
[2001].)
(i) In workmen's compensation cases, where there is
admission that two corporations are sister companies, operating
under one single management, and house in the same building,
piercing the veil may be considered. (Telephone Engineering
& Service Co., Inc. vs. Workmen's Compensation Commission,
104 SCRA 354 [1998]; see Sibaga't Timber Corp. vs. Garcia, 216
SCRA 470 [1992].)

40

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sea-2

(j) Where the corporate fiction was used as a means to
perpetuate a social injustice or as a vehicle to evade obligations,
it would be discarded and the two (2) corporations would
be merged as one, the first being merely considered as the
instrumentality, agency, conduit or adjunct of the other. (Azcor
Manufacturing, Inc. vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
303 SCRA 26 [1999]; Pabalan vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 184 SCRA 495 [1990].)

(k) But even when there is dominance over the affairs of
the subsidiary, the doctrine applies only when such fiction is
used as a subterfuge to commit injustice and circumvent the
law. (Union Bank of the Philippines vs. Court of Appeals, 290
SCRA 198 [1998]; Reynoso IV vs. Court of Appeals, supra.) The
subsidiary corporations, too, are ordinarily independent of each
other. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 564-565.)
(1) Absent circumstances justifying disregard of the
corporate entity, a holding or parent corporation has a separate
corporate existence and is to be treated as separate entity, distinct
from the subsidiary, hence, any claim or suit against the latter
does not bind the former, and vice-versa. (Villarde vs. Lopez, 419
SCRA [2004]; Jardine Davies, Inc. vs. JRB Realty, Inc., 463 SCRA
555 [2005]; Fortun vs. Quinsayas, 690 SCRA 623 [2013].) Thus,
that a corporation or a single stockholder owns all the stocks
of another corporation, taken alone, is not sufficient to justify
their being treated as one entity. If used to perform legitimate
functions, a subsidiary's separate existence shall be respected
and the liability of the parent corporation and the subsidiary
will be confined to those arising in their respective business.
(MR Holdings, Ltd. vs. Bajar, 380 SCRA 617 [2002].)
(m)A wholly-owned subsidiary is a distinct and separate
entity from its mother corporation and that the latter exercises
control over the former does not justify disregarding their
separate personality. (Luzon Iron Dev. Corp. v. BridestoneMining
and Dev. Corp., 815 SCRA 583 [2016].) It has been however, that
the fiction holds lesser sway for subsidiary corporations whose
shares are wholly if not almost wholly-owned by its foreign
parent company. The structural and systems overlap inherent
.s parent and subsidiary relations often render the subsidiary
a a mere local branch, agency or adjunct of the foreign parent

"II

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

«

corporation.7 (Mariano vs. Petron Corporation, 610 SCRA 487
[2010]; Koppel [Phils.], Inc. vs. Yatco, 77 Phil. 496 [1946].)
(5) Where it appears that a corporation is merely a business conduit
of its president who entered into a contract of administration and
supervision for the painting of the factory of another corporation,
and to evade liability, the first corporation claims that the president
acted as an agent of the second corporation. It is a legal truism that
when the veil of corporate fiction is made as a shield to perpetrate
a fraud and/or confuse legitimate issues (here, the facts relating
to employer-employee relationship), the same should be pierced.
(R.G. Sugay, Inc. vs. Reyes, 12 SCRA 700 [1964]; Jacinto vs. Court of
Appeals, 98 SCRA 211 [1991].)
i.

Where the petitioner, as president of the corporation, was ordered
by the court to pay the amounts adjudged, that the obligation was
incurred in the name of the corporation and he had ceased to be
corporate president, would not free him from personal liability
where the court has pierced the veil of corporate fiction because in
such case, for all legal intents and purposes, he and the corporation
are one and the same. (Ardlla vs. Court of Appeals, 215 SCRA 120
[1992].)
(6) Where a domestic or Philippine corporation is controlled
by aliens, its nationality shall be deemed that of the controlling
stockholders thereof during wartime, for reasons of national
security. (Filipinas Cia de Seguros vs. Christen Huenefeld & Co.,
Inc., 89 Phil. 54 [1951]; Davis Winship vs. Philippine Trust Company,
90 Phil. 744 [1952].)

(7) Where a corporation is dissolved and its assets are transferred to
another corporation to avoid a financial liability of the first corporation
to its employees, both firms being owned and controlled by the
same persons with the result that the second corporation should
be considered a continuation and successor of the first entity.
(Kukan International Corporation vs. Reyes, 631 SCRA 496 [2010];
’In this case, the contract of lease was executed by PC (foreign parent company),
as lessee. PC leased the property for the use of SC (subsidiary company) acting as PC's
Philippine branch, and consistently with such status, SC took possession of the property
after the execution of the contract. Held: For purposes of the contract, SC was a mere alter
ego of PC.
I

42

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2
Sec 2

Claparols vs. Court of Industrial Relations, supra; see National
Federation of Labor Union [NAFLY] vs. Opie, 143 SCRA 124 [1986];
see A.C. Ransom Labor Union CCLU vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 150 SCRA 498 [1987]; Cagayan Valley Enterprises, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 179 SCRA 218 [1989]; see Pepsi-Cola Bottling
Co. vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 210 SCRA 277 [1992];
Avon Dale Garments, Inc. vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
246 SCRA 733 [1995]; Phil. Bank of Communications vs. Court of
Appeals, 195 SCRA 567 [1985]; Concepts Builders, Inc. vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, supra; Heirs of P.V. Pajarillo vs. Court
of Appeals, 537 SCRA 96 [2007].)
(8) Where one corporation sells or otherwise transfers all its assets
to another corporation for value, the latter is not, by that fact alone,
liable for the debts and liabilities of the transfer. "In sale of assets,
the purchaser is only interested in the raw assets of the selling
corporation perhaps to be used to establish his own business
enterprise or as an addition to his on-going business enterprise."
(Allied Banking Corp. vs. Dyne-Sem Electronics Corp., 494 SCRA
493 [2006], citing Villanueva, Philippine Corporate Law, 1998 Ed., p.
444.) Sale of assets is legally distinct from merger, (see Sec. 80.)
(9) Where all the stockholders or members of a corporation, acting
as individuals instead of formal corporate action, enter into an illegal act
which, if done by formal corporate action, would be a ground for
forfeiting the charter of the corporation and dissolving it, the fiction
of corporate entity apart from the members will be disregarded, and
such action of the stockholders or members will be treated as the
action of the corporation in a proceeding by the State to forfeit the
charter. (18 CJ.S. 381-382.)

(10) Where a corporation is formed by a seller of a certificate of
public convenience to evade his individual contract that he "shall not for
a period of ten (10) years from the date of this sale, apply for any
TPU service identical or competing with the buyer." (see Villa Rey
Transit, Inc. vs. Ferrer, 25 SCRA 845 [1968].)

(11) Where petitioner started his employment with X
Corporation and was later transferred to Y Corporation, a sister
company, and the separation benefits given to the petitioner by
reason of his (illegal) dismissal correspond only to the period in
which he was employed by Y Corporation, ignoring the period
when he was still in the employ of X Corporation. The doctrine of

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

43

corporate entity was envisaged for convenience and to serve justice.
Therefore, it should not be used as a subterfuge to commit injustice
and circumvent labor laws. (Indino vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 178 SCRA 168 [1989].)
(12) Where a corporation is organized by an insolvent debtor to
defraud his creditors and he transfers his properties to it to further
such fraudulent purpose. (Kelluz vs. Douglas County Back, 58 Conn.
43; see Palacio vs. Fely Transp. Co., 5 SCRA 1011 [1962].) Here, the

second corporation was purposely formed and operated to defraud
his creditors, (see Kukan International Corporation vs. Reyes,
supra.) But the mere amendment of the articles of incorporation
changing the name of the corporation is not an indication to evade
payment by one corporation of its obligations to another. (Remo, Jr.
vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 172 SCRA 405 [1989].)
(13) Where a corporation is organized as a device to evade an
outstanding legal or equitable obligation, the courts, even without
reference to actual fraud, refuse to apply the doctrine of corporate
entity.

(a) In a California case, a lessee corporation with intent to
evade the payment of royalties under a lease, conveyed title
to a second corporation. The second corporation conveyed to
a third, with the same end in view. It appeared that all of the
three corporations had been formed by the same persons, had
their offices together in the same room and had practically the
same officers. The court did not find there was any actual fraud.
Without regard to this, however, it was held that the transfers
were constructively fraudulent as against the lessor and that
all three corporations were jointly liable for the payment of the

royalties.

(b) In an old English case, a German vessel owned by a
German corporation, while sailing from Hamburg to London,
was sold by telegraph on August 1 to an English corporation,
controlled by the German corporation. On August 4, war was
declared between Germany and England. Next day, the vessel
arrived in England and was seized as a prize. The English
corporation claimed that the transfer to it made the seizure
illegal. The Prize Court held the seizure proper and that the
claim was invalid. It would clearly seem that in such case the

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

44

Sec. 2

transfer was within the purview of the rule which holds a
transfer not valid when made in contemplation of war and to
avoid seizure as a prize. In such circumstances, it was held that
applying the doctrine of distinct corporate entity was uncalled
for. (1 Fletcher, pp. 62-63.)
(14) Where the evidence on record shows that at the time
respondent pawned her jewelry, the pawnshop was owned by
petitioner (Sicam) himself and all the pawnshop receipts issued
to respondent shall all bear the words "Agenda de R.C. Sicam,
notwithstanding that the pawnshop was incorporated creating the
impression to respondent and the public as well that the pawnshop
was owned solely by petitioner and not by a corporation." (Sicam vs.
Jorge, 529 SCRA 443 [2007].)
(15) The corporate fiction has also been disregarded in other
cases as where it was used:
(a) to shield a violation of the prohibition against forum
shopping (First Phil. International Bank vs. Court of Appeals,
252 SCRA 259 [1996].); or
(b) to avoid a judgment credit (Sibagat Timber Corp. vs.
Garda, 216 SCRA 470 [1992].); or

(c) to avoid the payment of higher taxes (Koppel Phils., Inc.
vs. Yatco, 77 Phil. 496 [1946].); or

(d) to avoid inclusion of corporate assets as part of the estate
of a decedent (Cease vs. Court of Appeals, 93 SCRA 483 [1979].);

or
(e) to promote unfair objectives (Villanueva vs. Adre, 172
SCRA 876 [1989].); or

(f) to violate a provision under the Labor Code (see
Arts. 288, 289 thereof.) declared to be penal in nature (Reahs
Corporation vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 271
SCRA 247 [1997].); or

(g) to confuse legitimate issues (Jacinto vs. Court of Appeals,
198 SCRA 211 [1991].); or
(h) to avoid a judgment in favor of an employee where the
employer corporation is no longer existing and is unable to
satisfy the judgment, the employee's recourse being against the
officers of the corporation who were, in effect, acting in behalf of

Sec2

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

45

the corporation (Restaurante Las Conchas vs. Liego, 314 SCRA
24 [1999].); or
(i) to escape liability for non-payment of SSS contributions
under R.A. No. 8282 which specifically disregards the corporate
personality between the corporation and its officers with respect
to its violations. (Ambassador Hotel Inc. vs. Social Security
System, 827 SCRA 641 [2017].)

Application of the “instrumentality”
or “alter ego” rule.
(1) Question purely one of fact.
The question of whether a
corporation is a mere instrumentality or alter ego, a mere sheet or
paper corporation, a sham or a subterfuge, or whether petitioner
advanced the requisite quantum of evidence warranting the piercing
of the veil of respondent's corporate entity, is purely one of fact.
(Phoenix Safety, Inc. vs. James, 28 Ariz. 514, 237; Heirs of Ramon
Durano, Sr. vs. Sps. Uy, supra; Pacific Rehouse Corporation vs. Court
of Appeals, 719 SCRA 665 [2014].) In applying the rule or doctrine,
the courts are concerned with reality not form, and with how the
corporation operated and the individual defendant's relationship to
the operation. (Comm, of Customs vs. O'Link International Corp.,
728 SCRA 469 [2014].)

—

—

(2) Common circumstances. Some factors have been identified
that will justify the application of the treatment of the doctrine of
the piercing of the corporate veil. The case of Garrett v. Southern
Railway Co.1 (173 F Supp. 915, E.D. Tenn. [1959].), cited in Philippine
National Bank vs. Ritratto Group, Inc. (362 SCRA 216 [2001].),
outlined the circumstances which may be useful in determining
whether the subsidiary is but a mere instrumentality of the
parent-corporation.

*This case involved the Southern Railway Co. Plaintiff was employed by Lenoir
Works and alleged that he sustained injuries while working for Lenoir. However, he sued
Southern Railway Company because Southern had acquired the entire capital stock of
Lenoir Car Works, hence, the latter corporation but a mere instrumentality of the former.
The Tennessee Supreme Court stated that as a general rule the stock ownership alone by
one corporation of the stock of another does not render the dominant corporation
liable
for the torts of the subsidiary unless the separate existence of the subsidiary is a
mere
sham, or unless the control of the subsidiary is such that it is but an instrumentality
or
adjunct of the dominant corporation.

46

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

See 2
Sec. 2

“The circumstances rendering the subsidiary an instrumentality.
It is manifestly impossible to catalogue the infinite variations of
fact that can arise but there are certain common circumstances
which are important and which, if present in the proper
combination, are controlling.
These are as follows:
(a) The parent corporation owns all or most of the capital
stock of the subsidiary.
(b) The parent and subsidiary corporations have common

47

—

(3) Three-pronged test.
The Supreme Court has laid a three¬
pronged control test in determining the applicability of the doctrine

of piercing the corporate veil or corporate fiction if based on the
"instrumentality" or "alter ego" rule. In applying this rule, the
courts are concerned with reality and not with form, with how the
corporation operated and the individual defendants relationship to
that operation. The absence of any of the three (3) elements below
prevents, under the rule, piercing the corporate veil.
(a) Instrumentality or control test.
Control, not mere
majority or complete stock control, but complete definition,
not only of finances but of policy and business in respect to
the transaction attacked so that the corporate entity as to this
transaction had at the time no separate mind, will, or existence
of its own;
(b) Fraud test. Such control must have been used by the
defendant at the time the acts complained of took place, to
commit fraud or wrong, violation of a statutory or other positive
duty, or dishonest and unjust act in contravention of plaintiff's
legal rights; and

—

directors or officers.
(c) The parent corporation finances the subsidiary.
(d) The parent corporation subscribes to all the capital stock
of the subsidiary or otherwise causes its incorporation.

—

(e) The subsidiary has grossly inadequate capital.
(f) The parent corporation pays the salaries and other
expenses or losses of the subsidiary.
(g) The subsidiary has substantially no business except
with the parent corporation or no assets except those conveyed
to or by the parent corporation.
(h) In the papers of the parent corporation or in the statements
of its officers, the subsidiary is described as a dependent or
division of the parent corporation, or its business or financial
responsibility is referred to as the parent corporation's own.
(i) The parent corporation uses the property of the
subsidiary as its own.
(j) The directors or executives of the subsidiary do not act
independently in the interest of the subsidiary but take their
orders from the parent-corporation.
(k) The formal legal requirements of the subsidiary are not
observed.
The Tennessee Supreme Court ruled:
"In the case at bar only two of the eleven listed indicia occur,
namely, the ownership of most of the capital stock of Lenoir
by Southern, and possibly subscription to the capital stock of
Lenoir ... The complaint must be dismissed."

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

।
c

—

(c) Harm/causal connection test.
The control and breach
of duty must proximately cause the injury or unjust loss
complained of. In other words, the causal connection between
the fraud committed through the instrumentality of the
corporate form and the injury or loss suffered by the plaintiff
must be established. (Concept Builders, Inc. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 257 SCRA 149 [1996]; Lim vs. Court of
Appeals, 323 SCRA 102 [2000]; Manila Hotel Corp. vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 343SCRA1 [2000]; Heirs of Ramon
Durano, Sr. vs. Sps. Uy, supra; see Ramoso vs. Court of Appeals,’
’In Reynoso IV os. Court of Appeals, 345 SCRA 335 (2000), the Supreme Court (First
Division) pierced the veil of corporate entity, holding General Credit Corporation (GCC),
formerly Commercial Corporation (CCC), liable for the obligations of CCC-QC basing
Its ruling (which reversed the decision of the Court of Appeals) "on the records." The
issue was whether the judgment in favor of petitioner against CCC-QC may be executed
against GCC which was not a formal party in the case. The ruling directly conflicts with
the above cited Ramoso decision of the Supreme Court (Second Division] affirming that of
the Court of Appeals and that of the SEC that "the mere control on the part of GCC, one
of the respondents through CCC Equity over the operation and business policies of the
franchise companies does not necessarily warrant piercing the corporate fiction without
proof of fraud xxx Whether the existence of the corporation should be pierced depends

48

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2

347 SCRA 463 [2000]; Lipat vs. Pacific Banking Corporation, 402
SCRA 399 [2005]; Martinez vs. Court of Appeals, 438 SCRA 132
[2004]; Child Learning Center, Inc. vs. Tagorio, 476 SCRA 236
[2005]; Nisce vs. Equitable PCI Bank, Inc., 516 SCRA 231 [2007];
Hi-Cement Corp. vs. Bank of Asia and America, 534 SCRA 269
[2007]; Yamamoto vs. Nishiro Leather Industry, Inc., 551 SCRA
447 [2008]; Phil. National Bank vs. Hydro Resources Contractors
Corp., 693 SCRA 294 [2013], Virata vs. Ng Wee, G.R. No. 220926,
July 5, 2017.)

With respect to the second element, even control over the
financial and operational concerns of a subsidiary company does
not by itself call for disregarding its corporate fiction. (NASECO
Guards Association vs. National Service Corporation, 629 SCRA 90
[2010].) The fraud or wrongful or dishonest and unjust act of at least
the intent to accomplish some fraudulent or illegal purpose behind
control must be clearly and convincingly established, otherwise the
separate existence of the subsidiary and parent corporations must
be respected. The wrongdoing cannot be presumed, (supra.)
In Philippine National Bank,*10 the Supreme Court concluded:
"Aside from the fact that PNB-IFL, is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of petitioner PNB, there is no showing of the indicative
factors that the former corporation is mere instrumentality of
the latter are present. Neither is there a demonstration that
any of the evils sought to be prevented by the doctrine of
piercing the corporate veil exists. Inescapably, therefore, the
doctrine of piercing the corporate veil based on the alter ego or
instrumentality doctrine finds no application in the case at bar.
In any case, the parent-subsidiary relationship between PNB
and PNB-IFL is not the significant legal relationship involved
in this case since the petitioner was not sued because it is the
parent company of PNB-IFL. Rather, the petitioner was sued
on questions of facts, appropriately pleaded. Mere allegation that a corporation is the
alter ego of the individual stockholders is insufficient.
l0In this case, the contract questioned was one entered into between respondent and
PNB-IFL, not PNB. In their complaint, respondents admit that petitioner PNB was mere
a
attomey-in-fact for the PNB-IFL, with full power and authority to, inter alia, foreclose on
the properties mortgaged to secure their loan obligations with PNB-IFL. In other words,
petitioner was an agent with limited authority and specific duties under a
special power
of attorney incorporated in the real estate mortgage. It was not
privy to the loan contracts
entered into by respondents and PNB-IFL.

Sec 2

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

49

because it acted cis an attomey-in-fact of PNB-IFL, in initiating
the foreclosure proceedings. A suit against an agent cannot
without compelling reasons be considered a suit against the
principal."
Acquisition by court of jurisdiction over
corporation or corporations Involved.

The principle of piercing the veil of corporate fiction and the
resulting treatment of two (2) related corporation as one and the
same juridical person with respect to a given transaction, is basically
applied only to determine established liability. It is not available to
confer on a court jurisdiction it has not acquired in first place, over
a party not impleaded in a case. Otherwise put, a corporation not
impleaded in a court cannot be the subject to the court's process
of piercing the corporate veil; hence any proceedings (i.e., writ of
execution) taken against it and its property, would infringe on its
right to due process:
The implication of the above comment is two-fold: (1) the court
must first acquire jurisdiction" over the corporation or corporations
involved before it can apply the doctrine; and (2) the doctrine
must be raised during a full-blown trial over a cause of action duly
commenced involving parties duly brought under the authority of
the court. If the court has no jurisdiction over the corporation, it
follows that the court has no business in piercing its veil of corporate
fiction because such action offends the corporation's right to due

process.

A mere motion to pierce the veil of corporate fiction is not the
appropriate vehicle for proceeding against a corporation for the
judgment debt of another principal action against the latter had
been terminated, on the alleged identity of the two corporations.
Such motion states a new cause of action, i.e., for the liability of the
judgment debtor-corporation to be borne by another, which should
be properly ventilated in another complaint and subsequent trial

"Jurisdiction over the defendant is acquired either upon a valid service of summons
apprising him of a pending action against him or the defendants voluntary appearance
in court. The corporation concerned must have been properly served with summons or
properly subjected to the jurisdiction of the court. Corollary thereto, it cannot be subjected
to a writ of execution meant for another in violation of the right of due process, (see
International Academy of Management and Economics vs. Litton and Company, Inc.,
848 SCRA 437 [2017]; Kukan International Corporation vs. Reyes, 631 SCRA 596 [2010],)'

50

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2

where the doctrine can, if appropriate, be applied based on the
causes of action. Making another corporation, thru the medium of
a writ of execution, answerable for an adjudged liability against
another, is a clear case of altering a decision, an instance of granting
relief not contemplated in the decision sought to be executed.
(Kukan International Corporation vs. Reyes, 631 SCRA 596 [2010];
Pacific Rehouse Corporation vs. Court of Appeals, 719 SCRA 665
[2014]; Pioneer Insurance & Survey Corporation vs. Morning Start
Travel & Tours, Inc., 762 SCRA 283 [2015].)
Corporation as a creation of law
or by operation of law.
It is well-established that no corporation can exist without the
consent or grant of the sovereign, and that the power to create
corporation is one attribute of sovereignty. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 573.)
(1) Special authority or grant by the State required. A corporation
is created by law or by operation of law. This means that corporations
cannot come into existence by mere agreement of the parties as in
the case of business partnerships. They require special authority or
grant from the State. This power is exercised by the State through
the legislature, either by a special incorporation law or charter which
directly creates the corporation or by means of a general corporation
law under which individuals desiring to be and act as a corporation
may incorporate.
In the Philippines, the general law which governs the creation
of private corporations is the Revised Corporation Code.12 Private
corporations owned or controlled by the government can only be
created by special laws,13 (Constitution of the Philippines, Art. XII,
Sec. 16.), often called "charters."

—

An exception to the rule that legislative grant or authority is
necessary for the creation of a corporation obtains with respect to
corporations by prescription. (Infra.)

“Article 45 of the Gvil Code provides, among other things, that "Private corporations

are regulated by laws of general application on the subject. Partnerships and associations
for private interest or purpose are governed by the provisions of this Code concerning

partnerships."
Before the adoption of the 1935 Constitution, private corporations, whether
government-owned or -controlled or not, could be created either by general
or special

Sec 2

TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

51

—

(2) Compliance with conditions prescribed by law. Corporations
can only come into existence in the manner prescribed by law.

General laws authorizing the formation of corporations are,
in effect, general offers to any persons who may bring themselves
within their provisions; and if condition precedents are prescribed
in the statute, or certain acts are required to be done, they are terms
of the other and must be complied with substantially before legal
corporate existence can be required. (18 C.J.S. 468.)

—

(3) Enjoyment of privileges subject to laws and the charter.
A
corporation as a creature of the State is presumed to be incorporated
for the benefit of the public. It receives certain special privileges and
franchises and holds them subject to the laws of the State and the
limitations of its charter. There is a reserved right in the State and
the limitations of its charter. There is a reserved right in the State
to inquire how these privileges had been employed, and whether
they had been abused. (Bataan Shipyard & Engineering Co., Inc. vs.
PCGG, 150 SCRA 181 [1987].)

Right of succession of a corporation.
A corporation has a capacity of continuous existence despite
the death, withdrawal, insolvency, or incapacity of the individual
stockholders or members and regardless of the transfer of their
interest or shares of stock. Thus, it is frequently said that an attribute
of a corporation aggregate is immorality or perpetual succession.
But the corporation is by no means immortal.
(1) Under the old Corporation Code, the life of the corporation
is limited to the period of time stated in the articles of incorporation
not exceeding 50 years from the date of incorporation unless sooner
dissolved or unless the period is extended.14 (Sec. 11.) However,
under the Revised Corporation Code, a corporation shall have
perpetual existence unless its articles of incorporation provide
otherwise. (Sec. 11.)

14Since ownership in the corporation may be transferred by a sale of its stock without
the assent of the other owners (see Sec. 63.), the corporation is highly permanent in
some cases almost perpetual. Since the Dartmouth College case, 1918, in which the United
States Supreme Court held that a charter granted by a State to a corporation was a binding
contract and could not be altered by the State without the consent of the corporation
(see Sec. 16.), state laws limit the life of the corporation usually to twenty or fifty years,
(see Sec. 11.) New charters, however, are obtained without much difficulty." (C.L. James,
Principles of Economics, 9th ed., p. 46; Barnes & Noble College Outline Series.)

—

52

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 2

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

(2) Corporations created by special laws have the right of
succession for the term provided in the laws creating them.
Powers, attributes, and properties
of a corporation.

A corporation, being purely a creation of law,” may exercise only
such powers as are granted by the law of its creation.” An express
grant, however, is unnecessary. All powers which may be implied
from those expressly provided by law and those which are essential
or necessary to the corporation's existence may also be exercised,
(see Secs. 35[k], 44.) The corporation exercises its powers through its
board of directors (or trustees) and/or its duly authorized officers

and agents.

Distinctions between a partnership
and a corporation.

The following are the distinctions:
(1) Manner of creation.
A partnership is created by mere
agreement of the parties, while a corporation is created by law or
by operation of law (Sec. 2.);
(2) Number of incorporators. A partnership may be organized
by at least two (2) parties, while a corporation, by any person,
partnership, association or corporation, singly or jointly, with others
but not more them 15 (Sec. 10.);
(3) Commencement of juridical personality.
A partnership
acquires juridical personality from the moment of the execution
of the contract of partnership, while a corporation has corporate
existence and juridical personality only from the date of the issuance

—

—

—

“Strictly speaking, this is true only with respect to corporation created by special
acts of the legislative. Those organized under the Revised Corporation Code, a general
law, are really the result of the contract of the parties. The State merely gives its approval
to their agreement.
“The powers that may be exercised by a corporation are not entirely dependent
upon the State. The purpose or purposes of the corporation as stated in its articles of
incorporation determine to a large extent the powers it may exercise, (see Secs. 10,
36(11].) Subject only to certain restrictions, the incorporators, stockholders, or members
are entirely free to decide what the purpose or purposes of the corporation shall be. (see

Secs. 14(21 15[2nd].)

of the certificate of incorporation by the SEC under its official seal

(Sec. 18.);

—

(4) Powers. A partnership may exercise any power authorized
by the partners provided it is not contrary to law, morals, good
customs, public order, or public policy (Art. 1306, Civil Code.),
while a corporation can exercise only the powers expressly granted
by law or implied from those granted or incidental to its existence
(Sec. 2.);

—

(5) Management. In a partnership, when the management is
not agreed upon, every partner is an agent of the partnership, while
in a corporation, the power to do business is vested in the board of
directors or trustees (Sec. 22.) except in the case of a corporation sole
and One Person Corporations (Secs. 115, et. seq.);
(6) Effect of mismanagement.
In a partnership, a partner as
such can sue a co-partner who mismanages, while in a corporation
the suit against a member of the board of directors or trustees who
mismanages must be in the name of the corporation (Sec. 22.);
(7) Right of succession. A partnership has no right of succession
(Arts. 1828, 1830, 1860); while a corporation has such right (Sec. 2.);
(8) Extent of liability to third persons.
In a partnership,

—

—

—

the partners (except limited partners) are liable personally and
subsidiarily (sometimes solidarily) for partnership debts to third
persons, while in a corporation, die stockholders are liable only to
the extent of their investment as represented by the shares subscribed
by them (see Secs. 63, 36.);
(9) Transferability of interest. In a partnership, a partner cannot
transfer his interest in the partnership so as to make the transferee a
partner without the consent of all the other existing partners because
the partnership is based on the principle of delectus personarum,
(Arts. 1707, 1804.), while in a stock corporation, a stockholder has
the right to transfer his shares without the prior consent of the other
stockholders because a corporation is not based on this principle
(see Sec. 62.);

—

—

(10) Term of existence. A partnership may be established for
any period of time stipulated by the partners, while a corporation
shall have perpetual existence unless its articles of incorporation
provides otherwise (see Sec. 11.);

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

54

Sec 2
Sec 2

—

(11) Dissolution. A partnership may be dissolved at any time
by the will of any or all of the pai tners, while a corporation can
be dissolved only with the consent of the State except dissolution
shortening corporate term (see Secs. 133-139.); and
(12) Lotos which govern. A partnership is governed by the Civil
Code, while a corporation is governed by the Revised Corporation
Code.

—

Similarities between a partnership
and a corporation.
The similarities are:
(1) Like a partnership, a corporation has a juridical personality
separate and distinct from that of the individuals composing it;17
(2) Like a partnership, a corporation can act only through

agents;
(3) Like a partnership, a corporation (except a corporation sole
and a One Person Corporation) is an organization usually composed
of an aggregate of individuals;
(4) Like a partnership, a (stock) corporation distributes its
profits to those who contribute capital to the business (although an
industrial partner also shares in partnership profits);
(5) Likewise, a partnership, a corporation can be organized
only where there is a law authorizing its organization. To organize
a corporation or a partnership that could claim juridical personality
of its own and transact business as such is not a matter of absolute
right but a privilege which may be enjoyed only under such terms
as the State may deem necessary to impose (Ang Pue & Co. vs. Sec.
of Commerce and Industry, 5 SCRA 645 [1962].); and

,7A sole partnership does not possess a juridical personality separate and distinct

from that of the owner of the business. The Revised Corporation Code permits an
individual to form a One Person Corporation (OPC) with a legal personality separate
from the sole shareholder with the difference that the burden of proving such separate
personality when it is challenged is on the shareholder by affirmatively showing that the
corporation was adequately financed and its property is independent of the stockholder's
personal property, (see Sec. 130.)

•

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

'

55

(6) A partnership, no matter how created or organized, is
taxable as a corporation, subject to income tax.1* (Sec. 24[a], NIRC.)

Corporation as a partner.
(1) General rule.
As a rule, corporations cannot ordinarily
enter into a partnership with other corporations or with individuals.
The reasons given are:

—

(a) A corporation can only act through its duly authorized
officers and agents and is not bound by the acts of anyone else,
while in a partnership, each member binds the firm when acting
within the scope of the partnership business. In entering into
a partnership, the identity of the corporation is lost or merged
with that of another and the direction of its affairs is placed in
other hands than those provided by the law of its creation (SEC
Opinion, Jan. 26, 1961, citing 6 Fletcher, pp. 325-326.);
(b) The limitation is based on grounds of public policy, since
in a partnership the corporation would be bound by the acts of
persons who are not its duly appointed and authorized agents
and officers, which would be inconsistent with the policy of the
law that the corporation shall manage its own affairs separately
and exclusively (13 Am. Jur. 830.) through the directors (or
trustees) or officers chosen by the stockholders (or members);

and

(c) Such an arrangement would permit the corporate assets
to be subjected to risks and liabilities not contemplated by the
stockholders at the time of making their investment. (19 Am.
Jur. 2d 505; SEC Opinion, Dec. 1, 1983; SEC Opinion, Dec 22
1966.)

—

(2) Exception. Under Section 35(h) of the Revised
Corporation
Code, a corporation may enter into a partnership or joint

with natural or juridical persons.

venture

Corporation as incorporator.

Under the old Corporation Code, only natural persons not less
than five (5) but not more than 15, all of legal age, a
majority of
whom are residents of the Philippines may form a corporation.
’’Except general professional partnership or "partnerships
purpose of exercising their common profession, no part of the incomeformed for the sole
of which is derived
from engaging in any trade or business." (see Sec. 22(B), NIRC.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

56

Sec. 2

Now, a corporation or partnership singly, or jointly with other

persons, partnerships, associations or corporations, not more than

15, may incorporate and organize a corporation for any lawful
purpose or purposes. (Sec. 10.)
Advantages of a business corporation.

The advantages of a business corporation are:
(1) The corporation has a legal capacity to act and contract as a
distinct unit in its own name;
(2) It has continuity of existence because of its non-dependence
on the lives of those who compose it;
(3) Its credit is strengthened by such continuity of existence;
(4) Its management is centralized in the board of directors;
(5) Its creation, organization, management, and dissolution are
standardized as they are governed under one general incorporation

law;
(6) It permits high flexibility in obtaining and pooling capital

than any other private form;

(7) It makes feasible gigantic financial undertakings since it
enables many individuals to invest their separate funds in the
enterprise to furnish large amounts of capital upon which big

business depends, beyond the abilities of most individuals or even
groups of individuals acting in ordinary partnership;
(8) The liability of shareholders is limited to their capital

contribution;

(9) They are not general agents of the business; and
(10) The shares of stocks can be transferred with ease without
the consent of the other stockholders so that the enterprise need not
be liquidated for the investor to get back his money. Corporations
do not have exclusive possession of these advantages. For instance,
many of so-called corporate advantages can be worked into the
terms of a partnership agreement.
The Revised Corporation Code provides for the formation of a
One Person Corporation (OPC) where a single stockholder is also
the president and sole director.

Sec. 3

. '
.

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

•

t

57

Disadvantages of a business corporation.

These are:
(1) The corporation is relatively complicated in formation and
management;
(2) It entails relatively high cost of formation and operations;
(3) Its credit is weakened by the limited liability of the

stockholders;

(4) There is a greater degree of governmental control and
supervision than in any other forms of business organization;

(5) In large corporations, management and control are
separated from ownership; and
(6) The stockholders have little voice in the conduct of the
business.

—

Sec. 3. Classes of Corporations. Corporations formed
or organized under this Code may be stock or nonstock
corporations. Stock corporations are those which have

;

capital

stock divided into shares and are authorized
to distribute to the holders of such shares dividends or
allotments of the surplus profits on the basis of the shares
held- All other corporations are nonstock corporations.

Classification of corporation under
the Revised Corporation Code.
(1) The Revised Corporation Code classifies private corporations
into stock and nonstock corporations, according to whether their
membership is represented by shares of stock or not.
(a) A stock corporation is the ordinary business corporation
created and operated to make a profit which may be distributed
in the form of dividends to stockholders on the basis of their
invested capital. The two (2) elements mentioned in Section
3 (with capital stock divided into shares and is authorized to
distribute shares' dividends) must be present to make a private
corporation fall under the definition of a stock corporation.
(b) Unlike stock corporations, nonstock corporations do not
issue stock and distribute dividends to their members; they are

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

58

Sec.3

created not for profit but for the public good and welfare. (SECOGC Opinion No. 43-03,' August 29, 2003.) Of this character are
most of the charitable, religious, social, literary, scientific, civic,
and political organizations and societies. Nonstock corporations
have no capital stock which can be subscribed by their members.
Their capital is sourced from contributions and donations. They
must have members.

Sec. 3

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

59

(2) As to whether they are for religious purposes or not:
(a) Ecclesiastical corporation or one organized for religious
purposes. Under the Revised Corporation Code, religious
corporations are classified into corporations sole and religious
societies (Sec. 107, par. 2.); or
(b) Lay corporation or one organized for a purpose other than
for religion. Lay corporations may be eleemosynary or civil.

(2) Generally, a corporation may be organized either as
a stock or nonstock, (see Secs. 105-106.) Some corporations
cannot be organized except in the form of stock corporations,
like banks. (R.A. No. 8791.) A religious corporation is always
nonstock, (see Sec. 107.) Nonstock corporations are primarily
governed by Title XI (Secs. 86-94.) of the Revised Corporation Code.

(a) Eleemosynary corporation or one established for, or
devoted to, charitable purposes or those supported by charity;
or

The provisions governing stock corporations, when pertinent,
apply to nonstock corporations except as may be covered by specific
provisions of Title XI. (Sec. 86.)

(b) Civil corporation or one established for business or profit,
ie., with a view toward realizing gains to be distributed among
its members.

Other classifications of corporations.

There are other classifications of corporations, such as those
enumerated below.
(1) As to number of persons who compose them:
(a) Corporation aggregate is a corporation consisting of more
than one member or corporator; or
(b) Corporation sole is a special form of corporation usually
associated with the clergy and formed by one (1) person only.
Under the Revised Corporation Code, it is a religious corporation
which consists of one (1) member or corporator only and his
successors, such as a bishop. (Sec. 110.) All other corporations
must be corporation aggregate, that is, they must be formed by
"not less than five (5)" persons.*2 (see Sec. 10.)

'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 45 (2002].

2

A corporation aggregate does not become a corporation sole by the mere fact that its
shares of stock become vested in one person because the shares may again be transferred
or sold by the holder to others. In the meantime, however, the holder and the corporation
may be treated as the same.

(3) As to whether they are for charitable purposes or not:

(4) As to State under or by whose laws they have been created:
(a) Domestic corporation or one incorporated under the laws
of the Philippines; or
(b) Foreign corporation or one formed, organized, or existing

under any laws other than those of the Philippines. It includes
multinational corporations created under the laws of another
State, (see Sec. 140.) For tax purposes, a foreign corporation is
further classified into resident or non-resident. (Supra.)
(5) As to their legal right to corporate existence:
(a) De jure corporation or a corporation existing in fact and in
law; or
(b) De facto corporation or a corporation existing in fact but
not in law. (see Sec. 19.)

(6) As to whether they are open to the public or not:
(a) Close corporation or one limited to selected persons or
members of a family (see Secs. 95-104.); or

(b) Open corporation or one open to any person who may
wish to become a stockholder or member thereto. This includes

publicly-listed companies.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

60

Sec 3

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,

Sec. 3

61

DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

(7) As to their relation to another corporation:
(a) Parent or holding corporation or one so related to another
corporation that it has the power, either directly or indirectly,
through one or more intermediaries, to control or to elect the
majority of the directors of such other corporations;*
(b) Subsidiary corporation or one so related to another
corporation that the majority of its directors can be elected, either
directly or indirectly, by such other corporation which become
its parent corporation. It is one in which another corporation*
owns at least a majority (i.e., over 50%) of the shares and thus
has control over its financial and/or operating policies; or
(c) Affiliated corporation or one related to another by owning
or being owned by common management or by a long-term
lease of its properties or other control device. An affiliation
exists between a holding or parent company and its subsidiary,
or between two corporations owned or controlled by a third.5
(E.L. Kholer, A Dictionary for Accountants, 1975 ed„ p. 26.) It
may include interlocking directorates or ownership (see Sec.
33.) and sharing of employees, equipment, or facilities.

(8) As to whether they are for public (government) or private

purpose:
(a) Public corporations or those formed or organized for the
government of a portion of the State for the general good and

welfare; or
’It is a corporation organized to hold the stock of another or other corporations
enabling it to control or substantially influence the policies and management of such
corporation or corporations. It holds stock in other companies for purposes of control
rather than for mere investment.
‘Normally, a corporation is considered a wholly-owned subsidiary only if the rest
of the stockholders, other than the parent company, own one (1) share in the corporation
and only to qualify them as incorporators and/or directors. Where the corporation is not
such a wholly-owned subsidiary (i.e., some stockholders own more than one share), the
SEC ruling that "dividends either in the form of cash or stock should be declared on the
basis of the outstanding capital stock held by the stockholders and any transfer thereof
must be done only after the amount declared has been proportionately distributed to the
stockholders" is applicable. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 17, 1994.)
’The term "conglomerate" is also used to refer to a conclusion or corporations
engaged in different businesses together usually involving a parent company, subsidiaries
and affiliates. A corporation may spin-off its business by organizing another corporation
(subsidiary) to which it transfers a portion of its assets in exchange for the stockholders'
capital stock.

(b) Private corporations or those formed for some private
purpose, benefit, or end; it may be a stock or nonstock
corporation, govemment-owned or -controlled corporation or
quasi-public corporation.6

The Revised Corporation Code does not classify corporations
into public or private for the reason it applies only to private
corporations.
Private corporations include:
1) Govemment-owned or -controlled corporations or those
created or organized by the government7 of which the
government is the majority stockholder.

Examples are the Government Service Insurance
System, National Power Corporation, Philippine National
Railway,' and
‘The true test is the purpose of the corporation. If the corporation is created by the
State as its own agency or instrumentality for political or public purpose connected with
the administration of government, then it is a public corporation. If not, it is a private
corporation notwithstanding that it is created to promote public good, interest, or
convenience although the whole, or substantially the whole interest in the corporation,
belongs to the State in the Philippines, the public corporations are the provinces, cities,
municipalities, and barangays. In addition, the Constitution mandates the creation of
autonomous region in Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras, (see Art. X, Sec. 1 thereof.)
These local units are also called municipal corporation or local governments.
’It may be organized as a stock or nonstock corporation. A government
instrumentality (e.g., Manila International Airport Authority), which is neither a stock or
nonstock corporation vested with corporate powers to perform efficiently its governmental
functions, does not quality as a govemment-owned or -controlled corporation. It
remains part of the national government machinery although not integrated with the
department framework. (Manila International Airport Authority vs. Court of Appeals,
295 SCRA 591 [2006].) Unless the government instrumentality is organized as a stock
or nonstock corporation, it remains a government instrumentality exercising not only
government but also corporate powers. (Republic vs. City of ParaAaque, 677 SCRA 246
[2012].) Thus, a government instrumentality may be endowed with corporate powers
and at the same time retain its classification as a government "instrumentality" for all
other purposes. Government instrumentalities are vested with corporate powers but they
do not become stock or nonstock corporations which is a necessary condition before an
agency or instrumentality is deemed a govemment-owned and -controlled corporation.
(Basis Conversion and Development Authority vs. Commissioner of

Internal Revenue,
867 SCRA 179 [2018]; for definition of "government instrumentality," and "govemmentowned and -controlled corporation," see Sec. 2 (10) and (13) of the Introductory Provisions
of the Administrative Code of 1987.
*These corporations are private and not public corporations because they are not
established for the government of a portion of the State. Where the government engages
in a particular business thru the instrumentality of a corporation, it divests itself pro

&

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 3

2) Quasi-public corporations or private corporations
which have accepted from the State the grant of franchise
or contract involving the performance of public duties (1
Fletcher, p. 216.) but which are organized for profit. They
have been defined also as corporations private in ownership
but having an appropriate franchise from the State to
provide for a necessity or convenience of the general public,
incapable of being furnished through the ordinary channels
of private competitive business and dependent for its
exercise upon eminent domain or some agency of the
government. (Ibid., p. 217.) They are private corporations
that perform public service.’
hac vice of its sovereign character, so as to subject itself to the rules governing private
corporations. (Phil. National Bank vs. Pabalan, 83 SCRA 595 [1978].)
It has been ruled that employees of government-owned or -controlled corporations,
whether formed by special law or under the Corporation Code (except private firms
taken over by the government in foreclosure or similar proceedings), are governed by
the Civil Service Law (P.D. No. 807, as amended) and not by the Labor Code (P.D. No.
442, as amended.) because of Art. XII-B, Sec. 1 of the 1973 Constitution, which provides
"The Civil Service embraces every branch, agency, subdivision and instrumentality of the
Government, including every government-owned or -controlled corporation."
A dissenting opinion holds that the constitutional provision contemplates only
those corporations created by special law. "Whether a corporation is governmentowned or -controlled depends upon the purpose of the inquiry. A corporation may be
'government-owned or -controlled' for one purpose but not for another. In other words, it
is not possible to broadly categorize a corporation as 'government-owned or -controlled.'
Thus, if the National Housing Corporation (which was created pursuant to Act No. 1459,
the former Corporation Law) is not covered by the Civil Service, it is not necessarily
covered by the Labor Code. For it may well be that the NHC is in limbo." (National
Housing Corp. vs. Juco, 134 SCRA 172 (1985).) The ruling in Juco is no longer applicable.
Under the present Constitution, only government-owned or -controlled corporations
"with original charter" (i.e., created by special law and not under the Corporation
Code) are embraced within the Civil Service. (Art. IX, B-Sec. 2(1) thereof.) But a private
corporation acquired by the government utilizing public funds, while retaining its
corporate existence, becomes a government-owned or -controlled corporation within the
constitutional precept of public accountability (see Art. XI, Sec. 1, Ibid.) and the employees
are therefore, public servants, falling within the investigatory and prosecutor power
of the Office of the Ombudsman for purposes of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices
Act. (Quimpo vs. Tanodbayan, 146 SCRA 137 (1986).) Neither are government-owned
or -controlled corporations organized as subsidiaries of such corporations under the
Corporation Code are included in the Civil Service. (Bliss Development Corp. Employees
Union vs. Calleja, 237 SCRA 271 (1994).) Their employees are subject to the provisions of
the Labor Code.
’These corporations are also known as "public utilities" or "public service
corporations." Examples of these corporations are those organized as electric, water,
telephone, and transportation companies. Because the business in which they are
engaged are impressed with a public interest, they may not engage in that business
without authority of the State in the form of franchise. Neither may they cease engaging
in that business unless the state permits them to do so. A quasi-public
corporation is given

Sec.3

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

63

(9) As to whether they are corporations in a true sense or only
in a limited sense:
(a) True corporation or one which exists by statutory
authority; or
(b) Quasi-corporation or one which exists without formal
legislative grant. It is an exception to the general rule that a
corporation can exist only by authority of law. It may be:
1) Corporation by prescription or one which has

exercised corporate powers for an indefinite period
without interference by the sovereign power and
which by fiction of law is given the status of a
corporation*10 (1 Fletcher, p. 415.); or

—

—

certain powers of a public nature such as the power of eminent domain in order to
enable it to discharge its duties for the public benefit, in which respect it differs from an
ordinary private corporation, the powers of which are given and exercised exclusively for
the profit and advantage of the stockholders. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 555.)
That a certain juridical entity is impressed with public interest does not, by that
circumstance alone, make the entity a public corporation, because a corporation may
be private although its charger contains provision of a public character, incorporated
solely for the public good. This class of corporations may be considered quasi-public
corporations, which render public service, supply public wants, or pursue other
eleemosynary objectives. While purposely organized for the gain or benefit of its
members, they are required by law to discharge functions for the public benefit. (Phil.
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals vs. Commission on Audit, 534 SCRA
112 (2007).)
The juridical entities known as water districts created by P.D. No. 198 have been
held as quasi-public corporations, performing public services and supplying public
wants and are entirely distinct from corporations organized under the Corporation Code.
The function of supervision or control over them is entrusted to the Local Water Utilities
Administration (LWUA), a government corporation established by the decree. (Marilao
Water Consumers' Assoc, vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 201 SCRA 437 (1991).)
l0The Roman Catholic Church has been recognized as a corporation by prescription
having acted as such and assume corporate powers for a long period of time. According
to the Supreme Court, it "antedates by almost a thousand years any other personality
in Europe and existed when the Grecian eloquence still flourished in Antioch and when
idols were still worshipped in the temples of Mecca.... Persecuted as an unlawful asso¬
ciation since the early days of its existence up to the time of Galieno, who was the first of
the Roman emperors to admit it among the juridical entities protected by the laws of the
Empire, it existed until then by mercy and will of the faithful and depended for such ex¬
istence upon pious gifts and offerings. Since the latter half of the third century, and more
particularly since the year 313, when Constantine, by the Edict of Milan, inaugurated an
era of protection for the church, the latter gradually entered upon the exercise of such
rights as were required for the acquisition, preservation, and transmission of property
the same as any other juridical entity under laws of the Empire...." (Barlin vs. Ramirez
7 Phil. 41 (1906).)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 3

2) Corporation by estoppel or one which in reality is
not a corporation, either de jure or de facto, because it is
so defectively formed, but is considered a corporation
in relation to those only who, by reason of their acts of
admissions, are precluded from asserting that it is not a
corporation. This legal assumption is not good, however, as
against the State but may arise only for purposes of private

litigation.
Corporation by estoppel is another instance whereby a
corporation may exist without formal statutory authority. It
has no real existence in law as has a de facto corporation but
is a mere fiction. (8 Fletcher, pp. 218-219; see Sec. 20.)
Important distinctions between public
and private corporations.

The most important division of corporations is into public and
private, for there are many principles or law which apply to the
former and not to the latter.
(1) The most important distinction is with respect to

governmental control. Public corporations, being mere
instrumentalities of the State, are subject to governmental visitation
and control, whereas the charter of a private corporation is a contract
between the State and the corporation or incorporators, which,
under the provision of the Constitution prohibiting laws impairing
the obligation of contracts, renders such corporations not subject to
visitation, control, or change by the State, except in the exercise of
the police power.
(2) Another distinction is that a public corporation may be
created without the consent of the locality to be affected, whereas
the consent of the incorporators is necessary to the creation of a

private corporation.
(3) The distinction is also important with respect to taxation,
to the question of liability for the torts or negligence of officers and
agents, and to various other questions. (14 C.J. 72-73.)

Sec. 4

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

65

Dual status of public corporations.
A public or municipal corporation possesses two (2) kinds of
power, governmental or public and proprietary or private, and in
exercising the former, it is a "municipal government," while as to
the latter, it is a "corporate legal individual." (see 9-A Words and

Phrases 391.)
A public corporation engaged in the performance of
governmental or public functions (e.g., maintenance of peace and
order) as distinguished from corporate or proprietary functions
(e.g., operation of a public market), absent statute, is not liable for
damages occasioned by the negligent or wrongful actions of its
officers, agents, or employees. The test for distinguishing the first
kind of power from the second, and consequently, in determining
liability or non-liability for torts of its agents, is whether the act
performed is for the common good or whether it is for the special
benefit or profit of the corporate entity, (see ibid., p. 390.)
Sec. 4. Corporations Created by Special Laws or Charters.
Corporations
created by special laws or charters shall
—
be governed primarily by the provisions of the special
law or charter creating them or applicable to them,
supplemented by the provisions of this Code, insofar as
they are applicable.

Incorporation of a private corporation
by a special act

Section 4 authorizes the creation of private corporations by
special laws or charters. The enactment of special act creating a
private corporation is subject to the constitutional limitation that
such corporation shall be owned or controlled by the government.
(Constitution of the Philippines, Art. XU, Sec. 16.)
The reason for the restriction is obvious:
(1) It is chiefly to prevent the granting of special privileges
to
one body of men without giving all others the right to obtain them
in the same conditions; and

(2) Perhaps, it is partly to prevent bribery and corruption of
the
legislature. (Clark on Corporations, p. 45.)

66

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 4

\

that it has no power to interpret the law creating it. However,
the SEC can rule on the status of corporation as to whether it is a
government-owned or -controlled corporation belonging to this
type. It has jurisdiction to determine this issue, (see Phil. National
Construction Corporation vs. Pabion, 320 SCRA 188 [1999].)

—

Governing law.

(2) Rights, power, or privileges. Asa member of a corporation,
the government never exercises its sovereignty; it acts merely as a
corporator. (18 Am . Jur. 2d 584.) And the mere fact that the government
is a majority stockholder of a corporation does not make it a public
corporation. As a private corporation, it has no greater rights,
powers, or privileges than any other corporation organized for the
same purpose under the Corporation Code. (National Coal Co. vs.
Collector of Internal Revenue, 46 Phil. 583 [1924].) By engaging in
a particular business, through the instrumentality of a corporation,
the government divests itself pro hac vice of its sovereign character,
as to render the corporation subject to the rules governing private
corporations. (Light Rail Transit Authority vs. Mendoza, 767 SCRA
624 [2015].)

(1) A corporation created by a special incorporation law or
charter is primarily governed by such law and suppletorily, by the

Government as a stockholder
of a corporation.

—

(1) Jurisdiction of SEC.
The SEC has no jurisdiction over
corporation with original charter or created by special law. It follows

67

DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS
\
v

A special law creating a private corporation which is neither
owned nor controlled by the government is void for being violative
of the constitutional provision, (see National Development Co. vs.
Phil. Veterans Bank, 192 SCRA 257 [1990].)

Revised Corporation Code "insofar as they are applicable," either
because they are not inconsistent with, or are made applicable by,
the special law.1
(2) Under the Constitution (Art. IX, B-Sec. 2(1] thereof.), officers
and employees of government-owned or -controlled corporations
with original charters, i.e., created by special law, are placed under
the Civil Service, and thus, subject to Civil Service Law. Those
incorporated under the general incorporation law, the Corporation
Code, are governed by the Labor Code.
(3) A government-owned or -controlled corporation may
be organized under the Revised Corporation Code and not
by special law. Therefore, it would be proper to increase its
capitalization by amending its articles of incorporation (see Sec.
15.) under the Revised Corporation Code instead of Congress
passing legislation to this effect. (SEC Opinion, July 10, 1997.)

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,

Sec 5

\

I
Sec. 5. Corporators and Incorporators, Stockholders
and Members. — Corporators are those who compose a
corporation, whether as stockholders or shareholders
in a stock corporation or as members in a nonstock
corporation. Incorporators are those stockholders or
members mentioned in the articles of incorporation as
originally forming and composing the corporation and
who are signatories thereof.

Components of a corporation.

The four (4) classes of persons composing a corporation are:
'Thus, it has been held that the Philippine National Bank, having a charter of its own
(R.A. No. 1300, as amended.), was not governed, as a rule, by the Revised Corporation
Code. In view of Secs. 15, 16, and 30 of the charter, the provision of Sec. 74 of the Revised
Corporation Code with respect to the right of a stockholder to demand an inspection
or examination of the books of the corporation does not apply even in a supplemental
capacity to said bank. (Gonzales vs. Phil. National Bank, 122 SCRA 489 [1983].) The
Philippine National Red Cross is a government-owned and -controlled corporation with
an original charter under R.A. No. 95, as amended. (Baluyot vs. Holganza, 325 SCRA 248

[2000].)
See RD. No. 2029 (Feb. 4, 1986) "defining government-owned or -controlled corpo¬
rations and identifying their role in national development."

(1) Corporators or those who compose the corporation, whether
stockholders or members. Hence, the term includes incorporators and
stockholders or members who become as such after incorporation

of the corporation;

(2) Incorporators or those corporators (whether natural or
juridical persons) mentioned in the articles of incorporation as
originally forming and composing the corporation and who executed
and signed the articles of incorporation and acknowledged the same

68

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 5

\\

Sec 5

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

69

\
before a notary public, (see Secs. 10, 13, 14.) So all incorporators are
corporators but a corporator is not necessarily an incorporator.1
(3) Stockholders or the owners of shares of stock in a stock
corporation. They are the owners of the corporation. They are also
called shareholders. They are the corporators in a stock corporation.
Stockholders may be natural or juridical persons.
Under Section 3, a corporation, to be classified as a stock
corporation, (a) must have capital stock divided into shares, and
(b) must be "authorized to distribute to the holders of such shares
dividends or allotments of the surplus profits on the basis of the
shares held"; and
(4) Members or corporator of a corporation which has no capital
stocks. All incorporators in a stock corporation must own or at least
be a subscriber to at least one (1) share of the capital stock of such
corporation. (Sec. 10.)
Three other classes.

There are three (3) other classes of persons who play important
roles in the formation and organization of a corporation, namely:
(1) Promoters or persons who bring about or cause to bring
about the formation and organization of a corporation by bringing
together the incorporators of the persons interested in the enterprise,
procuring subscriptions or capital for the corporation and setting
in motion the machinery which leads to the incorporation of the
corporation itself. Simply signing and verifying the articles of
incorporation and subscribing for stock in the proposed company is
said, however, not to make one a promoter thereof. (18 Am. Jur. 2d
647.)

‘The incorporators are the initial subscribers for stock. The principal function of the

incorporators is to incorporate the corporation and to enable it to become a body politic
and corporate under the law. They are in charge of the affairs of the corporation during
the organization period. While the status of a corporator is temporary because one may
cease to be a stockholder or member, an incorporator will forever retain his status as
such, notwithstanding that he has ceased to be a corporator. The articles of incorporation
cannot be amended by deleting his name or substituting it with that of another who is not
an incorporator. Only natural persons can be incorporators. (Sec. 10.)
An "incorporator" must be distinguished from a "subscriber." The latter agrees
to buy shares in the corporation, i.e., he is an investor and participant in the corporate
venture. An incorporator may be a subscriber of shares.

\

When used with corporations, the term refers to persons who
undertake the formation of a corporation without their being
incorporators. They lay the groundwork for corporate existence;
(2) Subscribers or "persons who have agreed to take and pay for
original, unissued shares of a corporation formed or to be formed."
(Ballantine on Corporations, p. 375; see Secs. 59, 60.) He becomes a
stockholder only from the time his subscription is accepted by the
corporation or the corporation's offer is accepted by him. Technically,
a person is not a stockholder (or member) unless he is recorded as
such in the books of the corporation, (see Sec. 62.)
All incorporators (Supra.) are subscribers but a subscriber need
not be an incorporator; and
(3) Underwriter or "a person, usually an investment banker, who
(a) has agreed, alone or with others, to buy at stated terms an entire
issue of securities or a substantial part thereof; or (b) has guaranteed
the sale of an issue by agreement to buy from the issuing party
any unsold portion at a stated price; or (c) has agreed to use his
"best efforts" to market all or part of an issue; or (d) has offered for
sale stock he has purchased from a controlling stockholder." (E.L.
Kohler, op. cit., p. 480; for definition of the term under the Securities
Regulation Code [R.A. No. 8799], see Sec. 3(1.15], and under the
Investment Company Act [R.A. No. 2629], see Sec. [dd].)
Agreement or contract with a corporation.

—

(1) Between corporators and corporation.
It is essential to the
existence of a private corporation that there shall be an agreement
between the corporators and the corporation creating a contractual
relation between them. There can be no such thing as a corporation
aggregate without members, and a person cannot become a member
except by his own agreement or contract.

—

(2) Between each member and corporation.
Some writers and
some cases say that there must be an agreement between the
members creating a contractual relation between them, but this is

inaccurate.

There is ordinarily no contract between individual members
in the formation of a corporation. The contract is between each
individual member and the whole body of members in their
collective capacity, represented by the corporation, that is, between

70

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

each member and the corporation. A subscription for shares, for
instance, in the organization of a corporation is not a contract
between the subscriber and the other subscribers individually, but it
is a contract between each subscriber and the corporate body. (Clark
on Corporations, Sec. 26.)

—

Sec. 6. Classification of shares.
The classification of
shares, their corresponding rights, privilege, or restrictions
and their stated par value, if any, must be Indicated in the
articles of incorporation. Each share shall be equal in all
respects to every other share, except otherwise in the
articles of incorporation and in the certificate of stock. (SA)

The shares In stock corporations may be divided
into classes or series of shares, or both. No share may
be deprived of voting rights except those classified and
issued as “preferred” or “redeemable” shares, unless
otherwise provided in this Code: Provided, That there shall
always be a class or series of shares with complete voting
rights. (A)
Holders of nonvoting shares shall nevertheless be
entitled to vote on the following matters:
(a) Amendment of the articles of incorporation;

(b) Adoption and amendment of bylaws;

(c) Sale, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge, or other
disposition of all or substantially all of the corporate
property;
(d) Incurring,

creating,

or

increasing

indebtedness;

bonded

(e) Increase or decrease of authorized capital stock;

(f) Merger or consolidation of the corporation with
another corporation or other corporation;

(g) Investment of corporate funds In another
corporation or business In accordance with this Code; and
(h) Dissolution of the corporation.

Except as provided In the immediately preceding
paragraph, the vote required under this Code to approve
a particular corporate act shall be deemed to refer only
to
stocks with voting rights.

\

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

I

The shares or series of shares mav or mav not have

71

•

a Par value: Provided, That banks, trust, insurance and
preneed companies, public utilities, building and loan
associations, and other corporations authorized to obtain

or access funds from the public, whether publicly listed or

not shall not be permitted to issue no-par value shares of
stock.
Preferred shares of stock issued by a corporation may
be given preference in the distribution of dividends and in
the distribution of corporate assets in case of liquidation,
or such other preferences: Provided, That preferred shares
of stock may be issued only with a par value. The board of
directors, where authorized in the articles of incorporation,
may fix the terms and conditions of preferred shares of
stock or any series thereof: Provided, further, That such
terms and conditions shall be effective upon filing of
a certificate thereof with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission."
Shares of capital stock issued without par value shall
be deemed fully paid and nonassessable and the holder of
such shares shall not be liable to the corporation or to its
creditors in respect thereto: Provided, That no-par value
shares must be issued for a consideration of at least Five
pesos (P5.00) per share: Provided, further, That the entire
consideration received by the corporation for its no-par
value shares shall be treated as capital and shall not be
available for distribution as dividends.

A corporation may further classify its shares for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with constitutional or
legal requirements.

Power to classify shares.
(1) The shares in stock corporations may be divided into
classes or series of shares, or both. The classification of shares, their
corresponding rights, privileges or restrictions and their stated
value, if any must be stated in the articles of incorporation not
merely in the bylaws. (Title V.)
(2) Unless restricted by the law or the provision of its articles
of incorporation (see Secs. 13, 14.), a corporation has unrestricted
freedom to issue such classes or series of shares as the prospects and

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

72

Sec. 6

needs of its business may require to attract investors. There shall
always be a class or series of shares with complete voting rights. A
"series" refers to a subdivision of a class of shares.
(3) The primary classification of shares is common and
preferred, each of which may be divided into other classes. (Infra.)
Thus, shares of stock may differ regarding voting rights, dividend
rights, and, in case of liquidation, rights to corporate assets.
(4) A corporation may issue only one class or kind of share.
There must be at least one class of stock, and under Section 6 (par.
2.), a corporation must have at least one class of stock with voting
rights.
(5) No share may be deprived of voting rights except those
classified and issued as "preferred" or "redeemable" shares, unless
otherwise provided in the Revised Corporation Code.

When classification of shares may be made.

—

(1) By the incorporators.
The classes and number of shares
which a corporation shall issue are not first determined by the
incorporators as stated in the articles of incorporation filed with the

SEC.

—

(2) By the board of directors and the shareholders.
After the
corporation comes into existence, they may be altered by the board
of directors and the stockholders by amending the articles of
incorporation pursuant to Section 15.' If the amendment changes or
restricts the rights of any class of shares, or authorizes preference in
any respect superior to those of outstanding shares of any class, any
stockholder shall have the right to dissent and demand payment of
the fair value of his shares. (Sec. 80.)

Classification to comply with constitutional
or legal requirements.
(1) Minimum percentage of capital stock ownership of Filipino
citizens. A corporation may further classify its shares to insure

—

Where no difference in "rights, privileges or restrictions" is provided for as
requirement by Section 6, as where "the only difference between the series is that only
B-l Series shall be initially offered to the public and sold through the exchanges while
B-2 Senes shall be similarly offered and sold at a later date as the board of directors may
determine," the classification should not be allowed. (SEC Opinion,
March 15 1989 )

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

73

compliance with constitutional or legal requirements (Sec. 6, par. 8.),
such as those which prescribe the minimum percentage of capital
stock ownership of Filipino citizens in corporation engaged in any
business or activity reserved for stockholdings in corporations
declared by law to be vested with public interest.
Thus, the articles of incorporation may classify shares of stock
into Class "A" and Class "B" and provide that Class "A" shares shall
be held exclusively by Filipino citizens only, while Class "B" shares,
by either Filipino citizens or foreigners.2 In such case, aliens or
foreign corporations cannot own "A" shares. The articles, however,
may permit aliens to buy "A" shares (unless foreign ownership
requirements will be violated).

—

(2) Reason of expediency primarily for monitoring purpose.
Corporations classify shares for reasons for expediency, primarily
for monitoring. The par value or number of one class of shares may
be more than the others. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 36-06,3 Sept. 21,
2006.) The classification of common shares of stocks into Class "A"
and Class "B" shares have never been obligatory. Some corporations
which engage in business where there is a cap on foreign ownership
classify their shares with the number of B shares corresponding to
the maximum percentage of foreign ownership allowed so that they
can keep track of their foreign shareholders.

—

(3) Computation of foreign ownership limit.
The Constitution
does not distinguish between common and preferred shares,

’With the general perception that the country is dependent on foreign investments,
many local investors invest in "B" shares, thereby creating a bigger demand for the shares
which are limited. The lopsided market has developed a psychological advantage and a
dual pricing scheme for "B" shares at the expense of "A" shares. The resulting premium
for "B" shares has been under attack from foreign fund managers who questioned the
wisdom of paying for a higher price than the "A" shares which are, with exemption on
foreign ownership, the same security with the same risks and yield. In many cases, the
local investor are the ones maintaining the relative strong performance of "B" shares in
the absence of foreign investors.
Without the classification, local investors will invest more in a particular issue not
because foreigners are investing but because of good potentials and foreigners can buy
more shares if they do not exceed the equity limit prescribed by the Constitution and
existing laws. This will require strict monitoring to make sure that the limits on foreign
ownership will always be observed.
The policy of SEC is to allow shares of listed firms to remain classified as "A" and
"B" shares while requiring firms still planning to go public to declassify their shares.
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 66 12002].

74

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6
Sec6

as the term "capital," as used in Section 11, Article XII thereof,
in the computation of the foreign ownership limit for domestic
corporations. Section 173 defines "outstanding capital stock" as
referring to "the total shares of stock issued xxx." The Supreme
Court, however, has ruled that the 40% limit refers only to common
stock entitled to vote directors. (Gamboa vs. Teves, 652 SCRA 690
[2011]; 682 SCRA 397 [2012].)
Shares presumed to be equal in all respect
The law provides that except as otherwise provided in the article
of incorporation and in the certificate or stock, "each share shall be
equal in all respects to every other share." (Sec. 6, par. 1.) This is
the doctrine of equality of shares. It means that absent any provision
in the articles of incorporation and in the certificate of stock to the
contrary, all stocks, regardless of their class nomenclature, enjoy
the same rights and privileges and subject to the same liabilities.4
(1) Authority of the board of directors to classify shares.
The
board of directors has no authority to classify shares of stock
where the articles of incorporations are silent on the matter. Hence,
a corporation cannot, without express authority in the articles of
incorporation, and without amendment thereof, issue preferred
shares with superior rights and privileges than other shares.
Subscription contacts covering such shares are void, (see Art.
1409[l,3].)
(2) Consent of stockholders to change of terms and preference of shares.
The articles of incorporation or the charter of a corporation being
considered as a contract between the corporation and stockholders
(see Sec. 15.), the corporation is under obligation to observe
the provisions thereof and it cannot without the consent of the
stockholders, change the terms and preferences of classes of shares
of stocks provided therein. Thus, any special agreement between a
particular subscriber and the corporation by which he is allowed

—

—

SEC-OGC Opinion No. 10-09, citing De Leon, The Corporation
of the
Philippines Annotated, pp. 67-68 [2002]. In the absence of special provisions,Code
the
holders
of preferred stock in a corporation are in precisely the same
position, both with respect to
the corporation itself and with respect to the creditors of the
corporation, as the holders of
the common stock, except only that they are entitled to receive
dividends on their shares,
to the extent guaranteed or agreed upon, before any
dividend can be paid to the holders
of common stock. (SEC Opinion, July 16, 1996, citing
Fletcher Cyc. Corps., Sec. 5290.)

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

75

to subscribe for shares upon different terms other subscribers is
invalid. (SEC Opinion, April 18, 1985, citing Ballantine, Rev. ed.,
p. 459.)

—

(3) Right to vote of all classes of shares. If one class of shares has
the right to vote, all other classes are presumed to have the same
voting power. Stockholders have one vote for each share held by
them. Section 6 (par. 1.) is construed to mean that unless denied in
the articles of incorporation, all shares regardless of class (e.g., with
par value and without par value, common and preferred) enjoy all
the rights of a stockholder. Hence, said provision cannot be invoked
for a proposed amendment of the articles of incorporation whereby
Class "A" shares shall be entitled to, say, four votes per share, and
Class "B" shares, to one vote per share. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 11,
1988.)

But the right to vote may be denied by implication as where
the articles of incorporation provide that "only holders of common
stock shall have the right to vote."
(4) Authority of board of directors to fix terms and conditions of
preferred shares. The terms and conditions of preferred shares of
stock may be fixed by the board of directors only when authorized
in the articles of incorporation. (Sec. 6, par. 6.) In such case, the
preference enjoyed by the preferred stock will not appear in the
articles of incorporation.

—

Capital stock and capital explained.
(1) Capital stock is the amount fixed in the articles of
incorporation to be subscribed and paid-in or agreed to be paid-in
by the stockholders of a corporation, in money, property, services,
or other means at the organization of the corporation or afterwards
and upon which it is to conduct its business (see 2 Fletcher, p.
12.), such contribution being made either directly through stock
subscription (see Sec. 59.) or indirectly through the declaration of
stock dividends.5 (18 Am. Jur. 2d 735.)
’The capital stock is the money value assigned to a corporation's issued shares,
constituting generally the legal capital (Infra.) of the corporation. (E.L. Kohler, ap. at.,
p. 84.) It represents the equity of the stockholders in the corporate assets. It limits
the maximum amount or number of each class of shares that may be issued by the
corporation without formal amendment of the articles of incorporation, (see Sec. 15.) It

76

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

(a) Authorized capital stock refers to the amount of
capital stock as specified in the articles of incorporation. It is
synonymous with capital stock where the shares of the
corporation have par value, (see Secs. 13[h], 14[seventh].) If
the shares of stock have no-par value, the corporation has no
authorized capital stock, but it has capital stock the amount of
which is not specified in the articles of incorporation as it cannot
be determined until all the shares have been issued. (Ibid.) In
this case, the two (2) terms are not synonymous.
Additional shares may not be issued unless the articles of
incorporation are amended by vote of the stockholders, (see
Secs. 15, 37.) But unissued authorized shares may be issued at a
later date without amendment of the articles of incorporation or

approval of the stockholders.
(b) Subscribed capital stock is the amount of the capital stock
subscribed, whether fully paid or not. It connotes an original
subscription contract for the acquisition by a subscriber of
unissued shares in a corporation (see Secs. 59, 60.) and would,
therefore, preclude the acquisition of shares by reason of
subsequent transfer from a stockholder or resale of treasury
shares. (Sec. 9.)
(c) Outstanding Corporation capital stock is the portion of
the capital stock issued and held by persons other than the
corporation itself. The Revised Corporation Code defines
the term as "the total shares of stock issued under binding
subscription contracts to subscribers or stockholders, whether
or not fully or partially paid, except treasury shares." (Sec. 173.)
It is thus broader than "subscribed capital stock."
The terms "subscribed capital stock" and "issued" or
"outstanding" capital stock are used synonymously since
subscribed capital stock, as distinguished from the certificate
of stock, can be issued even if not fully paid. But while every
subscribed share (assuming there is a binding subscription
agreement) is "outstanding," an issued share may not have the
status of outstanding shares. This is true in the case of treasury

shares. (Sec. 9.)

remains the same even though the actual value of the shares as determined
by the assets
of the corporations is diminished or increased, unaffected by profits
and losses.

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

77

(d) Paid-up capital stock is that portion of the subscribed or
outstanding capital stock that is actually paid. The term actual
capital stock is also used to refer to the amount of the capital
stock actually subscribed and paid for.
Paid-up capital differs from paid-in capital. The former refers
to shares actually subscribed and paid while the latter is the
sum of the amount paid for shares of stocks issued, plus the
additional paid-in capital, or the excess or premium paid over
the par value of such shares. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 40-19,
Sept. 16, 2019.)
(e) Unissued capital stock is that portion of the capital
stock not issued or subscribed. It does not vote and drawn no
dividends.
(2) Capital is used broadly to indicate the entire property or
assets of the corporation. It includes the amount invested by the
stockholders plus the undistributed earnings less losses and
expenses.
(a) In the strict sense, the term refers to that portion of the
net assets paid by the stockholders as consideration for the
shares issued to them, which is utilized for the prosecution
of the business of the corporation. It includes all balances or
installments due the corporation for shares of stock sold by it
and all unpaid subscription for shares.
(b) In the case of stock dividends, it is the amount that
the corporation transfers from its surplus profit account to
its capital account. It is the same amount that can loosely be
termed as the "trust fund" (see Sec. 59.) for the payment of the
debts of the corporation, to which the creditors may look for
satisfaction. (National Telecommunications Commission vs.
Court of Appeals, 311 SCRA 508 [1999].)
(c) The term is also used synonymously with the words
"capital stock," as meaning the amount subscribed and paid-in
and upon which the corporation is to conduct its operation4 (11

‘The term "capital" denotes the sum total of the shares subscribed and paid by the
stockholders or agreed to be paid irrespective of their nomenclature. It would, therefore,
be legal for foreigners to own more than 40% of the common shares but not more than
the 40% constitutional limit of the outstanding capital stock which would include both
common and non-voting preferred shares. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 15, 1988.) The Supreme

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

78

Sec. 6

Fletcher Cyc. Corp., p. 15 [1986 ed.].) and it is immaterial how
the stock is classified, whether as common or preferred.
(d) Legal capital is the amount equal to the aggregate par
value and/or issued value of the outstanding capital stock.
When par value shares are issued above par, the premium or
excess is not to be considered as part of the legal capital, (see Sec.
42.) In the case of no-par value shares, the entire consideration
received forms part of legal capital and shall not be available for
distribution as dividends, (see Sec. 6, par. 7.)
Under varying State laws, the term "stated capital" is used
instead of legal capital to refer to "the portion of the amount
contributed by purchasers of no-par value stock that is credited
to the capital account." (E.L. Kohler, op. cit., 446.)
ILLUSTRATION:
Suppose the articles of incorporation of corporation X
provides that the authorized capital stock of the corporation
is Pl,000,000.00 divided into 10,000 shares of the par value of
P100.00 per share. At its incorporation, only P250,000.00 of
the authorized capital stock was subscribed and 25% of the
subscription was paid; thus, only P62,500.00 was paid to the
treasurer of the corporation.
Therefore, the authorized capital stock of corporation X is
Pl,000,000.00, the subscribed, outstanding, or issued capital
stock is P250,000.00, the paid-up capital stock is P62,500.00,
and the unissued capital stock is P750,000.00. The legal capital
is also P250,000.00.

Capital stock and capital distinguished.
(1) Capital is the actual corporate property. It is, therefore, a
concrete thing. Capital stock is an amount. It is, therefore, something

abstract.

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

79

incorporation (where shares are with par value) and is unaffected
by profits and losses. Thus, capital may be greater or lesser than the
amount of the capital stock.
(3) It is said that capital belongs to the corporation and capital
stock when issued belongs to the stockholders, and that capital
may either be real or personal property but capital stock is always
personal. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 736.)
The term "capital," however, is frequently used loosely in the
sense of capital stock.
Capital stock and legal capital
distinguished.

Like capital stock, legal capital is merely an amount and
remains unchanged except as outstanding shares are increased or
reduced in number or amount. But while capital stock limits the
maximum amount or number of shares that may be issued without
formal amendment of the articles of incorporation (see Sec. 37.),
legal capital sets the minimum amount of the corporate assets
which for the protection of corporate creditors, may not be lawfully
distributed to stockholders.
Stock or share of stock defined.

Stock or share of stock is one of the units into which the capital
stock is divided. It represents the interest or right which the owner
has

—

(1) in the management of the corporation in which he takes part
through his right to vote7 (if voting rights are permitted for that
class of stock by the articles of incorporation);
(2) in a portion of the corporate earnings, if segregated in the

form of dividends; and

(3) upon its dissolution and winding up, in the property and

(2) Capital fluctuates or varies from day to day according

assets of the corporation remaining after the payment of corporate
debts and liabilities to creditors, (see 11 Fletcher, p. 18 [1971 ed.].)

Court has ruled in Gamboa vs. Teves (652 SCRA 690 [2011]; 682 SCRA 397 [2012].),
that the
term capital in Sec. 11, Art. XII of the Constitution (foreign equity
in public utilities)
refers only to shares of stock entitled to vote in the election of directors, (see Sec. 140.)

7The stockholders' right of management consists primarily of their privilege to vote
in the election and removal of directors. (Secs. 23, 27.)

as there are profits or losses or appreciation or depreciation of
corporate assets. Capital stock is an amount fixed in die articles of

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

80

Sec 6

I

Capital stock and share of stock

distinguished.

*

As distinguished from capital stock, the term "stock" or "share
of stock" is commonly used in a distributive sense to refer to the
stock in the hands of the stockholders and, therefore, belongs to
them. On the other hand, the former is used in a collective sense to
signify the whole body of shares of stock in the corporation. (Ibid.)
Nature of share of stock.

(1) The ownership of share of stock confers no immediate legal
right or title to any of the property of the corporation. Each share
merely represents a distinct undivided share or interest in the common
property of the corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 737.)
Such interest has been described as "indirect, contingent,
remote, conjectural, consequential, and collateral. It is purely
inchoate, or a mere expectancy of a right in the management of the
corporation and to share in the profits thereof and in the properties
and assets thereof on dissolution, after payment of corporate debts
and obligations." Hence, stockholders of such are not entitled to
intervene in a litigation involving corporate property under Section
2, Rule 12 of the Rules of Court. (Saw vs. Court of Appeals, 195
SCRA 740 [1991].)
(2) Shares of stock constitute property distinct from the capital
or tangible property of the corporation and belong to the different
stockholders who enjoy the attributes of ownership which under
the Civil Code, include "the right to enjoy and dispose of a thing
without other limitations than those established by law." (Art. 428

thereof.)

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

81

necessarily follows from the fact that the property of a corporation
does not belong, in law, to the stockholders but to the corporation
as a distinct legal entity or artificial person. (Stockholders of F.
Guanzon & Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, 6 SCRA 373 [1962].)
(3) They are in the nature of choses in action but are not such
in a strict sense. They do not constitute an indebtedness of the
corporation to the shareholder (18 Am. Jur. 2d 738.) and are,
therefore, not credits as to make the stockholder a creditor of the
corporation. (Garcia vs. Lim Chu Sing, 59 Phil. 562 [1936].) Hence,
no action can be maintained against the corporation for the return
of the contributions of the shareholders as long as the corporation
needs them and is not under dissolution, (see Sec. 63, as to nature of
relation of stockholder to the corporation.)
(4) A share of stock only typifies a proportionate or aliquot part
of the corporation's property, or the right to share in its proceeds to
that extent when distributed according to law. It does not represent
property or a corporation. The corporation as a juridical person,
distinct from the members composing it, has property of its own
which consists chiefly of real estate.
As noted, a holder of shares is in no legal sense the owner of
any part of the capital of the corporation; nor is he entitled to the
possession of any define portion of its property or assets, nor a co¬
owner of the corporate property (see Stockholders of F. Guanzon
& Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, supra; Boyer-Roxas vs. Court of
Appeals, 211 SCRA 470 [1992].), his interest in the corporate property
being equitable or beneficial in nature.

Certificate of stock defined.

Incorporeal in nature, the shares are personal property* (see Sec.
62.) of the stockholder (except treasury stock which belongs to the
corporation; see Sec. 9.) and this is true even where the property
of the corporation consists wholly or chiefly of real estate. This

Certificate of stock is a written acknowledgment by the
corporation of the interest, right, and participation of a person in
the management, profits, and assets of a corporation.
It is a formal written evidence of the holder's ownership of one
or more shares and is a convenient instrument for transferring title,
(see Sec. 62.)

‘Art. 417. The foDowing are also considered as personal property:... (2) Shares of
stock of agricultural, commercial, and industrial entities, although they may have real
estate. (Gvil Code)
Art. 2005. Incorporeal rights, evidenced by negotiable instruments, bills of lading,
shares of stock, bonds, warehouse receipts and similar documents may also be pledged.
The instrument proving the right pledged shall be delivered to the creditor, and if
negotiable, must be indorsed. (Civil Code)

Share of stock and certificate of stock
distinguished.
(1) Share of stock is incorporeal or intangible property, while
certificate of stock is tangible property;

82

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 6

(2) Share of stock represents the right or interest of a person in a
corporation, while certificate of stock is the written evidence of that

right or interest;
(3) Share of stock may be issued even if the subscription is not
paid (Sec. 173.), except in no-par shares. (Sec. 6, par. 6.) As a rule, a
certificate of stock may not be issued unless the subscription is fully
paid (Sec. 63.); and
(4) The situs of share of stock is deemed to be the State where
the corporation has its domicile which is ordinarily the State under
whose laws it was created, while a certificate of stock may have a
situs at the place where it is located or at the domicile of the owner,
even though the corporation is domiciled elsewhere. (2 Fletcher,
pp. 62-63, 95.) The situs of share of stock retains that of the issuing
corporation, even though the certificate is without the State and is
owned by a non-resident. (Ibid., p. 62.)

The possession of a certificate of stock is not essential to
ownership of stock because the right to shares of stock may exist
independently of the certificate.
Situs of shares of stock for certain
purposes.

—

(1) For purposes of execution, attachment, and garnishment. The
situs of shares of stock is the domicile or residence of the corporation
(Chua Guan vs. Samahang Magsasaka, Inc., 62 Phil. 472 [1935].),
which is the place where the principal office of the corporation is
located, (see Sec. 13[c].)

"Stocks or shares, or an interest in stocks or shares of any
corporation or company" shall be attached by the officer executing
the order, "by leaving with the president or managing agent thereof,
a copy of the order and a notice stating that the stock or interest
of the party against whom the attachment is issued, is attached in
pursuance of such order." (Rules of Court, Rule 57, Sec. 7[d ).)
(2) For purposes of registration of chattel mortgages on shares of stock.
The situs is the province or city in which the corporation has
its principal office or place of business. (Chua Guan vs. Samahang
Magsasaka, Inc., supra.)

—

Sec. 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

83

—

(3) For purposes of property taxation. The rule is that the situs
of intangible property is at the domicile or residence of the owner.
(a) The above principle, however, is not controlling when
it is inconsistent with express provisions of statute, or when
justice does not demand that it should be, as where the property
has in fact a situs elsewhere, (see 16 Am. Jur. 474-475.) Thus,
shares of stock in a domestic corporation of a non-resident
foreigner are taxable in the Philippines. The reason is that the
shares receive the protection and benefit of our law. (Wells Fargo
Bank and Union Trust Co. vs. Coll, of Internal Revenue, 70 Phil.
325 [1940].)
(b) Under the National Internal Revenue Code (R.A. No.
8424, as amended.), for purposes of the estate tax, the gross
estate of a resident decedent, whether citizen or alien, or a
citizen decedent, whether resident or non-resident, includes his
intangible personal property wherever situated, (see Sec. 104
thereof.)

Classes of shares in general.

Shares of stock may be:
(1) Par value or no-par value;
(2) Voting or non-voting;
(3) Common or preferred, and preferred shares may be voting,
convertible, or redeemable. (Infra.) They may be:
(a) Preferred as to assets in case of liquidation or preferred
as to dividends and the latter may be:
1) Cumulative or non-cumulative; or
2) Participating or non-participating;
(4) Promotion share;
(5) Share in escrow;
(6) Convertible share;
(7) Founders' share (see Sec. 7.);
(8) Redeemable share (see Sec. 8.); and
(9) Treasury share, (see Sec. 9.)

84

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

A corporation may issue such classes or series of shares as the
prospects and needs of its business may require. It may classify its
shares to insure compliance with constitutional legal requirements.
(Sec. 6, last par.)
Par value share.

Par value share is one with specific money value fixed in the
articles of incorporation and appearing in the certificate of stock.
(1) The primary purpose of par value is to fix the minimum
subscription or issue price of the shares, thus assuring creditors that
the corporation would receive a minimum amount for its stock, (see
Sec. 61.)
(2) A corporation may issue shares with different par values.
Shares issued less than par value are referred to a watered stock, (see
Sec. 64.)
(3) The par value of a stock remains the same regardless of the
market value or book value (Infra.) of the stock, unless there is a
stock split, (see annotation under Sec. 42.) It is not usually the price
at which investors buy or sell the stock
No-par value share.

No-par value share is one with no stated value appearing on the
face of the certificate of stock It is a stock which does not state how
much money it represents.
(1) A no-par value share has, therefore, no-par value but it
has always an "issued value," i.e., the consideration fixed by the
corporation for its issuance, (see Sec. 61, last par.)
(2) A no-par value share does not purport to represent any
stated proportionate interest in the capital stock measured by value,
but only an aliquot part of the whole number of such shares of the
issuing corporation.
(3) A corporation may issue no-par value only, or with par value
shares. No-par value stockholders have the same rights as holders
of par value stock.
(4) The capital stock of a corporation issuing only no-par shares
is not set forth by a stated amount of money, but instead is expressed
to be divided into a stated number of shares, such as 1,000 shares.

Sec 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

85

This indicates that a shareholder of 100 shares is an aliquot sharer in
the assets of the corporation, no matter what value they may have, to
the extent of 100/1,000 or 1 / 10. Thus, by removing the par value of
shares, the attention of persons interested in the financial condition
of the corporation is focused upon the value of assets and the amount
of its debts. (Delpher Trades Corp. vs. Intermediate Appellate
Court, 157 SCRA 349 [1988], citing Agbayani, Commentaries and
Jurisprudence on the Commercial Laws of the Phils., Vol. Ill, 1980
Ed., p. 107.)

Voting share.

Voting share is share with the right to vote.
(1) Under SEC regulations (citing Section 23 of the Revised
Corporation Code, previously Section 24):
(a) One share is entitled to one vote. Voting will always
be based on number of shares and not on the number of
stockholders present in the stockholders' meeting.
(b) Each common share shall be equal in all respects to
every other common share. Corporations are prohibited from
issuing multiple voting and non-voting common shares nor
can they limit the maximum number of votes per stockholder
irrespective of the number of shares he holds. (SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 4, series of 2004.)
However, it should be noted that Section 6 is broad enough
to authorize the creation of shares with multiple voting rights.
(2) Only shares classified and issued as "preferred" or
"redeemable" may be deprived of voting rights. Article 6 [par. 1J
expressly prohibits the depreciation of voting rights except only as
to said shares. (Castillo vs. Balinghasay, 440 SCRA 442 [2004].) But
founders' shares may be given the exclusive right to vote and be
voted for in the election of directors for a limited period (Sec. 7.)
in which case voting common stocks will have no right to vote for
directors.
(3) Under the Revised Corporation Code, whenever a vote
is necessary to approve a particular corporate act, such vote refers
only to stocks with voting rights except in certain cases when even
non-voting shares may also vote. (Sec. 6, pars. 3 and 4.) The rule is
not "one stockholder, one vote" but "one share, one vote" because

86

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 6
Sec. 6

representation in a corporation is commensurate to extent of
ownership, (see SEC Memo. Circ. No. 04-04, March 17, 2004.)

87

other stockholders or class of stockholders but equally with all other

stockholders except preferred stockholders.

Non-voting share.

Non-voting share is share without right to vote.
(1) If stock is originally issued as voting stock, it may not
thereafter be deprived of the right to vote without the consent of the
holder.
(2) Under the Revised Corporation Code, no share may be
deprived of voting rights except those classified and issued as
"preferred" or "redeemable" shares, unless otherwise provided in
the Code. (Sec. 6, pai. 2.) The proviso refers to fundamental matters
enumerated in Section 6 (par. 3[a-hJ.) on which holders of non¬
voting shares in stock corporations shall nevertheless be entitled to
vote. Note that the enumeration in Section 6 does not include the
election of directors or trustees (see Sec. 24.) as one of the matters on
which non-voting shares may vote.
In nonstock corporations, Section 88 governs the right of the
members to vote on corporate matters.
(3) Where non-voting shares are provided for, the Revised
Corporation Code requires that there shall always be a class or
series of shares which have complete voting rights. (Sec. 6, par. 2.)
(4) Under Section 6 (par. 2.), only preferred or redeemable
shares may be denied the right to vote. The issuance of common
stock with a feature that voting rights thereof shall be exercised by
a trustee violates the rule that common shares cannot be deprived
of voting rights. The automatic assignment of voting rights is an
indirect violation of Section 6. (SEC Opinion, July 15, 1997.)
(5) In case any amendment of the articles of incorporation has
the effect of changing or restricting the rights of any stockholder, the
latter shall have the right to dissent and demand payment of the fair
value of his shares. (Sec. 80[l].)

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

(1) It is so-called because it is the basis class of stock which
private corporations generally issue (hence, the name) or because its
holder stands upon an equal footing, without extraordinary rights
or privileges.
(2) Common shares have complete voting rights. They cannot
be deprived of said rights except as provided by law.
(3) Common stockholders are the residual owners of the
corporation. They get only the assets left over in case of liquidation
after all other securities holders are paid.
(4) Because of restrictions upon other classes of stock with
respect to voting rights, the common stock normally has preference
in tiie matter of management, (see 18 Am. Jur. 2d 741.)
(5) The simplest corporate structure has only one kind of stock
all common. When only a single class of stock is issued, then all
shares are alike and all issues are common stock. A corporation may
issue more than one class of common stock, being designated "Class
A," "Class B," etc.

—

i

I

Preferred share.

Common share.

Preferred share of stock is one with a stated par value which
entitles the holder thereof to certain preferences over the holders of
common stock.’
(1) Under the Revised Corporation Code, preferred shares
of stock may be issued only with a stated par value. (Sec. 5, par.
2.) More than one class of preferred shares may be issued
usually
designated "first preferred," "second preferred," etc.
(2) The preferences are designated to induce persons to
subscribe
for shares of a corporation. They may consist in the payment of
dividends or the distribution of the assets of a corporation in case
of its dissolution ahead of the common stockholders, or such
other
preferences as may be stated in the articles of incorporation which

Common share of stock entitles the holder thereof to a pro rata
division of the profits, if there are any, and in its assets upon
dissolution, with no preference or advantage in that respect over

’Republic Planters Bank vs. Agana, Jr„ 269 SCRA 1 (1997),
Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 62 [1989 ed.]. dting De Leon. The

88

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

are not violative of the provisions of the Revised .Corporation Code.
(Sec. 6, par. 6.)
As already stated, each share shall be in all respects equal to
every other share except as otherwise provided in the articles of
incorporation and stated in the certificate of stock. (Ibid., par. 1.)
Thus, unless otherwise so provided, preferred stocks are presumed
to be voting.
(3) The term guaranteed stock, is sometimes used as synonymous
with preferred stock on which the payment of dividend is
guaranteed10 and a distinction is sometimes drawn to the effect that
guaranteed stock is entitled to arrears in dividends, while ordinary
preferred stock is not. (18 C.J.S. 650.)
(4) Interest-bearing stock on which the corporation agrees
absolutely to pay interest before dividends are paid to common
stockholders is legal only when construed as requiring payment of
interest as dividends from net earnings or surplus only." (see Sec.
43.) Such stock is, in effect, preferred stock, except perhaps that the
discretion of board of directors to use profits for other corporate
purposes may be more limited.

Common and preferred shares are the two main classes or forms
of stock. Holders of preferred shares do not lose the voting rights
in all matters affecting the corporation. Section 6 (par. 6.) provides
the cases when non-voting shares like preferred shares are granted
voting rights.
Promotion shares.
Promotion shares are such shares as are issued to promoters, or
those in some way interested in the company, for incorporating the
company, or for services rendered in launching or promoting the
welfare of the company, such as advancing the fees for incorporating,
advertising, attorney's fees, surveying, etc. (11 Fletcher, p. 48;
Enright vs. Hekscher, 240 F. 863.)

They may mean such shares as are issued to those who may
originally own the mining or valuable rights connected therewith,
"The guaranty merely mean that the holders are entitled to specified dividends if

there are profits out of which dividends may be paid, (see Sec. 43.)
"Republic Planters Bank vs. Agana, Sr., supra, citing De Leon, supra, p. 62, note 9.

Sec 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

89

in consideration of their deeding the same to the mining company
when the company is incorporated. (Ibid.)

Share in escrow.

Share in escrow is share subject to an agreement by which the
share is deposited by the grantor or his agent with a third person
to be kept by the depository until the performance of a certain
condition (usually the payment of the subscription price) of the
happening of a certain event contained in the agreement. (Cannon
v. Handley, 12 P. 315.)
(1) The escrow deposit makes the depository a trustee under an
express trust, (see Arts. 1440, 1441, Civil Code.)
(2) The legal title to the subject matter to be conveyed remains
in the grantor until the condition is fulfilled. The issuance of the
shares is thus made subject to a suspensive condition. (Lunk vs.
Stevens, 64 Phil. 1054 [1937].)
(3) The holders of escrow shares are not entitled to the rights
pertaining to a stockholder until the conditions set forth for the
release of such shares are fully met. The reason lies in the fact that
the shares he is supposed to be entitled to are not yet actually issued
to him; thus, he is not yet the owner of the shares and consequently,
he cannot be accorded the rights belonging to a regular stockholder.
In this regard, the stockholder's use of the subject shares and its
validity to determine quorum depends on whether the conditions
for release of the said shares were met, in accordance with the
escrow agreement. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 60-19, Dec. 20, 2019.)

Convertible share.
Convertible share is share which is convertible or changeable
by the stockholder from one class to another class (such as from
preferred to common and vice-versa) at a certain price and within a

certain period.

(1) Except as restricted by the articles of incorporation or
the
terms of the issuance, the stockholder may demand conversion at
his pleasure. The conversion ratio is the price at which the common

is to be valued as against the preferred.

(2) Where the corporation has issued stock to the
entire
authorized limit, it cannot issue additional stocks if the authorized
common stock of the corporation is fully subscribed.

90

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

(a) If it becomes necessary to create additional common
stocks into which preferred stocks can be converted, this can be
done simply by reclassifying the preferred shares into common
in such amount as would be necessary to cover the conversion
through an amendment of the articles of incorporation in
accordance with Section 15.
(b) Thus, although the preferred shares possess the
quality of being convertible into common shares per articles of
incorporation, such conversion is not automatic. An amendment
of the articles of incorporation is required to formalize the
conversion which must not result in watering of stock (see Sec.
64.), or issuance of stock in excess of the authorized capital stock
of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 3, 1990.)

Convertibility of shares.
(1) Preferred shares into common. In the absence of an express
provision in the articles of incorporation as to their convertibility
feature, preferred shares cannot be converted into common. The
terms of the preferred share contract cannot be changed without the
consent of the stockholders. (Sec. 6, par. 1, SEC Opinion, May 19,
1992.)

—

—

(2) No-par value share to par value. The conversion of no-par
value shares to par value is allowed by SEC provided there would
be no change in the stockholders' percentage interest in the total
assets of the corporation.
If the conversion would result in the increase in the number of
shares, the same should be allocated to the existing stockholders in
proportion to the number of shares held by them without changing
the total peso amount of the total outstanding shares. The individual
allocation of the shares as converted should be based on the average
issue value of the no-par value shares and not in the individual actual
contribution of the stockholders. (SEC Opinion, July 7, 1992.)

Nature of par value/book value/
market value.
(1) Par value. The par value12 stated in the certificate of stock

—

'’"Par" means equal, and "par value" means face value or value equal to the face of
the stocks or bonds. The par value of an interest-bearing bond on the day of its issuance is

Sec 6

.'

TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

91

represents the minimum amount of money or property contributed
by the shareholder to the capital stock of the corporation. Patently,
the assets of a company cannot always be equal to the par value
of the outstanding stock, the assets being constantly in a state of
fluctuation as the business prospers or declines. (13 Am. Jur. 302.)
(2) Book value.
The par value does not always reflect its
book value or its actual or true value which may be determined
by dividing the total stockholders' equity or the net value of the
total corporate assets (capital and surplus, if any) by the number of
shares issued or outstanding.
Since unpaid subscriptions (see Sec. 59.) are considered part of
the asset of a corporation which the board of directors may at any
time declare due and payable (see Sec. 66.), they should be included
in the computation of book value. But book value does not attach to
unissued or reacquired shares, (see Sec. 9.)
(3) Market value. Par value and book value may be more or
less than market value which may be defined as the price at which
a willing seller would sell and a willing buyer would buy, if both
have a reasonable knowledge of the facts, and neither being under
abnormal pressure.
Market value is affected by law of supply and demand.1’
ILLUSTRATION:
Suppose X Corporation has an authorized capital stock
of Pl,000,000.00 divided into 10,000 shares with a par value
of P100.00 per share. The capital stock is fully subscribed and

—

—

the principal and the accrued interest. (31 Words and Phrases [1957 ed.) 559.) To say that a
bond is valued at par means that its value is equal to the face value of the bond. (Ibid., 63.)
I5"ln

accounting practice, the journal entries for transactions are recorded in

historical value or cost. Thus, the purchase of properties of assets is recorded at acquisition
cost. The same is true with liabilities and equity transactions where the actual loan and
the amount paid for the subscription are recorded at the actual payment, including the
premiums

paid for the subscription of capital stock.
Moreover, it is common practice that the values of the accounts recorded at
historical value or cost are not increased or decreased due to market forces. In the case of
properties, the appreciation in value is generally not recorded as income nor the increase
in the corresponding asset because the increase or decrease is not yet realized until
the
property is actually sold. The same is true with the capital account. The market value
may be much higher than the actual payment of the par value and premium of capital
stock. Still, the books of account will not be reflected in the books of account." (PLDT
vs.
National Telecommunications Commission, 539 SCRA 365 [20071.)

1'
92

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 6

paid-up in cash. At this stage, the par value is the same as its
actual or book value. The book value is determined by dividing
Pl,000,000.00, the net asset, by 10,000, the number of shares
issued or outstanding.
If the corporation makes a net profit of P100,000.00, the
increased book value of each share would be P110.00. On
the other hand, if the corporation suffers instead a loss of
P100,000.00, its net assets would then be reduced to P900,000.00,
thereby making the book value of each share at only P90.00.
The market value, however, of each share may not be
P100.00 or P110.00 or P90.0O. Thus, the market value of each
share of X Corporation may be P150.00 when the book value is
P110.00 or it may be P60.00 when the book value is P90.00. The
market value of stocks may be influenced by the present and
prospective net income of the corporation, attractive dividend
payments, and other factors.
Presumption as to value of corporate
stock.

Corporate stock is "at par" when it is worth its face value, and
is "above par" or at a "premium" when it is worth more. According
to some authority, no presumption exists, absent supporting
evidence, that corporate stock is worth its par or face value. There is
another authority, however, that absent contrary evidence, there is a
presumption that corporate stock is worth its par or face value. (18
Am. Jur. 2d 750-751.)
It is difficult to determine the book or market value or price of a
corporation's stock when it is not traded publicly.
ILLUSTRATION:
C, the president, treasurer, and a director of X Corporation,
decided to withdraw from the corporation. According to its
bylaws, the person withdrawing had to determine the book
value of his shares as of the date the person gave notice of
withdrawal, which value would then be the purchase price
of the stock. The bylaws specified that book value should be
determined by sound and accepted accounting rules and
practices carried out by a certified public accounting firm. A
difference arose as to the book value, C using the straight line
method to determine asset cost rather than the accelerated

Sec. 6

-

T

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

93

depredation method adopted by X Corporation, with the result
that his determination of the book value per share was higher.
Which method of depreciation is the correct one?
The book value of stock is the difference between the assets
and liabilities of a corporation. Depreciation covers the original
cost of each asset over its established useful life, in proportion
to the actual annual decrease in the value of such asset. Factors
affecting depreciation adjustments are the asset's original cost,
its life in years, salvage value, and the method of depreciation

chosen.
The straight line method chosen by C permits an equal
amount to be charged off as expense during each year of the
asset7s life. The accelerated method adopted by X Corporation
allows a larger portion of depredation expense to be charged
as an expense in the first year and lesser amounts in the
following years. Accounting practices permit several methods
of depredation for different purposes. X Corporation used its
method for taxation purposes; C, to arrive at the value of the
stock.

According to the bylaws, the one withdrawing has the right
to choose the method to determine book value. (Chadwick v.
Cross, Abbot Co., 205 A. 2d 416 [Sup. Ct. Vt. 1964].)
Statutory restrictions regarding the Issuance
of no-par value shares.

Any or all of the shares or series of shares issued by a stock
corporation may or may not have a par value.

The Revised Corporation Code imposes these limitations or
restrictions regarding the issuance of no-par value shares:
(1) Banks, trust, insurance and preneed companies, and
building and loan assodations and other corporations authorized
to obtain or access funds from the public, whether publicly listed or
not, shall not be permitted to issue no-par value shares of stock;
(2) Preferred shares of stock of a corporation may be issued
only with a stated par value (Ibid.);
(3) Shares of capital stock issued without par value shall be
deemed fully paid and nonassessable and the holder of such shares
shall not be liable to the corporation or to its creditors in respect

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

94

Sec. 6

thereto. This does not mean that the holder is no longer liable for the
shares if they are not yet fully paid.14 It only means that the holder
shall not be liable beyond the issued price, (see Sec 61, last par.),
notwithstanding a change in their value;
(4) Shares without par value must be issued for consideration
at least five (5) pesos per share (Sec. 6, par. 7.); and
(5) The entire consideration received by the corporation for its
no-par value shares shall be treated as capital, and, therefore, shall
not be available for distribution as dividends. (Ibid.) The theory is
that shareholders intended that all the amounts paid for no-par
value shares shall be employed permanently to the prosecution of
the venture.
Consideration for no-par value shares.

Since the value of corporate stocks fluctuates and rarely
represents the par value, corporation are authorized to issue no¬
par value shares. Such shares may aid the investor to understand
the factors which determine stock value. They also make it easier
for corporations to sell stock under circumstances which may
militate against the interest of the investor. (C.L. James, Principles
of Economics, supra, p. 50.)
(1) A no-par value share has no "par value" but it has always
an "issued value" based on the consideration for which it is issued.
Under Section 6, a no-par value share may not be issued for less

than P5.00 per share.
(2) No-par value stocks may be issued from time to time at
different prices or values although the holders of all these shares are
entitled to share equally in the distribution of the profits and assets
of the corporation, (see Sec. 61, last par.)

Advantages of par value shares.

Par value shares have these advantages:
(1) Par value shares are easily sold as the public is more attracted
to buy this kind of shares;

“Issued shares indude subscribed shares which are unpaid or partially unpaid, (see

Sec. 1/3.)

Sec 6

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

95

(2) There is greater protection to creditors;

(3) There is unlikelihood of sale of subsequently issued shares
a
at lower price; and
(4) There is unlikelihood of the distribution of dividends that
are only ostensible profits, (see Harold, Corporation Finance, p. 35.)

Disadvantages of par value shares.

Par value shares have these disadvantages:
(1) The subscribers are liable to corporate creditors for their
unpaid subscription; and
(2) The stated face value of the share is not an accurate criterion
of its true value.

Advantages of no-par value shares.

No-par value shares have these advantages:
(1) No-par value shares are issued as fully paid and non¬

assessable;

(2) Their price is flexible;
(3) Low-priced stocks (most no-par shares are low-priced)
enjoy wider distribution;
(4) They tell no untruth concerning the value of the stockholder 's
procedure. (Ibid.)
(5) Stock dividends are more easily issued, thereby simplifying
accounting procedure. (Ibid.)

Disadvantages of no-par value shares.
No-par value shares have these disadvantages:
(1) They legalize large issues of stock for property;
(2) They conceal the money or property represented by the
shares;
(3) They promote issuance of watered stock (19 Mich. L. Rev.
591-595; see Sec. 64.); and
(4) There is lesser protection to creditors.

96

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Kinds of preferred shares.

Sec. 6
Sec 6

"

They may be:
(1) Preferred share as to assets or share which gives the holder
preference in the distributions of the dividends and in the assets of
the corporation in case of liquidation. (Sec. 6, par. 6.)
It has been held that preferred stock, standing alone, creates a
preference only as dividends and not to assets in case of liquidation
(Hellmen v. Penn Electric Vehicle Co. 67 Atl. 834.); or
(2) Preferred share as to dividends or share which gives the holder
preference to receive dividends on the share to the extent agreed
upon before any dividends are paid to the holders of common stock.
(2 Fletcher, p. 44.)
There is no guaranty, however, that it will receive any dividend.
The corporation is not bound to pay dividends unless the board of
directors declares them. The preference simply means that holders
of common stock may receive dividends only after the satisfaction
of the prior claims on dividends of preferred stockholders.15
Preference among preferred shares.
A corporation may issue more than one class of preferred stock
as to assets or as to dividends. Thus, certain preferred shares may be
given first preference or second preference on earnings.
Unless a classification is provided in the articles of incorporation,
preferred shares of stock enjoy the same preferences or privileges.
Thus, if the articles do not distinguish between those preferred
shares subscribed from the corporation and those acquired by other
modes, as far as preferences are concerned, the former cannot be
considered to enjoy privileges different from those of the latter.
(SEC Opinion, Dec. 4, 1981.)
•Z

Preferred stockholders not creditors
of corporation.
Like common shares, preferred shares are part of the
corporation's stock Both common and preferred stockholders are

'’Republic Planters Bank vs. Agana, Sr., 269 SCRA 1 (1997), dting De Leon, The
Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated p. 69 [1989 ed.].

97

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

no different from ordinary investors willing to share in the profits
and losses of the enterprise.
(1) Lien upon corporate property.
Preferred shares of stock
issued by a corporation many be given such other preferences
as may be stated in the articles of incorporation. (Sec. 6, par. 6.)
Preferences granted to preferred stockholders do not give them a
lien upon the property of the corporation nor make them creditors
of the corporation, the rights of the former being always subordinate
to the latter.1*
(2) Stock issued with a fixed interest.
Stock cannot be issued
with a fixed interest instead of dividends because this will make
the contract of subscription one of loan and make the corporation
a debtor of the subscriber. However, there may a fixed rate of
dividends.
Shareholders, both common and preferred, are risk takers who
invest capital in the business and who can look only to what is left
after corporate debts and liabilities are fully paid.17 (SEC Opinion,
Feb. 10, 1989, citing Ballantine, p. 503.) They sink or swim with the
corporation and there is no obligation to return the value of their
shares by means of repurchase if the corporation incurs losses and
financial reverses, much less guarantee such repurchase through a
surety bond. (Lirag Textile Mills, Inc. vs. Social Security System, 153
SCRA 338 [1987].)

—

—

—

(3) Stock issued with dividend payable in the nature of interest.
However, the dividends payable by the corporation may be in
the nature of interest as where the parties, under an agreement,
intended the repurchase by the corporation of preferred shares
with agreed cumulative dividends of a fix percentage per annum, on
their respective scheduled dates to be an absolute or unconditional
obligation which does not depend upon the financial ability of
the corporation, especially so where the obligation is secured by a
surety, notwithstanding that the dividends are supposed to be paid
out of net profits and earned surplus. (Ibid.)
(4) Stock issued with dividends payable guaranteed. The fact that
dividends are, in terms, guaranteed, does not make them creditors.

—

“Supra.
"Ibid.

98

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 6
Sec. 6

They are entitled to dividends only when there are profits out of
which dividends may be declared. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 3, 1986.)
Such a guarantee may, however, have the possible effect of making
the dividends cumulative (Infra.), that is, making the profits of one
year make up for the deficiencies of the preceding year or years.
(SEC Opinion, Aug. 24, 1987, citing 11 Fletcher, Sec. 4294.)
(5) Stock issued to creditors. It is immaterial how or where the
holder obtained his stock since the preference belongs to the stock
and not to the stockholder. Hence, that preferred stockholders were
formerly corporate creditors gives them no greater right as against
creditors. By abandoning their position as creditors, they lose their
rights as such. (Ibid.)

—

Limitations regarding issuance of preferred
shares.

There are four (4) legal limitations regarding preferred shares:
(1) Preferred shares deprived of voting rights in the articles of
incorporation (Sec. 6, par. 1.) shall still be entitled to vote on matters
enumerated in Section 6, par. 3., although they shall not be entitled
to vote on other matters (par. 4.);
(2) The preference of preferred shares must not be violative of
the Revised Corporation Code;
(3) Preferred shares may be issued only with a stated par value;
and
(4) The board of directors may fix terms and conditions of
preferred shares of stock or where authorized any series thereof
only when so authorized by the articles of incorporation and such
terms and conditions shall be effective upon filing a certificate
thereof with the SEC. (Ibid., par. 6.)

Authority of board of directors to fix terms
and conditions of preferred shares.

Section 6 empowers the board of directors, where authorized in
the articles of incorporation, to fix terms and conditions or preferred
shares of stock or any series thereof. The financing of an enterprise
goes on year after year, as business expands or the needs of capital
arise. (Ballantine, Rev. ed. 1 [1946], p. 471.)

'

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

(1) Benefits from authority given.

—

99

The authority enables the

board, without the delay and expense of amendment of the articles
of incorporation, to "tailor its securities to meet changes in market
conditions which cannot be foreseen at the time of incorporation or
later amendment of the articles of incorporation. Typical of changes
is the variance of the dividend rate to meet the demands of the money
market... The resolution of the directors fixing such preferences
is generally required to be certified and filed or recorded in the
same manner as articles of incorporation, thus, providing certain
information as to the term of the contract." (SEC Opinion, Jan. 11,
1982, citing Ballantine, Law of Corp., pp. 502-503, and 2 Fletcher, p.
531.)

—

(2) Concurrence of stockholders not required. It would not need
the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital
under Section 15 for the board to fix the terms and conditions of the
preferred shares were authorized by the articles of incorporation;
otherwise, it would defeat the very purpose for which the authority
was granted, which is to allow the corporation to respond quickly
to the fluctuating conditions in the market. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 11,

1982.)

—

(3) Blanket authority not contemplated.
It would be contrary
to Section 6 of the Revised Corporation Code to give the board
of directors blanket authority to fix the terms and conditions of
the preferred shares without stating the privileges, preferences,
restrictions, or rights of the preferred shares. Unless certain features,
guidelines and standards as to the issue of preferred shares are stated
or spelled out in the articles of incorporation, such authorization
becomes a dangerous power which may adversely affect the rights
of shares already issued. (Ibid.)
Thus, as a matter of policy, the SEC does not allow a provision
giving the board of directors a blanket authority to fix the terms or
preferred shares unless such guidelines (e.g., setting a specific range
of dividend rate with minimum and maximum limits) are followed
in the determination thereof. (SEC Opinion, May 24, 1994.)

Kinds of preferred shares
as to dividends.
Preferred shares may be cumulative, non-cumulative,
participating non-participating, and cumulative-participating.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

100

Sec. 6

(1) Cumulative preferred share entitles the holder not only to the
payment of current dividends but also to dividends in arrears. If
the stipulated dividend is not paid in a given year, it shall be added
to the dividend which shall be due die following year and the
accumulated dividends must be paid to the holder of said preferred
share before any dividend may be paid to the holders of common

stock.

ILLUSTRATION:
Suppose S owns ten preferred shares of X Corporation with
a par value of P100.00 per share at 5% guaranteed cumulative
dividends.
If after 4 years the corporation declare the regular annual
dividend, S will receive P250.00 for the ten shares: P50.00 for
each year or P200.00 for the 4 years (representing the dividends
in arrears) plus the dividend of P50.00 for the current year.
All the dividends must be paid to S before any dividends
can be paid to the holders of common shares. This kind of share
protects preferred stockholders against manipulation of the
financial accounts of the corporation to conceal profits.

(2) Non-cumulative preferred share entitles the holder thereof to
the payment of current dividends only in preference to common
stockholders. If dividends are not declared in a given year, the right
to the dividends for that particular year is extinguished.

ILLUSTRATION:
In the preceding illustration, if the dividends of S were
non-cumulative, he would be paid only for the current year at
P5.00 per share, or P50.00 for the ten shares.
(3) Participating preferred share is share that gives the holder not
only the right to receive the stipulated dividends at the preferred
rate but also to participate with the holders of common shares in
the remaining profits pro rata (or in the proportion stated in the
articles of incorporation) after the common shares have been paid
the stipulated dividend at the same preferred rate.
(4) Non-participating preferred share is share which entitles the
holder thereof to receive the stipulated preferred dividends and no
more. The balance, if any, is given entirely to the common stocks.

Sec. 7

<«»(

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

UH

ILLUSTRATION:
Suppose the capital stock of X Corporation is P100,000.00
dividend into 1,000 shares with a par value of P100.00 per
share. Three hundred (300) of the shares
If, a given year, the corporation declares a dividend of
P5,100.00, the 10% preference must first be paid to the owners
of preferred shares at P10.00 per share or P3,000.00. The balance
of P2,100.00 will be divided among the holders of common
shares at P3.00 each share.
If the dividends declared amount to Pll,400.00, then the
holders of common stock be receiving P8,400.00 of P12.00 each
share. However, if the preferred shares are participating, the
owners thereof also in the remaining profits of Pl,400.00 with
the holders of common stock after the latter have been granted
a share (P7,000.00) in the balance of P8,400.00 (Pll,400.00 P3,000.00) at the same rate of 10%. Thus, each share will be
entitled to an additional dividend of Pl.40 (Pl,400.00 + 1,000).

Absent an agreement, express or implied, dividends should
be deemed non-cumulative and non-participating in accordance
with the presumption established in Section 6 (par. 5.) that shares
are equal in all respects unless otherwise stated in the article of
incorporation and in the certificate of stock.
(5) Cumulative-participating preferred share is a combination of
the cumulative share and participating share. This means that the
holder is entitled not only to dividends in arrears but also, after
receiving his preferred share of dividends, to participation with the
holders of common stock in the remaining profits.

—

Sec. 7. Founders’ Shares.
Founders’ shares may
be given certain rights and privileges not enjoyed by the
owners of other stocks. Where the exclusive right to vote
and be voted for in the election of directors Is granted, It
must be for a limited period not to exceed five (5) years
from the date of Incorporation: Provided, such exclusive
right shall not be allowed if its exercise will violate

Commonwealth Act No. 108, otherwise known as the “AntiDummy Law”; Republic Act No. 7042. otherwise known as

the “Foreign Investment of 1991”: and other pertinent laws,

102

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 7

Founders’ shares.
Founders' shares have been defined as "shares issued to the
organizers and promoters of a corporation in consideration of some
supposed right or property. Such shares usually share in profits only
after a certain percentage has been paid upon the common stock,
but are often given special privileges over other stock as to voting
and as to division of profits in excess of a minimum dividend on the
common stock."1 (Webster's Second International Dictionary, p. 997.)
(1) Special rights and privileges.
The shares of stock of a
corporation, close or non-close (see Title XU.), may include founders'
shares classified as such in the articles of incorporation.
Such shares may be given special rights and privileges not
enjoyed by the owners of other stock including common stocks,
such as preference in the payment of dividends and/or distribution
of assets in case of liquidation, right to convert the shares into other
shares, right to cumulative dividends, etc. to encourage them to
make large investments in the proposed corporation.

—

'They are not to be confused with so-called management shares which are "corporate
stocks generally held by officers or directors of a company that receives no dividends
until a specified amount has been paid on the common stock but that receives a
large
share of the residual profits." (Ibid., [Third], p. 1372.) Both shares have their origin
in
English common law.
(also
Founders' shares
called managers' shares and deferred shares) are issued
commonly in Great Britain, rarely in the United States. Their combined voting power is
usually equal to the voting power of the common stock, and they generally have a special
claim on earnings, either before or after the payment of dividends to other stockholders.
Their participation in the assets of the corporation in the event of dissolution is usually
limited to the remaining assets after other stockholders have received the
amounts to
which they are entitled, according to the provisions of the respective issues. (E.L.
Kohler
ap. tit., p. 221.)
In the deliberation of the Batasang Pambansa on founders' shares, it was
the
consensus of the lawmakers that the SEC will have to take into account:... whether
those
persons to whom the prerogative or right is reserved have, shall we
say, contributed
substantially in the organization of the corporation or whether also the business
of the
corporation is of a character that is necessary for a period of time that is
control must be
to a certain loans or certain group of individuals. Otherwise,
it may not be able to obtain
certain concessions, certain loans or certain business because
these founders' shares may
not only serve to remunerate possible promoters...
because of the existence of a certain
group of individual who have perhaps special qualifications to
manage a corporation
by reason of which it is in their competence only that
other group with which
the corporation may be dealing and willing or aggregatecertain
to enter into transactions with
the corporation but only if the management of that
corporation
xxx." (Proceedings of the Batasang Pambansa, Nov. 12, 1979, is reserved to that group
cited in SEC Opinion, April
26, 1981.)
It is not clear whether founders' shares would retain
their character as such in case
they are transferred by their original owners.

Sec. 8

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

103

—

(2) Exclusive right to vote and be voted.
Where, however, the
exclusive right to vote and be voted for in the election of directors is
granted, such right must be for a limited period not exceeding five
(5) years from the date of incorporation.
(a) The SEC may approve or reject the grant of the exclusive
right having in mind as well the protection of the interests of
the corporation itself and the public if its exercise will violate
the Anti-Dummy Law, Foreign Investments Act, and other

pertinent laws.
(b) Section 7 provides an exception to the rule in Section 6
(par. 1.) that "no share may be deprived of voting rights except
those classified and issued as 'preferred' or 'redeemable shares,'
unless otherwise provided in this Code."
(c) The limitation in Section 7 refers only to the exclusive
right to vote and be voted for in the election of directors, a
right normally enjoyed by holders of common shares, the class
of shares which are supposed to have complete voting rights.
After the expiration of the limitation period, founders shall have
equal rights with the holders of common shares.
(d) Section 7 applies to a nonstock corporation. Thus, a
corporation cannot provide that only holders of founders' shares
may vote at any meeting of the members and be elected to the
board of directors for a period of five years "from and after the
formal turn-over of the project". (Forest Hills Golf and Country
Club, Inc. vs. Kings Properties Corp., G.R. No. 212833 (Notice),
(August 7, 2019].) The exclusive right to vote and be voted must
not exceed five (5) years from the date of incorporation.
Preferred shares are not affected by the provisions in Section
7. Their status remains even after expiration of the five-year
period. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 8, 1995.)
Sec. 8. Redeemable Shares. — Redeemable shares may
be Issued by the corporation when expressly provided in
the articles of incorporation. They are shares which may
be purchased by the corporation from the holders of such
shares upon the expiration of a fixed period, regardless
of the existence of unrestricted retained earnings in the
books of the corporation, and upon such other terms and
conditions stated in the articles of incorporation, and the

104

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 8

certificate of stock representing the shares, subject to
rules and regulations issued bv the Commission.
J

L •

Redeemable shares.

Redeemable or callable shares are shares, usually preferred, which
by their terms are redeemable at a fixed date or at the option of
either the issuing corporation or the stockholder or both at a certain
redemption price.1
(1) Meaning of redemption. It is the repurchase or reacquisition
of stock by a corporation which issued the stock in exchange for
cash or property, whether or not the acquired stock is cancelled,
retired or held in the treasury. Essentially, the corporation gets back
some of its stock, distributes cash or property to the shareholder,
and continues in business as before.
The redemption of stock dividends previously issued is
sometimes used by corporations as a veil for the constructive
distributions of cash dividends.2 (Comm, of Internal Revenue vs.
Court of Appeals, 301 SCRA 152 [1999].)
(2) When redeemable shares may be issued. Under Section 8, they
refer to shares issued by a corporation which said corporation may
purchase or take up from their holders upon the expiration of a fixed
period and upon such terms and conditions expressly provided in
the articles of incorporation and certificates of stock representing
said shares. They may be issued only when expressly so provided
in the articles of incorporation.
(3) Redemption regardless of existence of unrestricted retained
earnings. Upon the expiration of the period fixed, they may be
taken up or purchased by the corporation, regardless of the existence
of unrestricted earnings (see Sec. 42.) in the books of the corporation.
(a) The rule in Section 40 is different. The power of the
corporation to acquire its own shares for the purposes stated
therein is subject to the condition that there be unrestricted
retained earnings in its books to cover the shares purchased or
acquired. Section 3 (1) of the SEC Rules Governing Redeemable

—

—

—

‘Republic Planters Bank vs. Agana, Sr., 269 SCRA 1 (1997), ddng De Leon, The
Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 75 (1989 ed.].
’See “Tax treatment of stock dividends," under Sec. 42.

’•ri

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

105

and Treasury Shares (the "1982 Rules") also states that: "No
corporation shall redeem, repurchase or reacquire its own
shares, of whatever class, unless it has an adequate amount of
unrestricted retained earnings to support the cost of the said
shares. . ." Hence, the existence of unrestricted retained earnings
is required before a corporation can redeem its shares. (SECOGC Opinion No. 20-19, May 27, 2019.)
The requirement of unrestricted retained earnings to cover
the shares is based on the trust fund doctrine which means that
the capital stock, property and other assets of a corporation are
regarded as equity in trust for the payment of corporate creditors.
The rationale is that a corporation's creditors are preferred over
the stockholders. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 20-19, May 27, 2019.)
(b) In the case of redeemable shares, the shareholder is
conferred the right of a creditor to attract corporate financing.
The issuance of the shares may be likened to the issuance
of bonds or debt papers. Since the terms and conditions of
the purchase are in the articles of incorporation, and in the
corresponding certificates of stock, corporate creditors and
, other shareholders are supposed to know the same.
(c) Strict compliance with statutory or contractual
provisions of redemption is essential. The retirement of stock
by a corporation differs from a purchase by a corporation of its
own stock. It is said that the manner in which a duly authorized
plan for retiring stock is to be carried out is part of the corporate
business, and absent fraud or bad faith, is not subject to judicial
control, (see 11 Fletcher, pp. 381-382 [1971].)

—

(4) Where corporation insolvent.
Redeemable shares may
be redeemed regardless of the existence of unrestricted retained
earnings, provided that the corporation has, after such redemption,
assets in its books to cover debts and liabilities inclusive of capital
stock. (Sec. 5, par. 5, SEC Rules Governing Redeemable and
Treasury Shares.) Therefore, redemption may not be made where
the corporation is insolvent or if such redemption would cause
insolvency or inability of the corporation to meet its debts as they
mature. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 23, 1985; see SEC-OGC Opinion No.
2019, May 27, 2019.)

106

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 8
Sec 8

'' TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,

107

DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

Such a limitation is based on the principle that corporate assets
are a trust fund for creditors.3 (see Sec. 40.)
(5) Terms and conditions. Section 8 requires that all the terms
and conditions affecting such shares must be stated not only in
the articles of incorporation but also in the certificate of stock
representing said shares.
Provisions in the articles relating to the redemption of preferred
stock are, in effect, a contract between the issuing corporation and
the preferred stockholders and strict compliance thereof is essential.
Thus, the corporation cannot redeem its preferred shares before
the redemption period or at a discount price in contravention of
the articles of incorporation to improve its financial position. The
remedy is to amend the articles by changing the redemption features
of the preferred shares. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 23, 1985.)
(6) Redemption optional with corporation.
Except as otherwise
provided, the redemption rests entirely with the corporation, and
the stockholder is without right to either compel or refuse the
redemption of his stock, i.e., the payment of cash in exchange for
the stock. The redeemable shapes provided in Section 8 are of the
optional, not the obligatory type.4
(7) Maintenance of a sinking fund. For the protection of stock
holders, all corporations which have issued redeemable shares with
mandatory redemption features are required by the SEC to set up
and maintain a sinking fund where cash is gradually set aside in
order to accumulate the amount necessary to meet the redemption
price of redeemable shares at specified dates in the future.
The fund shall be deposited with a trustee bank and shall not be
invested in risky or speculative ventures, (see SEC Rules Governing
Redeemable and Treasury Shares, [CCP] No. 1-1982.)

—

—

—

’Republic Planters Bank vs. Agana, Sr., 269 SCRA 1 (1997), citing De Leon, p. 76,

note 19.

If the redemption would prejudice the rights of corporate creditors, the latter have
the right to question the same. In case of dissolution, holders of redeemable shares are
not entitled to any part of the corporate assets until corporate debts and liabilities are
fully paid. The rights should be deemed subordinate to the rights of corporate creditors.
The rule then is that redeemable shares may be redeemed, regardless of the existence of
unrestricted retained earnings, provided that after such redemption, the corporation has
sufficient assets in the books to cover its debts and liabilities inclusive of the capital stock.
*Ibid., citing De Leon, pp. 76-77, note 1.

—

(8) Purpose of redemption. Redemption is not a preference for
the benefit of the shareholders but a restriction to be exercised in
the discretion of the board of directors for the benefit of the owners
of the corporation, holders of common shares. It is a safeguard to
enable a corporation to retire an obligation or a claim on the earning,
usually at a premium when it becomes advisable for purposes of
financing.5 (Ballantine p. 509 [1946 ed.].)

Unless expressly provided in the articles of incorporation and
stated in the certificate of stock, preferred shares shall be deemed
irredeemable, (see SEC Opinion , Dec. 4, 1968.)

—

(9) Effect of redemption. A redemption by the corporation of its
stock is, in a sense, a repurchase of it for cancellation.6 The retirement
of a class of stock destroys all rights adhering to the shares of that
class. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 805.)
(a) In the case of redeemable shares reacquired by the
' corporation, the same shall be considered retired and no longer
issuable, unless otherwise provide in its articles of incorporation,
(see SEC Rules [CCP] No. 1-1982, supra.) The rule is different
with respect to treasury shares. (Infra.)

Upon redemption, redeemable shares lose their status
as part of the outstanding or unissued authorized capital
stock. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 20-19, May 27, 2019.)
(b) The treasury shares will not decrease the capital stock of
the corporation.’

(c) Where the reissuance of redeemed shares is prohibited
either expressly or impliedly by silence, the number of
authorized shares of the capital stock of the corporation is

sIt is generally held that a corporation may redeem its preferred stock only when it
is expressly authorized by law or has contractually reserved the right to do so, and that it
has no inherent power in this respect (Bowman v. Armour & Co, 17 HI 2d. 43.)

‘Ibid.
The redemption price usually includes the capital component at par or stated value
per share, and if dividends are cumulative, any arrearages to the redemption date as
the dividend component. Payment of an additional sum is frequently provided for as a
"premium component." (William L. Cary, Cases and Materials on Corporations, 1969 ed.

(University Case Book Seriesl, p. 1616.)
’SEC-OGC Opinion No. 20-18, May 27, 2018.

108

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 9

reduced accordingly, and the articles of incorporation must be
amended to reflect such reduction, (see Sec. 15.)
(10) Voting rights.
Redeemable shares may be deprived of
voting rights in the articles of incorporation, unless otherwise
provided in the Revised Corporation Code, (see Sec. 6, pars. 1, 3[ah].)

—

—

Sec. 9. Treasury Shares. Treasury shares are shares
of stock which have been issued and fully paid for, but
subsequently reacquired by the issuing corporation
through purchase, redemption, donation, or some other
lawful means. Such shares may again be disposed of fora
reasonable price fixed by the board of directors.

Sec.9

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASS IFICATIONS

109

liability of the corporation. They are, therefore, not a part of
outstanding capital stock, (see Sec. 173.) This is so because the
amount paid for acquiring treasury shares does not represent
return of capital to the stockholders but an investment out of
retained earnings on a salable property known as treasury
shares. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 16-16, June 27, 2016.)
(c) The acquisition of treasury shares does not reduce the
number of issued shares or the amount of stated capital and
their "sale" does not increase the number of issued shares or the
amount of stated capital. The redeemed shares (treasury shares)
are still part of the total shares of stocks issued to subscribers
or stockholders whether or not fully paid or partially paid but
no longer outstanding. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 16-16,’ June 27,

Treasury shares.

2016.)

Treasury shares are shares lawfully issued by the corporation
and fully paid for and later reacquired by the corporation either by
purchase, redemption, donation, forfeiture, or other lawful means.
(1) Status. Section 40 expressly empowers a stock corporation
to purchase or acquire its own shares for legitimate corporate
purposes. Only unrestricted retained earnings may be used for the
purchase of the corporation's own shares. Under Section 67 (last
par.), the corporation, absent a qualified bidder, may bid at the
public sale of delinquent shares and title to the shares purchased
shall be vested in the corporation as treasury shares.

(d) Treasury shares must be distinguished from the
authorized but unissued shares in that the acquisition of the
former does not reduce the number of issued shares or the
amount of stated capital stock and their sale does not increase
the number of issued shares or the amount of stated capital.
(SEC Opinion, Jan. 14, 1993, citing 11 Fletcher, chap. 58, sec.

—

(a) Treasury shares are not retired shares. They do not
revert to the unissued shares of the corporation but are regarded
as property acquired and owned by the corporation which
may be reissued or resold by the corporation. Being the owner
of the treasury shares, the corporation may opt to retire, sell,
or distribute as property dividends these shares. (SEC Rules
Governing Redeemable and Treasury Shares, [CCP] No. 1-1992;
see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 16-15, June 27, 2016; SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 6-12, April 20, 2012.)
(b) Treasury shares are issued shares but being in the
treasury (hence, the name), they do not have the status of
outstanding shares (Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. Manning,
66 SCRA 14 [1975].), in the sense that they do not constitute a

5088.)

—

(2) Disposition of treasury shares.
A treasury share or stock,
which may be common or preferred, may be used for a variety of
corporate purposes, such as for a stock bonus plan for management
and employees, or for acquiring another company. It may be held
indefinitely, resold or retired. While held in the company's treasury,
the stock earns no dividends and has no vote in company's affairs.
(Philippine Coconut Producers Federation, Inc. vs. Republic, 600

SCRA 102 [2009].)
(a) The corporation may, like any of its other properties, sell
or dispose the treasury shares for a reasonable price fixed by the
board of directors. Once sold or reissued, the treasury shares
again become outstanding stock and regain voting rights. (SECOGC Opinion No. 06-12, April 20, 2012.) The price paid out of
retained earnings for the value of reacquired shares should be
treated in the corporate books as payment of the purchase of the
’Citing De Leon, the Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 104 [2002],

no

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 9
Sec. 9

«1

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

shares and an investment on such property. (SEC Opinion, Feb.
20, 1991.)
(b) When stock has been issued and fully paid and

reacquired by the corporation to be disposed of for its benefits,
the corporation may dispose of the stock even at less than its
par value or acquisition cost, provided the price is reasonable,
as fixed by the board of directors. By "reasonable", it would
mean that if it is issued at less than the par value or issued value,
the consideration for their issuance plus whatever profit the
corporation made in their acquisition shall not be below their
par or issued value. Otherwise, they might still be classified as
watered stock. (SEC Opinion, October 1, 1982; SEC Opinion,
July 17, 1984.)
(c) A corporation may eliminate the treasury shares by
reducing its authorized capital stock (see Secs. 37, 56.). (SEC
Rules, CCP No. 1-1982.)
(d) Treasury shares, being unrealized income, are not
considered as part of earned or surplus profits, and therefore, not
distributable as dividends, either in cash or stock But if there are
retained earnings arising from the business of the corporation,
treasury shares, being the property of the corporation, may
properly be distributed as property dividend. (SEC Opinion,
Oct. 1, 1985; SEC-OGC Opinion 06-12, April 20, 2012.) In
sum, treasury shares are regarded as property owned by the
corporation and cannot be distributed as property dividends
among the stockholders absent unrestricted retained earnings
other than the amount equivalent to the cost of treasury shares,
because to do so would violate the trust fund doctrine. (SECOGC Opinion No. 06-12, April 20, 2012.)
In case of declaration of treasury shares as property dividends,
the corporation can only do so if the amount of the retained
earnings previously used to support their acquisition has not been
subsequently impaired by losses. Generally, a corporation can
reacquire its own shares for legitimate corporate purpose/s provided
it has sufficient amount of unrestricted retained earnings to support
the cost of the shares. The amount of such earnings equivalent to
the cost of the treasury shares being held cannot be declared and
distributed as dividends until the shares are reissued or retired. The
reason for this is that such amount of earnings equivalent to the cost

of treasury shares is not considered part of earned or surplus profits
that is distributable as dividends.

On the other hand, if there are retained earnings arising from
the business of the corporation other than the amount equivalent
to the cost of treasury shares, treasury shares, being property of
the corporation, may be distributed among the stockholders as
property dividends. Any declaration and issuance of treasury shares
as property dividend shall be disclosed and properly designated as
property dividend in the books of the corporation and in its financial
statements. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-12, April 20, 2012.)
(3) Where acquisition from stockholders. Shares may be acquired
by the corporation from stockholders by purchase, redemption, or
donation, or through some other lawful means.
(a) If the corporation acquires the shares by purchase from
stockholders, the transaction is, in effect, a return to them of the
value or the value of their investments in the company, and a
reversion of the shares to the corporation. It is required in such
cases, however, that the corporation must have surplus with
which to buy the shares so that the transaction will not impair
its capital, (see Sec. 40.)
(b) But if the share is donated to the corporation by the
stockholders, their act would simply amount to the surrender
of their stock without getting back their investments which are,
instead, voluntarily given to the corporation.
In both kinds of acquisition of the corporation, therefore, the
shares would have value but because they have been acquired
by the corporation, they would cease to represent any right. (SEC
Opinion, Nov. 22, 1966.) Treasury shares are recorded at cost.
(4) Dividend restriction on retained earnings.
As a rule, a
corporation can reacquire its own shares provided it has an adequate
amount of unrestricted retained earnings to support the cost of the
said shares.2 Thus, the capital stock is preserved.
The amount of such earnings equivalent to the cost of the
treasury shares being held, cannot be declared and distributed as
dividends. Such restriction shall be lifted only after the treasury

—

—

’For exceptions to this rule, see note under Sec 40.

112

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 9

shares are reissued or retired in accordance with law. (SEC Rules,
CCP No. 1-1982.)
(5) Voting rights.
Treasury shares have no voting rights as
long as they remain in the treasury (Sec. 56.), i.e., uncancelled and
subject to reissue. A corporation cannot in any proper sense be a
stockholder in itself, and shares of its own stock, therefore, held
by it cannot be voted or be entitled to vote, for otherwise, equal
distribution of voting powers among stockholders will be effectively
lost and the directors will be able to perpetuate their control of the
corporation. (Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. Manning, supra; San
Miguel Corporation vs. Sandiganbayan, 340 SCRA 289 [2000].)
(6) Right to dividends.
Neither are treasury shares entitled
to dividends or assets because dividends cannot be declared by a
corporation to itself. (Ibid.) Such distribution of dividends would be
like making the corporation debtor and creditor of the same amount
at the same time3 or requiring it to take money or stock from one
of its pockets and putting the same in another, which would be
pointless. Hence, stock dividend (see Sec. 42.) may not be declared
on treasury stock even on the express condition that such dividend
shall also be treated as treasury stock.4 (SEC Opinion, Nov. 2, 1966.)
(7) Resale. They may be sold by the corporation at any price
the board of directors sees fit to accept, even at less than par or
issued value, the corporation having already received the full value
upon their initial issuance, provided such price is reasonable under
the circumstances:
(a) Stockholders may rightfully complain if the price is
lower than reasonable.
(b) In case of sale or reissue, the treasury shares again
becomes outstanding stock and regain whatever dividends and
voting rights they originally held.

—

Sec. 9

.

TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS

«3

(c) Treasury shares differ from retired or cancelled shares in
that while the latter has disappeared altogether, the former may
be sold. Section 35(f) expressly authorizes stock corporations to
sell treasury shares subject to the provisions of Section 9.s Their
status on resale differs from that of newly created shares which
cannot be issued for less than the legal minimum consideration,
(see Sec. 61.)

— —
oOo

—

—

’Art. 1275. The obligation is extinguished from the time the characters of creditor
and debtor are merged in the same person. (Civil Code)
‘"So, what rights, if any, remain? Perhaps the right of the corporation to reissue
its treasury shares for a valuable consideration it its charter permits but this is a mere
incident of incorporation which is applicable to unissued as well as to issued share xxx'
(Ballantine, p. 615 [ 1946).) Treasury shares are no longer part of the "outstanding capital
stock, (see Sec. 173.)

’There has been considerable discussion among accountants, and some shifting of
opinions, as to the proper accounting treatment of purchases of shares for the treasury.
Such shares are not, in fact, a corporate asset. When they are acquired out of surplus, it
seems clear, particularly in states in which their acquisition out of capital is illegal, that
the surplus should be reduced or earmarked as restricted to the extent of the amount paid
for the shares. But the restriction may be lifted and the surplus restored, even as earned
surplus, if thereafter the treasury shares are resold (to the extent the amount received
covers that has been paid to reacquire them), or if the shares are retired. (William I. Cary,
op. at., p. 1615.)

i

Title II

INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS
Sec. 10. Number and Qualifications of Incorporators.
Any person partnership, association or corporation,
singly or jointly with others, but not more than fifteen
(15), in number, mav organize a corporation for any lawful
purpose or purposes: Provided, That natural persons who
are licensed to practice a profession, and partnerships
or associations organized for the purpose of practicing
a profession, shall not be allowed to organize as a

—

corporation unless otherwise provided under special laws.
Incorporators who are natural persons must be of legal
age,

Each Incorporator of a stock corporation must own
or be a subscriber to at least one (1) share of the capital
stock.
A corporation with a single stockholder is considered a
One Person Corporation as described in Title XIII, Chapter
III of this Code. (N)

Incorporation of a private corporation
a mere privilege.

Generally, incorporation is generated by agreements of a group
of persons, and may, therefore, be likened to other contracts which
individuals may enter into. But such agreements alone are not
sufficient for a corporation to exist. It is necessary that legislative
authority be obtained to put a stamp of state intervention in
the creation of corporations, such power being one attribute of
sovereignty. (18 C.J.S. 404.)

114

Sec 10

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

115

In our jurisdiction, the right to be and act as a corporation does
not belong to any person as a natural and civil right, but as a special
privilege conferred upon a group of persons by the sovereign power
of the State. Until there is a grant of such right, therefore, whether
by special act of the legislature or under general law, there can be no
corporation. Under Section 10, the formation of a corporation "for
any lawful purpose or purposes," provided it is in accordance with
the Revised Corporation Code, is a matter of right and cannot be
restrained, (see Sec. 17.)
Since a corporation is merely a creation of law, it can be dissolved
at any time by legislative enactment subject to certain limitations,
(see Sec. 184.1.)
Advantages of the corporate form.

The advantages of incorporation are so well understood
that it seems almost superfluous to enumerate them, (see Sec.
2.) Nevertheless, it may be useful to mention here only its chief
advantages as stated by a well-known authority.
First, through the process of incorporation, several persons may
unite in a single enterprise without using their own names, without
difficulty or inconvenience, and with the valuable right to contract,
to sue and be sued, to hold or convey property in the corporate
name, and to act as a legal unit.
Second, an individual stockholder may invest in the corporate
enterprise as much or as little as he sees fit, without risking more,
and absent statutes to the contrary, this is the limit of his liability,
since stockholders are not personally liable for the debts of the
corporation. They can transfer their shares without the consent of
the other stockholders.
Third, the rights and obligations of a corporation are not
affected by the death or change of the individual members, but the
corporate business continues uninterrupted and unaffected so long
as die corporate entity continues. Its credit is strengthened by such
continuity of existence.

Fourth, the modem corporation makes great undertakings
feasible since it enables many individuals to corporate to furnish
the large amounts of capital necessary to finance the gigantic

116

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 10

enterprises of modem times, (see 1 Fletcher, p. 42.) The resulting
large-scale enterprise may be more efficient, thus lowering the costs
of production. (C.L. James, Principles of Economics, supra, p. 46.)
Corporations and associations distinguished.
(1) Concept of association. A corporation is defined by Section
2 of the Revised Corporation Code. The word "association'' is one of
vague meaning, used to indicate a collection of persons who have
joined together for a certain object. The term is properly applied to
an unincorporated society or body of individuals, formed for moral,
benevolent, social patriotic, or political purposes. (5 Am. Jur. 2d 430431.)

—

—

(2) Possession of juridical personality.
While an association
may, in its broadest sense, include a corporation, the two (2) terms

ordinarily are used to denote different conceptions. The principal
distinction lies in the fact that a corporation is a legal entity deriving
its existence from franchise, whereas an association, in the narrower
separate from the individuals composing it. (7 C.J.S. 21.)
It is clear from the foregoing that the two (2) terms, "corporation"
and "association," denote two (2) different significations in the strict
legal sense.

—

(3) Governing law.
Private corporations are governed by
the Revised Corporation Code, while associations are generally
governed by the Civil Code or some other laws. (SEC Opinion,
July 27, 1962.) Article 45 of the Civil Code provides that "private
corporations are regulated by laws of general application on the
subject; while partnerships and associations for private purposes are
governed by the provisions of this Code concerning partnerships."

—

(4) Capacity to act in its name. Article 46 of the Civil Code also
provides; "Juridical persons may acquire and possess property to all
kinds as well as incur obligations and bring civil or criminal actions
in conformity with the laws and regulations of their organization."
Thus, an association cannot sue or be sued, it cannot enter into
contracts in the name of the association, and neither can it acquire
properties under its common name. Contracts entered into in its
behalf make the person signing or executing them liable to the other
contracting party. (SEC Opinion, July 23, 1990.)

I

Sec. 10

title n. incorporation and organization
of private corporations

117

An association is not competent to act as agent or create agents
or confer upon another authority to act on its behalf, and those who
act or purport to act as its representatives or agents do so at their
own risk. (Vda. de Salvatierra vs. Garlitos, 103 Phil. 757 [1958].)
(5) Validity and enforcement of acts.
The fact, however, that
a group of persons adopt a name and operate without first being
organized as a legal entity, does not make their acts necessarily void.
Their acts may be valid, although unenforceable under the name
they have adopted. If a suit is to be brought to enforce their rights,
they have to sue as individuals and not in the name of the group or
association, if not being a legal unit, (see Rules of Court, Rule 3, Sec.

—

15.)

Although an association has no juridical personality, its
subscription to the capital stock of a corporation is not necessarily
invalid. The subscription should not be taken and accepted under
such name. (SEC Opinion, March 11, 1969.)
(6) Powers, rights and privileges.
A society or association
not engaged in business and not desirous of acquiring juridical
personality need not be registered with the SEC. (SEC Opinion,
Aug. 22, 1989.) An unregistered organization, however, cannot
exercise the powers, rights, and privileges incident to incorporation
and expressly granted to registered corporations under Section 35 of
the Revised Corporation Code.
(7) Policy of juridical non-interference. The general rule is that
courts will not interfere with the internal affairs of an unincorporated
association so as to settle disputes between the members on
questions of policy, discipline, or internal government. (Lions Clubs
International vs. Amores, 121 SCRA 621 [1983].)

—

—

Concept of franchise.

In common usage, the term "franchise" includes any special
privilege or right affected with public interest, conferred by the State
or corporations or persons and which does not belong to the citizens
of the country, generally as a matter of common right, (see J.R.S.
Business Corp. vs. Imperial Insurance, Inc., 11 SCRA 634 [1964];
National Power Corporation vs. City of Cabanatuan, 401 SCRA 259
[2003].) To illustrate:
(1) No persons can make themselves a body corporate without
legislative authority. The right to exist, therefore, as a corporation

118

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 10
Sec. 10

is a (primary or corporate) franchise. No person can take another's
property even for public use, without such authority, which is the
same as to say that the right of eminent domain can only be exercised
by virtue of a legislative grant. This right of eminent domain is a

(secondary or special) franchise.
(2) As a privilege, a franchise is not exercised by private
individuals at their mere will and pleasure only but under such
conditions, regulations, and restrictions as the government may
deem necessary to impose in the public interest, security and safety.
Primary franchise and secondary franchise
defined and distinguished.

For practical purposes, franchise, so for as relating to
corporations, have been divided into two (2) kinds:
(1) Primary or corporate franchise is the right or privilege granted
to individuals by the State to be and act as a corporation after its
incorporation. This privilege, which is granted to the incorporators,
enables them to act for certain designated purposes as a single
individual and exempts them, unless otherwise especially provided,
from individual liability for corporate debts. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 608-

609.)

The primary franchise (also called "general franchise") is granted
to and vests in the individuals who compose the corporation and
not in the corporation itself.
(2) The right to exist as a corporation is thus distinguished
from the franchise to exercise powers and privileges granted to
such corporation to the business for which it was created, including
those conferred for purposes of public benefit such as the power of
eminent domain and other powers and privileges enjoyed by public
utilities, which is called secondary or special franchise.'

'Only quasi-public corporations or those affected with public interest are given
the power to institute condemnation proceedings against owners of private property.
It is unlawful to grant the right of eminent domain to purely private entities, exercising
functions which are not public in nature. For in such cases, they would be using the right

to take property for private use. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 28, 1968.)

i

119

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

The secondary franchise is conferred upon the corporation
after its incorporation and not the individuals who compose the
corporation.2
Transferability of franchise.
The term "franchise" is generic, covering all the rights granted
by the State. It may mean either the corporate or primary franchise
which is the right granted to a group of individuals to exist and
act as a corporation, or the secondary or special franchise which is
the right granted to a corporation to exercise certain powers and

privileges. (Supra.)
(1) The primary franchise is in its nature inalienable. It is part
of the corporation and cannot be sold or assigned; otherwise, a
corporation would be created without the consent of the legislature.
(Memphis, etc., RRC v. Railroad Comrs., 112 U.S. 609, 28 L. ed. 837.)
It may be conveyed provided there is express legislative authority
to do so. (J.R.S. vs. Imperial Insurance Co., Inc., 11 SCRA 634 [1964].)
(2) The secondary franchise, which is vested in the corporation
itself, may ordinarily be conveyed or mortgaged under a general
power granted to a corporation to dispose of its property, except
such franchises as are charged with a public used. (Ibid.)
(a) If the corporation is a public utility, its franchise can be
sold only subject to the prior approval and authorization of the
(now defunct) Public Service Commission. (Act No. 156, Sec.
20[g], as amended.)1
tr

...
• »1

.

.

J

,

2It has been held by the Supreme Court that the term "franchise" used in the
1935 Constitution of the Philippines that "no franchise, certificate or any other form of
authorization for the operation of a public utility shall be granted except to corporations
or other entities organized under the la ws of the Philippines sixty per centum of the capital
of which is owned by citizens of the Philippines..." (Art. XIV, Sec. 5 thereof, now Art
XII, Sec. 11.), refers to secondary franchise or the privilege to operate as a
public utility
after the corporation has already come into being. The Constitution does not prohibit
the mere formation of a public utility corporation without the required proportion of
capital. What it does prohibit in the granting of a franchise or other form of authorization
for the operation of a public utility for a corporation already in existence but
without
the requisite proportion of Filipino capital. (People vs. Quasha, 93 Phil. 333 (1935).) This
ruling must be qualified in view of Sec. 17(4). (Infra.)
3It has been held that even if the franchise is sold under execution, such approval
of the Public Service Commission is still necessary. (Raymundo vs. Luneta
Motor Co.,
58 Phil. 880 [1973].) Absent such approval in the transfer of the property
covered by the
franchise, the transferor or grantee continues to be responsible under the
franchise in

120

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 10

(b) A secondary franchise is subject to levy and sale on
execution, with all the property necessary for the enjoyment
thereof. However, where the judgment does not contain any
special decree making the franchise of a private corporation
answerable for its judgment debt, the inclusion of said

corporation's franchise (e.g., to operate a messenger as delivery
service), trade name and capital stocks in the execution sale of
its properties has no justification and such sale should be set
aside insofar as it authorizes such levy and sale? (J.R.S. Business
Corp. vs. Imperial Insurance, Inc., supra.)

*
There are three (3) steps in the creation and organization of a
corporation, namely;
Steps in creating a corporation.

• J1

(1) Promotion;

(2) Incorporation (Sec. 18.); and
(3) Formal organization and commencement of business
operations, (see Sec. 22.)
I

II

Promotion of corporations.

The term "promotion" is said to be not a legal but a business
term, usefully summing up in a single word, a number of business
operations peculiar to the commercial world by which a company is
generally brought into existence. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 647.)
The formation and organization of a corporation are brought
about generally at the instance and under the supervision of one
or more so-called "promoters." (see Sec. 4.) The activity by such
persons is not, strictly speaking, a formal part of the organization
of a corporation, because it occurs outside the corporate form
and theoretically, at least, independent thereof. (Ibid.) Upon
relation to the SEC and to the public. The transferee holds the property as agent for the
registered owner as far as the law is concerned. ("Y" Transit Co., Inc vs. National Labor
Relations SEC, 229 SCRA 508 (1994].)
‘Under the former Corporation Law (Act No. 1459, as amended.), voluntary transfer
of franchise is not permitted. Secs. 51 to 61 of the law refer to forced or involuntary
transfer or sale of secondary franchise under execution. But the sale must be "especially
decreed and ordered in the judgment" of the court and "confirmed by the court after due
notice." (Sec. 56 thereof.)

121

TITLE D. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

Sec. 10

incorporation, the practice is for the board of directors to pass a
resolution ratifying the contracts entered into by the incorporators
with the promoters.
A corporation, however, may be formed and organized by the
incorporators themselves without getting the services of so-called

promoters.

• ,I

I

•I -

- r» .

*

I

Promoters of corporation.

Apromoter of a corporation is one who, alone or with others takes
it upon himself to organize a corporation to procure the necessary
legislation, where that is necessary; to procure the necessary
subscribers to the articles of incorporation, where the corporation is
organized under general laws; to see that the necessary document
is presented to the proper office to be recorded and the certificate
of incorporation issued; and generally, to "float the company."5 (18
C.J.S. 521-522.)

They are the agents of the incorporators.
Stages in corporate promotion.
A corporate promotion is said to include three (3) stages, to wit-.

—

(1) Discovery.
This stage may represent a new product or
service, or the promoter may simply organize another company in
an existing line of business;

—

—

(2) Investigation.
This second phase involves an analysis of
needs financial, management, plant, material and labor and a
decision whether the estimated earnings justify the effort; and
(3) Assembly.
This last stage consists of bringing together
the property, money, and personnel into an organization. At this
stage, the promoter must have some assurance of control lest third
parties deprive him of the fruits of his efforts. Control may cover
such items, for example, as patents, leases, options on property, and
contracts for services.

—

—

’Promoter are often referred to especially in the English cases, as "projectors,"
"agents," "stewards," or "trustees," but whatever term is applied, it means "one who
acts in the formation, establishment, and control of a company prior to the
incorporation
and the assumption of control by the board of directors." (Ibid.)

122

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 10

Sea 10

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION

123

OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

The above is a description of the promoter in the economic sense.
At law, promoter problems arise in several contexts. For example,
the extent of his rewards and the manner of obtaining them may
sometimes be subject to question. (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials
on Corporations, 1969 ed. [University Case Book Series], p. 86.)
Nature of relations of promoters.
(1) To corporation.
A promoter has a unique relation to a
corporation representing its interest when it does not legally exist
or has just been created.

—

(a) The promoters of a corporation are not in any sense the
agents of the corporation before it comes into existence, for there
cannot be an agency unless there is a principal. But they may
become the agents of the corporation after it has been formed
provided there is assent, express or implied, by the corporation.
(18 C.J.S. 522.)
(b) Although promoters cannot occupy the relation of agent
of the corporation before its formation, and although they are
not trustees in the proper sense, they occupy a fiduciary or quasi¬
trust relation towards the subscribers before its organization, as
long as they are acting as promoters. (Ibid.)

(c) This fiduciary relation imposes upon the promoters to
act in good faith in all dealings in behalf of the corporation to
protect the corporation from dishonest promoters. A promoter
violates this duty if, for example, he secretly acquires property
which he knows the corporation will acquire and them sells it to
the corporation at a secret profit.
(2) To subscribers or corporators.
Although promoters of a
corporation cannot be agents of the corporation before it is formed,
they may be agents of the subscribers or corporators.
(a) Since agency is a contract, it is essential there is an
agreement to this effect.

—

(b) Even when there is no agency, the relation between

the promoters and the persons who have become, or who
are expected to become, subscribers for its capital stock, or
corporators, or purchasers of stock from the corporation, is one
of trust and confidence, so as to impose upon the former the

l

duty to act in perfect good faith and in the interest of all the
subscribers and corporators.
(c) Subscribers for stock in a proposed corporation do not,
without agreement to such effect, become partners with the
promoters of it. (14 C.J. 254.)
(d) Stockholders of corporation cannot be held personally
liable for the compensation claimed by promoters for services
performed by them in the organization of the corporation absent
any showing that said stockholders contracted such services.
That they benefited from such services is no justification to hold
them personally liable therefore. The corporation should alone
be liable for its corporate acts as duly authorized by its officers
and directors. (Caram, Jr. vs. Court of Appeals, 151 SCRA 372
[1987].)

(3) Inter me.

—

A partnership can be created, as between the
parties themselves, only by agreement, and, therefore, promoters do
not become partners as between themselves, absent such agreement,
by merely joining in an attempt to create a corporation, by uniting
in subscriptions for stock, or by otherwise promoting the creation of
the corporation. But such a relation may be created by agreement of
the parties, in which case it is governed by the general principles of
the law of partnership.4 (14 C.J. 254.)
Liability of corporation for promotion
fees.
(1) Genera! rule.
In the absence of character or statutory
provisions, a corporation is not liable to its promoters in respect
for any payment in services rendered or expense incurred before
its incorporation in promoting it, unless after its incorporation it
expressly agrees to make such payment or from the other facts the
court can infer a new contract to reimburse.

—

‘It is however, unimportant to determine whether the relationship is a partnership
or a mere joint venture since in both cases, the legal rules which apply and the principles
which govern the parties are the same. Each member is bound to the same scrupulous
good faith toward his fellow members as through all were partners, and each has the
right to demand from the others the utmost good faith in everything concerning the
common interest. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 676.)

124

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 10

(a) It is more reasonable to hold services performed or
expenses incurred before organization of a corporation to have
been gratuitous because of the general good or private benefit
expected to result from the object of the corporation, and because
it is unjust to stockholders who subscribe and pay for stock, that
their property be subject to claims for which they have no voice
in creating.
(b) It is a fraud for promoters to undertake to decide for the
future stockholders in the corporation to be organized that a large
part of the capital stock is a fair remuneration for their services,
to issue that amount to themselves as such remuneration, and
then to invite the public to subscribe to stock without disclosing
that fact and getting the subscribers consent to the payment of
that remuneration. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 649.)

—

(2) Authorization by stockholders.
After due organization of
the corporation, it may, with the consent of all its stockholders
and where there is no question as to the rights of subsequent
stockholders, authorize the payment of compensation to promoters
and the issuance to them of stock unless prohibited by statute. (Ibid.)
(3) Amount.
The amount of promotion fees that the SEC
allows depends principally upon the effort exerted, the difficulties
encountered, and the expenses incurred in promoting and organizing
the corporation.7 There is no hard and fast rule. However, where
the SEC had authorized the payment of promotion fees of mining
companies, the maximum fee allowed did not exceed 5% of the
amount paid and received on the subscriptions.

—

Liability of corporation on promoter’s
contracts.
(1) Before incorporation and organization.
Until the certificate
of incorporation had been issued by the SEC (see Sec. 19.), a
corporation has no being, franchise, or faculties. Its promoters or
those engaged in bringing it into existence are in no sense identical
with the corporation; nor do they represent it in any relation of
agency or have any authority to enter into preliminary contracts
binding upon the corporation. Therefore, since a corporation

—

’As a rule, this promotion fee is not given in lump sum but in stages as the company
proceeds in its operations. (SEC Opinions, July 10, 1963 and July 22, 1970.)

Sec. 10

TITLE U. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

125

cannot, before its organization, have agents contract for itself, or be
contracted with, it is not liable upon any contract which a promoter
attempts to make for it before its organization unless the contract is
expressly or impliedly adopted or ratified by it after organization is
completed or liability is imposed by statute.

A promoter's contract does not, by the incorporation of a
contemplated company, ipso facto become the contract of the
corporation.
(2) After incorporation and organization.
Under the general
rule permitting a corporation to assume liability on a promoter's
contract, the contract must be one such as the corporation can itself
make. A corporation as a legal entity cannot assume the obligations
of an ultra vires contract (see Sec. 45.) made by its promoters anymore
than it can legally initiate such contract. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 600-601; see
Cagayan Fishing Dev. Co., Inc. vs. Sandiko, 65 Phil. 223 [1937].)
Until such assumption of liability is made, the better rule seems
to be that contracts entered into by promoters "should at most be
deemed suspended, and enforceable only after the incorporation
and organization" of the corporation, (see C.G. Alvendia, op. cit., p.

—

135.)

Liability of promoters for failure
to organize corporation.

—

(1) To subscribers. If money is paid to promoters or provisional
directors by a subscriber for shares in a projected corporation
preliminary to organization, and the promoters or provisional
directors fail to organize the corporation according to the prospectus
or other agreement or abandon the enterprise before it has been
carried into execution, it is a case of money paid on a consideration
which has failed. The subscriber may, therefore, recover it back from
the promoters or directors in an action at law although the money
has been applied in payment of preliminary expenses or otherwise?

(18 C.J.S. 537.)

•Where, however, the subscriber agrees that the amount paid on his subscription
may be applied on certain promotional or development expenses and it is so applied, the
promoters are not personally liable for the amount paid on the subscription where
the
project to organize the corporation is abandoned. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 660.)

126

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 10

It must be shown by the subscriber that the person receiving
the money sought to be recovered to receive it for the promoters or
provisional directors or for the abortive corporation, and that he in
fact did so receive it. (14 C.J. 276.)

—

(2) To each other.
While it has been held that as between
themselves the rights of the stockholders in a defectively incorporated
association should be governed by the laws of the State relating
thereto and not by the rules governing partners, it is ordinarily held
that persons who attempt, but fail, to form a corporation and who
carry on business under the corporate name, occupy the position of
partners inter se. (see Secs. 21-22.)
But such a relation should be implied only to do justice between
the parties. So, one who takes no part except to subscribe for stock
in a proposed corporation never legally formed does not become
a partner with the other subscribers. (Pioneer Insurance & Surety
Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 175 SCRA 668 [1989].)

Underwriting agreements.

Underwriting agreements are now resorted to generally to float
stock issues of large corporations.
There are four (4) general types of underwriting contract.
First, the syndicate’ may make a firm commitment under which
the members severally but not jointly agree to purchase the whole
issue outright at a particular price for resale at a price different to
the public, or to dealers who sell at another differential to the public.
Second, the underwriters may make an all-or-nothing commitment
under which they agree to accept liability for the purchase of an
issue at a given price only if the entire issue is not sold
usually
within a 30-day period.
Third, the syndicate may make a standby commitment or
rights offering under which it will purchase and distribute at
predetermined prices to the public any amount of the issue not
taken by stockholders in exercising their preemptive rights.

—

’Underwriting syndicate is the term used to refer to a group of investment bankers
who have pooled their resources to share in the profits of an underwriting on a pro rata
basis according to the amount of underwriting risk assumed. (Ibid., p. 64.) The contract
may be entered into by the underwriter or underwriters with the corporation or with the
promoter before incorporation.

Sec 10

127

TITLE IL INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

Fourth, the underwriters may make only a best efforts commitment.
This merely means that the syndicate will use its best efforts to
distribute the issue to the public. Under such commitment the
syndicate does not agree to purchase the issue at predetermined
prices. The security is sold for whatever price it will bring, the
underwriters take a predetermined spread, and the issues take the
residual. Under a variation of this agreement, there may be a fixed
price but no guarantee on the quantity sold.'0 (see J. Zwick & N.
Norton, "Investment Banking and Underwriting," in The Stock
Market Handbook, edited by F. Zarb & G. Kerekes, Vol. 1, 1970 ed.,

p. 65.)
I

Incorporation distinguished from
creation.

•'

The term “incorporation" is narrower in scope than the term
"creation."
The first "refers to the performance of conditions, acts, deeds,
and writing by incorporators, and the official acts, certifications or
records which give the corporation its existence."
But the second, "understood in its broadest sense, includes all of
the acts and doings from the enactment of the general incorporation
law by the legislature through the promotion, underwriting,
preparation and execution and filing of the incorporation papers
and obtaining the certificate of charter, to the organization and
first meeting and election which set the corporation in motion fullpledged." (C.G. Alvendia, op. cit., p. 73.)

Incorporation distinguished from
corporation.
A corporation is a civil institution established by a law of the
State from considerations of public policy. Its existence, its capacities
and its powers are all conferred by law from some real or supposed
public benefit to result from it. It is a political institution of the State.

'The term “underwriting” is defined under the Investment Houses Law (RD. Na
129.) as "the act or process of guaranteeing the distribution and sale of
securities of any
kind issued by another corporation." (Sec. 3[a] thereof.)

128

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 10

Sec. io

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION

129

OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

The words "corporation" and "incorporation" are frequently
confounded, particularly in the old books. The distinction between
them is, however, obvious: one is a legal or juridical institution;
the other, only the act by which that institution is created. When
a corporation is said to be a person, it is understood to be so only
in certain respects and for certain purposes, for it is strictly a legal
institution, (see 9-A Words and Phrases 453.)
I

Steps in Incorporation.

Incorporation includes:
(1) Drafting and execution of the articles of incorporation by
the incorporators and other documents required for registration of
the corporation.
(a) The incorporators will file the articles of incorporation
(in the form prescribed by Section 14) and other incoporation
document with the SEC. The documents may be in the form of
electronic documents. (Sec. 13, last par.)
(b) If the proposed corporation is governed by a special
law (e.g., educational institution), the incorporation documents
must include a favorable recommendation of the appropriate
government agency (i.e., Department of Education) that such
articles of incorporation is in accordance with law (see Sec. 16,
last par.);
(2) Payment of the registration, incorporation, and other fees
(see Sec. 175.); and
>
(3) The issuance by the SEC of the certificate of incorporation if
all the papers filed after verification and examination are found in
order, (see Sec. 18, par. 2.)
There are rules or requirements under special laws to be
complied with in organizing specific business. (Sec. 16, last par.)

.

The Revised Corporation Code does not prohibit the formation
or organization of corporations with the same stockholders/
incorporators, subject to Section 176.
Substantial compliance with requirements.
(1) Corporations governed by Revised Corporation Code.
Where
the formation or organization of corporations is not governed

—

by special laws (e.g., those engaged in real estate development),
the SEC may accept and approve the articles of incorporation or
amendments upon mere showing of a substantial compliance with
the Revised Corporation Code (SEC Opinion, Oct. 12, 1988.) and
that it meets the guidelines established by the SEC. (SEC Opinion,

June 19, 1989.)

—

(2) Necessary to legal incorporation.
It is a general principle
that substantial compliance with the requirements of the statute
authorizing the formation of corporations is all that is necessary
to legal incorporation and to the existence of a corporation. Thus,
Section 13 requires that articles of incorporation shall contain
"substantially7' the matters enumerated, "except as otherwise
provided by this Code or by special law," while Section 14 provides
that the articles of incorporation shall comply "substantially" with
the form prescribed. Section 16(1) likewise requires substantial
compliance with the form prescribed in the Revised Corporation
Code relative to the approval of articles of incorporation and any
amendment thereto. (Ibid.)
(3) Registration of proposed corporation becomes a matter of right.
Where there is substantial compliance with the legal requirements,
the registration of the proposed corporation becomes a matter of
right.

—

Number of Incorporators.

For the purpose of forming a new domestic corporation under
the Revised Corporation Code, not more than 15 persons may
organize themselves and form a corporation.
Only a One Person Corporation (OPC) may have a single
stockholder and a sole director. Its registration must comply with
the corresponding separate guidelines on the establishment of an
OPC. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019.)
Qualifications of incorporators.

Incorporators are those stockholders or members mentioned in
the articles of incorporation as originally forming and composing
the corporation, and who are signatories thereof.11
"See Appendix A: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019 (Guidelines on the
Number and Qualifications of Incorporations under the Revised Corporation Code).

130

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 10

(1) Each incorporator of a stock corporation must own, or be
a subscriber to, at least one (1) share of the capital stock.12 Each
incorporator of a nonstock corporation must be a member of the

corporation.
(2) The incorporators may be any combination of natural
person /s, SEC-registered partnerships,” SEC-registered domestic
corporation / s or association/ s, and foreign corporations,

partnerships, and associations.
(3) Incorporators who are natural persons must be of legal age,
and must sign the articles of incorporation /bylaws.'4 (Ibid.)
l2Benefidal ownership is unnecessary and a person who holds the legal title to stock
is qualified to become an incorporator. The law permits a scheme by which all the shares
are owned by a single individual. The validity of the incorporation is not affected by the
fact that it is formed in the interest of a single individual and that the other persons are
under his control, without any substantial interest, or without individual responsibility
who may only be called "qualifying stockholders," or who are popularly known as
dummies or "men of straw." Nor is the existence of the corporation originally formed by
the required number of incorporators affected by the subsequent accumulation of all the
shares in the hands of one individual (18 C.J.S. 415-416.), unless circumstances exist to
justify the piercing of the veil of corporate entity, (see Sec. 2.)
’’Under the old rule, only natural persons can be incorporators. Now, any "person,
partnership, association or corporation, singly or jointly, with others can be incorporators.
Since there is no more minimum limit to the number of directors, a corporation can have
only one (1) director if its articles of incorporation so provide.
In any case, a corporation may become a stockholder in another corporation by
subscribing to or purchasing the latter's stock, (see Sec 35(g).), for the power of one
corporation to own stock in another corporation is entirely different from its power to
create or itself become one of the incorporators of another corporation, (see 18 C.J.S.
414.) However, as a practical matter, a corporation could have stockholders directors,
or officers, acting as individuals, organize a new corporation and thereafter the first
corporation could acquire the stock of the new corporation. (15 Am. Jur. 2d 584.)
l4The incorporators are presumed to have the capacity to enter into a valid contract, the
act of forming a corporation as between the parties being contractual, although there is
no more requirement that the incorporators must be qualified to enter into a contract. The
purpose of its requirements in Sections 13 and 15 is to secure the State and all concerned
against the possibility of any fictitious name being subscribed to the articles and to
furnish proof of the genuineness of the signatures.
A married woman may be an incorporator without the need of containing the
consent or her husband since under the law, "either spouse may exerdse any legitimate
profession, occupation, business or activity without the consent of the other" subject to
the right of the husband to "object only on valid, serious and moral grounds." (Art. 73,
Family Code.) A minor who is emancipated either by marriage or by voluntary concession
of the parents is not qualified to be an incorporator because Section 10 requires that the
incorporators must be "all of legal age." Article 236 of the Family Code (E.O. No. 209,
July 6, 1987.), however, provides: "Emancipation for any cause shall terminate parental
authority over the person and property of the child who shall then be qualified and
responsible for all acts of civil life." The Corporation Code is a special law. The Family
Code, however, has reduced the majority age to 18 years. (Art. 234.)

Sec. 10

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

131

(4) Natural persons licensed to practice a profession, and
partnerships or associations organized to practice a profession, are
not allowed to organize as a corporation unless otherwise provided
under special laws. (Sec. 10.)

The usual practice is for the incorporators to serve as first
directors of the corporation.

Juridical persons as incorporators.

—

(1) Partnerships.
In the event that an SEC-recorded
partnership is made an incorporator, the application for registration

must be accompanied by a Partners' Affidavit, duly executed by all
the partners, to the effect that they have authorized the partnership
to invest in the corporation about to be formed and that they have
designated one partner to become a signatory to the incorporation
document. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019.) Ln effect, the
SEC seems to require that the partners unanimously approve the act
of the partnership in being an incorporator. This should not be the
case if the articles of partnership do not require a unanimous vote of
the partners.

Partnerships under "dissolved" or "expired" status with the
SEC shall not be authorized to become an incorporator. (SEC Memo.
Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019.)

—

(2) Domestic corporations or associations.
In the event that
ah SEC-registered domestic corporation or association is made
an incorporator, its investment in the new corporation must be
approved by a majority of the board of directors or trustees and
ratified by the stockholders representing at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the outstanding capital stock, or by at least (2/3) of the members
in the case of nonstock corporations, at a meeting duly called for
the purpose. A Directors' /Trustees' Certificate or a Secretary's
Certificate, indicating the necessary approvals, and the authorized
signatory to the incorporation document, shall be executed under
oath and submitted by the applicant.

Domestic corporations under "delinquent", "suspended",
"revoked" or "expired" status with the SEC shall not be authorized
to become an incorporator. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30,

2019.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

132

Sec 10

Sec. 11

—

(3) Foreign corporations. In the event that a foreign corporation
is made an incorporation, the application for registration must
be accompanied by a copy of a document (i.e., Board Resolution,
Directors' Certificate, Secretary's Certificate, or its equivalent), duly
authenticated15 by a Philippine Consulate or with an apostille16
(marginal note) affixed thereto, authorizing foreign corporation
to invest in the corporation being formed and specifically naming
the designated signatory on behalf of the foreign corporation. (SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019.)

133

statutory, and regulatory restrictions and conditions, regarding
foreign participation in certain investment areas or activities.17
(5) The Taxpayer Identification Number of the principal and
the designated signatory should both be stated in the articles of
incorporation. No application for incorporation shall be accepted
unless the registration documents reflect the Tax Identification
Number or passport number of all its foreign investors other
than foreign corporations not yet issued a Taxpayer Identification
Number.
After incorporation, all the foreign investors, natural or juridical,
shall secure a Taxpayer Identification Number. All documents to be
filed with the SEC after incorporation (e.g., General Information
Sheets) shall not be accepted unless the Tax Identification Number
of all its foreign investors, natural or juridical, resident or non¬
resident, are indicated. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16-19, July 30, 2019.)

-

(4) Additional requirement on certain corporations. No articles of
incorporations of banks, banking and quasi-banking institutions,
preneed, insurance and trust companies, NSSLAS, pawnshops,
and other financial intermediaries shall be approved unless
accompanied by a favorable recommendation of the appropriate
government agency to the effect that the articles of incorporation
are in accordance with law. (Ibid.)

—

A corporation shall hays
Sec. 11. Corporate Term.
perpetual existence unless Its articles of incorporation

Signatories of the articles of incorporation.
(1) Each individual signing the articles of incorporation/
bylaws must indicate the capacity upon which he /she is affixing
his/her signature thereto (i.e., Incorporator or Representative of XYZ

provides otherwise.

Corporations with certificates of Incorporation Issued
prior to the effectivlty of this Code, and which continue
to exist, shall have perpetual existence, unless the
corporation, upon a vote of its stockholders representing
a majority of its outstanding capital stock, notifies the
Commission that it elects to retain Its specific corporate
term pursuant to its articles of Incorporation: Provided,
That any change in the corporate term under this section
is without prejudice to the appraisal right of dissenting
stockholders in accordance with the provisions of this
Code. (N)

Corp.).
(2) An individual designated to sign the articles of
incorporation /bylaws on behalf of an incorporator, which is not
a natural person, must also indicate the corporate or partnership
name of the entity being represented and for whom he/she is
executing the articles of incorporation/bylaws.
(3) An individual who signs the articles of incorporation on
behalf of an incorporator, which is not a natural person, may not be
named as a director or trustee in the same articles of incorporation,
unless when the said individual is also the owner of at least one (1)
share of stock, or is also a member, of the corporation being formed.
(4) The inclusion of foreign nationals in the articles of
incorporation shall be subject to the applicable constitutional,

17By specific constitutional and legal provisions, citizenship is a necessary
qualification for incorporators in corporations in which a certain percentage of the capital
stock is required to be owned by Filipino citizens. (Infra., under Sec. 14[llth].) Foreign
shareholders may be debarred from certain nationalized activities which are exclusively
reserved for Filipino citizens. The rule applies to directors or trustees, (see Secs. 11, 22.)
Enemy aliens cannot become incorporators, for subjects of one country cannot
lawfully contract with the subjects of the country with which it is at war. (White v.
Bumeley, 20 How. 235.)

I5For documents executed in countries and territories which are not Apostille-

contracting parties.

16For documents executed in countries and territories which are Apostille¬

contracting countries.

TITLE fl. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

r

I
L

134

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. II

Sec. 11

A corporate term for a specific period mav be extended
or shortened bv amending the articles of incorporation:
Provided, That no extension may be made earlier than

three (31 years prior to the original or subsequent expiry
date(s) unless there are justifiable reasons for an earlier
extension as may be determined by the Commission:
Provided, further. That such extension of the corporate
term shall take effect only on the dav following the original

or subsequent expiry datels),
A corporation whose term has expired may apply for
a revival of its corporate existence, together with all the
rights and privileges under its certificate of incorporation
and subject to all of its duties, debts and liabilities existing
prior to its revival. Upon approval by the Commission,
the corporation shall be deemed revived and a certificate
of revival of corporate existence shall be issued, giving
it perpetual existence, unless its application for revival
provides otherwise. (N)
No application for revival of certificate of incorporation
of banks, banking and quasi-banking institutions, preneed,
insurance and trust companies, nonstock savings and

loan associations (NSSLAs), pawnshops, corporations
engaged in money service business, and other financial
intermediaries shall be approved by the Commission
unless accompanied by a favorable recommendation of
the appropriate government agency. (N)

Perpetual corporate term.
(1) The old Corporation Code prescribed a maximum corporate
term of 50 years from the date of its incorporation and required
corporations to amend their articles of incorporation to extend the
corporate life. Its existence is deemed dissolved upon expiration of
the term.
(2) The Revised Corporation Code now provides that a
corporation shall have perpetual existence unless its articles of

incorporation provide otherwise.1

The transformation of a bank from a government-owned corporation
to private
one did not result in a break on its life as a juridical person.
The
same
continuity
of
idea
cannot, owever, be said of its employees
when employment
owne corporation ceased. Such privatization cannot deprive with it as a govemmentthe government employees

i'

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

135

Corporations existing before, and which continues to exist after,
the effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code are ipso jure granted
perpetual existence with no further action on their part. A positive
act on the part of corporations is only required if they intend to limit
their corporate term to a certain period. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 0220, Nov. 3, 2020; see also SEC-OGC Opinion No. 47-19, Sept. 5, 2019;
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 28-19, July 22, 2019; SEC-OGC Opinion No.
16-19, April 15, 2019.) Since the automatic conversion of the corporate
term to perpetual existence does not require an amendment of the
articles of incorporation, the 2/3 affirmative vote of the outstanding
shares to amend the articles of incorporation would not be required.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 28-19, July 22, 2019.)
(3) The shift to perpetual term of existence would not only
remove the possibility of a premature expiration of the registration
of productive businesses, but also foster sustainable long-term
projects beyond the initial 50-year term. In some corporations, a
50-year period may still be short to achieve its business purposes.
Understandably, some corporations may prefer to keep their
corporate existence limited depending on their purposes and needs.
(4) The general provision on corporate term in Article 11 does
not apply to religious corporations. The specific provisions in XIH
for the religious corporations, particularly Sections 108 and 114
(Religious Societies) do not provide for the term of existence of
religious corporations, whether classified as corporation sole or
religious society. (SEC Opinion No. 04-11, Jam. 10, 2011.)
Change in corporate term for a specific period.

The extension or shortening of the original corporate term is
subject to these conditions:
(1) The specific period may be extended or shortened by
amending the articles of incorporation;
(2) In case of extension, the same may be made no earlier than
three (3) years before the original or subsequent expiry date(s)
unless there are justifiable reasons for an earlier extension;
(3) Such extension shall take effect only on the day following
the original or subsequent expiry date(s);
involved of their accrued benefits and compensation. (Ong vs. Philippine National Bank,
621 SCRA 120 [2010].)

136

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 11

Sec 11

(4) The change in the corporate term is without prejudice to the
appraisal right of dissenting stockholders;
(5) The amendment must be is effected1before the expiration of
the corporate term of existence, for after dissolution by expiration
of the corporate term, there is no more corporate life to extend? The
corporation ceases to have judicial personality except for purposes
of liquidation under Section 139. Hence, the extension cannot be
done during the three-year period of liquidation (Alhambra Cigar
vs. SEC, 24 SCRA 269 [1968]; see Sec. 139.); and
(6) The application for revival of certificate of incorporation of
banks, etc., shall not be approved by the SEC unless accompanied
by a favorable recommendation of the appropriate government

Guidelines on corporate term.
The SEC issued these guidelines on corporate term?

t37

—

(1) Corporations incorporated under the Revised Corporation Code.
Corporations incorporated under the Revised Corporation Code
shall have perpetual existence unless its articles of incorporation
provides a specific corporate term.
(2) Corporations incorporated under B.P. No. 68 and Act No. 1459.
The rules cue:

—

agency.

Effect of extenslon/expiration of term.
(1) The mere extension of the corporate term of existence made
before the expiration of the original term constitutes a continuation
of the old, and not the creation of a new, corporation.
(2) Upon the expiration of the period fixed in the articles of
incorporation, absent compliance with the legal requisites for
the extension of the period, the corporation ceases to exist and is
dissolved ipso facto.
(3) The expiration of the term for which the corporation was
created does not, however, produce its immediate dissolution for all
purposes. (Sec. 139.)
.pf .ri
o
The suspension of the activities and operations of a corporation during the period
•

of enemy occupation may not be considered as having automatically operated to deprive
it of a corresponding part of its juridical life as fixed in its articles of incorporation.
Consequently, the original term of existence cannot be extended without violating the
law. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 21, 1962.)
’Under the doctrine of relation which has been applied in American decisions, where
the delay in effecting the amendment is due to the neglect of the officer with whom the
application is required to be filed or to a wrongful refusal on his part to receive it, the
same will be treated as having been filed before the expiry date. The doctrine does not
apply where the delay is attributable to the corporation. (SEC Opinion, May 14, 1987.)
The occurrence of a fortuitous event (Act of God) or force majeure (Act of Man)
is considered a meritorious reason by the SEC to justify the doctrine. The
test applied
by the SEC is whether under the particular circumstance there was such
insuperable
interference occurring without the corporation's intervention as could
have been
not
prevented by prudence, diligence, and care. However, since the
privilege of extension is
purely statutory, all of the statutory conditions precedent for
of corporate life
are not to be given a liberal interpretation. (SEC Opinion, July extension
7, 1987.)

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

1

(a) The corporate term of a corporation with certificate
of incorporation issued before the effectivity of the Revised
Corporation Code and which continue to exist, shall be deemed
perpetual upon the effectivity of the Revised Corporation
Code, without any action on the part of the corporation. The
corporation, subject to payment of filing fees, may amend its
articles of incorporation to reflect its perpetual corporate term
by a vote of majority of its board of directors or trustees and
by a vote of its stockholders representing a majority of its
outstanding capital stock including the non-voting shares, or a
majority of the members, in case of a nonstock corporation.
(b) A corporation with certificate of incorporation issued
before the effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code and
which continue to exist, that elects to continue with their
present corporate term pursuant to the corporation s articles
of incorporation, shall notify the SEC by filing a notice with
attached directors' certificate, certifying that the decision to
retain the specific corporate term as specified in the articles
of incorporation was approved in a meeting duly held for the
purpose by a majority vote of the board of directors or trustees
and by the vote of the stockholders representing a majority of
the outstanding capital stock, including the non-voting shares,
or a majority of the members, in case of a nonstock corporation.

*See Appendix B: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 22-20, August 18, 2020 (Guidelines on
Corporate Term).
The SEC also issued guidelines governing the computation of the corporate term
(see SEC Memo. Circ. 21-14, November 28, 2014).

138

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 11

(c) The notice to be submitted to the SEC must be signed by
at least a majority of the members of the board of directors or
trustees, and attested by the corporate secretary.
(d) The notice must be submitted to the SEC, Company
Registration and Monitoring Department (CRMD), any SEC
Satellite Office or SEC Extension Office, within a period of
two years from February 23, 2019, or until February 23, 2021,
pursuant to Section 185 of the Revised Corporation Code. A
Certificate of Filing Notice to Retain Specific Corporate Term
shall be issued to the corporation.
(e) The corporate term of corporations which fail to comply
with the required notification shall be treated as perpetual after
the lapse of the two-year period.
(3) Amendment to extend or shorten the corporate term.
(a) Corporations incorporated under the Revised
Corporation Code whose articles of incorporation provide
for a specific term of existence and existing corporations
incorporated under the Corporation Code and the Corporation
Law that opted to retain its specific corporate term, may file an
amendment of articles of incorporation to extend or shorten the
specific corporate term pursuant to Section 11, paragraph 3 of the
Revised Corporation Code. The amendment must be approved
by vote or written assent of majority of the board of directors
or trustees and vote or written assent of the stockholders
representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital
stock of the corporation.
(b) In no case shall any extension of corporations mentioned
in the preceding paragraph be made earlier than three (3)
years prior to the original or subsequent expiration date of the
corporate term, unless there are justifiable reasons for extension
as may be determined by the SEC.
(c) Extension of the corporate term shall take effect only on
the day following the original or subsequent expiry date(s).
(4) Amendment to change specific corporate term to perpetual
corporate term.
Corporations incorporated under the Revised
Corporation Code whose articles of incorporation provide for a
specific term of existence and existing corporations incorporated
under the Corporation Code and the Corporation Law that notified

—

—

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION

Sea n

139

OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

the SEC of the decision to retain the specific corporate term, may
subsequently amend its specific corporate term to perpetual term
of existence. The amendment must be approved by vote or written
assent of majority of the board of directors or trustees and vote or
written assent of the stockholders representing at least two-thirds
(2/3) of the outstanding capital stock of the corporation.
(5) Amendment to change perpetual corporate term to specific corporate
term. Corporations incorporated under the Revised Corporation
Code whose articles of incorporation provide for perpetual term of
existence, corporations incorporated under the Corporation Code
of the Philippines and the Corporation Law existing at the time of
effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code whose corporate terms
were treated perpetual for failure to comply with the notification
required by the SEC, and corporations that amended their articles
of incorporation to reflect their perpetual term of existence may
subsequently amend its perpetual term of existence to specific
corporate term. The amendment must be approved by vote or
written assent of majority of the board of directors or trustees and
vote or written assent of the stockholders representing at least twothirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock of the corporation.

—

—

(6) Appraisal right of dissenting stockholders. Any change in the
corporate term pursuant to Section 11 shall be without prejudice to
the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders in accordance with
the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code. (SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 22-20, August 18, 2020.)

Petition for revival of corporate existence.
A corporation whose term has expired may, at any time, apply
for a revival of its corporate existence, (see Sec. 11; SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 48-19, Oct. 7, 2019.)

—

(1) Who may apply for revival.
Under the Guidelines on the
Revival of Corporate Existence (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 23-2019.),5
these corporations may file the petition:
• (a) Generally, a corporation whose term has expired;

’See Appendix C: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 23-19, November 21, 2019 (Guidelines on the
Revival of Expired Corporations).

140

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 11
Sec. 1?

(b) An expired corporation whose certificate of registration
has been revoked for non-filing of reports (e.g., general
information sheet, and audited financial statements), provided
that it shall file the proper petition to lift its revoked status,
which may be incorporated in its petition to revive, and must
settle the corresponding penalties thereof;
(c) An expired corporation whose certificate of registration
has been suspended, provided that it shall file the proper petition
to lift its Suspended Status, which may be incorporated in its
Petition to Revive, and must settle the corresponding penalties

thereof; or
(d) An expired corporation whose corporate name has
already been validly re-used, and is currently being used, by

another existing corporation duly registered with the SEC,
provided that the former shall change its corporate name
within 30 days from the issuance of its Certificate of Revival of
Corporate Existence.
(2) Who may not apply for revival. These corporations are not
allowed to file a petition:

—

(a) An expired corporation which has completed the
liquidation of its assets;
(b) A corporation whose certificate of registration has been
revoked for reasons other than non-filing of reports (e.g., general
information sheet, and audited financial statements);
(c) A corporation dissolved by virtue of Sections 6(c) and
6(d) of Pres. Decree No. 902-A, as amended by Pres. Decree No.
1799; or
(d) An expired corporation which already availed of re¬
registration, in accordance with Memorandum Circular No. 13,
series of 2019 (Amended Guidelines and Procedures on the Use
of Corporate and Partnership Names), or other memorandum
circulars issued by the SEC pertaining to re-registration, unless:
1) The re-registered corporation has given its consent to
the Petitioner to use its corporate name, and has undertaken
to undergo voluntary dissolution immediately after the
issuance of the Petitioner's Certificate of Revival; or

TITLE II INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

1«

2) The re-registered corporation has given its consent to
the Petitioner to use its corporate name, and has undertaken
to change its corporate name immediately after the issuance

of the Petitioner's Certificate of Revival.
(3) Required vote to initiate revival.
The required number of
votes is at least a majority vote of the board of directors, and the vote
of at least majority of the outstanding capital stock. For nonstock
corporations, at least a majority vote of the board of trustees, and
the vote of at least majority of the members.
(4) Procedure of revival. Other requirements:
(a) Petition and filing fees must be paid for the revival.
(b) The Petition must be verified and must contain the
statements or mattes enumerated in Section 6 of the SEC Memo.
Circular No. 23-2019.
(c) The petitioner shall file with, and refer to in, its Petition
the documents enumerated in Section 7.
(5) Appraisal right.
The revival of the corporate existence is
without prejudice to the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders
in accordance with the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code.
(6) Applicability of the Revised Corporation Code.
To extend to
the revived corporations a benefit similar to that provided in Section
185 of the Revised Corporation Code, a revived corporation shall be
given a period of two (2) years from the issuance of its Certificate
of Revival to comply with the Revised Corporation Code, unless

—

—

—

—

otherwise provided in these guidelines.
(7) When exemption may be given.
In the broader interest of
justice and to best serve public interest, the SEC may, in a particular
matter, exempt an expired corporation from the above guidelines or
requirements. In exceptional cases and apply such suitable, fair and
reasonable procedure to improve the delivery of public service and
to assist the parties in obtaining a speedy and judicious disposition
of cases.

—

Sec. 12. Minimum Capital Stock Not Required of Stock
Corporations. — Stock corporations shall not be required
to have a minimum capital stock except as otherwise
specifically provided by special law. (A)

142

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 12
Sec. 13

Capital stock requirement

The Revised Corporation Code does not set a minimum capital
stock. The former Corporation Law (Act No. 1459.) has also no
capital stock requirement. It merely requires that the articles of
incorporation state the amount of the corporation's capital stock.
A minimum capital stock requirement is considered arbitrary
and does not assure any practical protection to corporate creditors.
Special laws may, however, require a higher paid-up capital, as in
the case of commercial banks, insurance companies, and investment

houses.
Minimum subscription and paid-up
capital.

Section 13 (Amount of capital stock to be subscribed and paid
for purposes of incorporation. Repealed) of the old Code requires
that at least 25% of the amount of the authorized capital stocks has
been actually subscribed and that at least 25% of such subscription
paid. In no case shall the paid-up capital be less than P5,000.00.’
These requirements were mandatory. Accordingly, if they were not
complied with, no stock corporation can be lawfully incorporated
even if a certificate of incorporation has been issued by the SEC
in good faith.2 The minimum 25% subscription and 25% paid-up

—

’Paid-up capital is merely seed money to start a corporation or a business entity.
Paid-up capitalization of P5,000.00 is not and should not be taken as a reflection of the
firm's capacity to meet its obligations. The best test of the viability of a business concern
is its working capital which consists of the liquid assets of a given business. (Kukan

International Corporation vs. Reyes, 631 SCRA 596 [2010].)
*Lf a corporation is organized and carries on business without substantial capital
in such a way that the corporation is likely to have no sufficient assets available to meet
its debts, it is inequitable that shareholders should set up such a flimsy organization to
escape personal liability. The attempt to do corporate business without providing any
sufficient basis of financial responsibility to creditors is an abuse of the separate entity
and will be ineffectual to exempt the shareholders from corporate debts. It is coming to be
recognized as the policy of the law that shareholders should in good faith put at the risk
of the business unencumbered capital reasonably adequate for its prospective liabilities.
If capital is illusory or trifling compared with the business to be done and the risks of loss,
this is a ground for denying the separate entity privilege." (Keating, Judge (dissenting),
citing Ballantine, pp. 302-303, in Walkovszky v. Carlton, 18 N.Y. 2d 414, 223 N.E. 2d 6.)
"An obvious inadequacy of capital, measured by the nature and magnitude of
the corporate undertaking has frequently been an important factor in cases denying
stockholders their defense of limited liability... that rule has been invoked even in
absence of a legislative policy which undercapitalization would defeat " (Anderson v.
Abbot 321 US. 349, 362-363.)

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

143

capital was required not only during the incorporation period but
also in case of increase of the authorized capital stock. (Sec. 38, par.
1, now Sec. 37, par. 4.)
The Revised Corporation Code deleted the requirement.
However, the minimum 25% subscribed and 25% paid-up
requirement is retained under Section 37 in case of an increase in
capital stock.
Subscription of corporations.

Domestic corporations may subscribe initially to the capital
stock of another proposed corporation.
With respect to foreign corporations, whether resident (i.e.,
engaged in business in the Philippines) and non-resident, they
may subscribe to the stocks of domestic corporations if they are
authorized by their charters to hold shares in other corporations.
Sec. 13.’ Contents of Articles of Incorporation. — All
corporations shall file with the Commission articles of
incorporation in any of the official languages, duly signed
and acknowledged or authenticated In such form and
manner as mav be allowed by the Commission containing
substantially the following matters, except as otherwise
prescribed by this Code or by special law:

(a) The name of the corporation;
(b) The specific purpose or purposes for which the
corporation is being formed- Where a corporation has more
than one stated purpose, the articles of incorporation shall
indicate the primary purpose and the secondary purpose
or purposes: Provided, That a nonstock corporation may
not include a purpose which would change or contradict
Its nature as such;

(c) The place where the principal office of the
corporation Is to be located, which must be within the

Philippines;

’Former Sec 14 is now Sec. 13, Sec. 15, now Sec. 14, etc.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

144

Sec. 13

Sec. 14

(d) The term for which the corporation is to exist, if the
corporation has not elected perpetual existence;

TITLE U. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION

Sec. 14. Form of Articles of Incorporation. — Unless
otherwise prescribed by special law, the articles of
incorporation of all domestic corporation shall comply
substantially with the following form:

(e) The names, nationalities and residence addresses
of the incorporators;

Articles of Incorporation
ef

(f) The number of directors, which shall not be more
than fifteen (15) or the number of trustees which mav be
more than fifteen (15);

(Name of Corporation)

(g) The names, nationalities and residence addresses
of persons who shall act as directors or trustees until the
first regular directors or trustees are duly elected and
qualified in accordance with this Code;

The undersigned incorporators, all of legal age have
voluntarily agreed to form a (stock) (nonstock) corporation
under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines and
certify the following:

(h) If it be a stock corporation, the amount of its
authorized capital stock the number of shares into which
it is divided, the par value of each, the names, nationalities
and residence addresses of the original subscribers,
amount subscribed and paid by each on the subscription,
and a statement that some or all of the shares are without
par value, If applicable;

First: That the name of said corporation shall be
Inc., Corporation or QPG"
“
Second: That the purpose of purposes for which such
corporation is incorporated are: (If there is more than one
purpose, indicate primary and secondary purposes);

(i) If it be a nonstock corporation, the amount of its
capital, the names, nationalities and residence addresses
of the contributors and the amount contributed by each;
and

I

0) Such other matters consistent with law and which
the incorporators may deem necessary and convenient.

I

An arbitration agreement may be provided in the
articles of Incorporation pursuant to Section 181 of this
Code. (N)

145

OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

Third: That the principal office of the corporation Is
located in the City/Municipality of
Province of
, Philippines;
Fourth: That the said corporation shall have perpetual
years from the date
existence or a term of
of issuance of the certificate of incorporation;
Fifth: That the names, nationalities and residence
addresses of the incorporators of the corporation are as
follows:
Name

Nationality

Residence

The articles of incorporation and applications for
amendments thereto may be filed with the Commission in
the form of an electronic document, in accordance with the
Commission’s rules and regulations an electronic filing.
(N)

Sixth: That the number of directors or trustees of the
corporation shall be
; and the names,
nationalities and residence addresses of the first directors
or trustees of the corporation are as follows:

146

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Residence

Nationality

Name

Sec. 14

Seventh: That the authorized capital stock of the
corporation Is
divided Into
of

Pesos (P

PESOS (P
),
shares with the par value
) per share.

(In case all the shares are without par value): That the
capital stock of the corporation is
shares without par value.
(In case some shares have par value and some
are without par value); That the capital stock of said
corporation consists of
shares of
which
shares have a par value
of PESOS (P
) each, and of which
shares are without par value.
Eighth: That the number of shares of the authorized
capital stock above-stated has been subscribed as follows:
Name of
Subscriber

Nationality

No. of
Shares
Subscribed

Amount

Subscribed

Amount
Paid

(Modify No. 8 If shares are with no par value. In case the
corporation is nonstock, Nos. 7, and 8 of the above articles
may be modified accordingly, and it is sufficient if the
articles state the amount of capital or money contributed
or donated by specified persons, stating the names,
nationalities and residence addresses of the contributors
or donors and the respective amount given by each.)

Sec 14

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
'
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

has been elected by
Ninth: That
the subscribers as Treasurer of the Corporation to act as
such until after the successor is duly elected and qualified
in accordance with the bylaws, and that as Treasurer,
authority has been given to receive in the name and for the
benefit of the corporation, subscriptions, contributions or
donations paid or given by the subscribers or members
who certifies the information set forth in the seventh and
eight clauses above, and that the paid-up portion of the
subscription in cash and/or property that the benefit and
credit of the corporation has been duly received.

Tenth: That the incorporators undertake to change
the name of the corporation immediately upon receipt of
notice from the Commission that another corporation,
partnership or person has acquired a prior right to the
use of such name, that the name has been declared not
distinguishable from a name already registered or reserved
for the use of another corporation, or that it is contrary to
law, public morals, good custom or public policy. (N)
Eleventh: (Corporations which will engage in any
business or activity reserved for Filipino citizens shall
provide the following):
“No transfer of stock or interest which shall reduce
the ownership of Filipino citizens to less than the required
percentage of capital stock as provided by existing
laws shall be allowed or permitted to be recorded in
the proper books of the corporation and this restriction
shall be indicated in all stock certificates issued by the
corporation.”
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto signed these
Articles of Incorporation, this
day of
20
, in the City/Municipallty of
,
Province of
, Republic of
the Philippines.

147

148

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14

(Names and signatures of the incorporators)

(a) The special law which creates the corporation;
(b) Executive Orders of the President,-4

Meaning of corporate charter.

Distinguished from franchise.

The term is sometimes loosely used in the sense of "franchise."
Properly speaking, corporate or primary franchise is the right and
privilege itself of being a corporation, (see Sec. 10.)
On the other hand, corporate charter applies to the instrumental
bestowing such right and privilege.
Components of corporate charter.

A charter represents the complete grant of authority; hence,
the complete charter of a corporation does not rest only upon one

instrument.
(1) As to corporations formed under the general incorporation
law, the charter consists of:
(a) The law under which it is organized (R.A. No. 11232.);
(b) Articles of incorporation;
(c) Bylaws; and
(d) All applicable provisions of the Constitution and
the general laws of the State in force when the corporation is

incorporated which are as much a part of its charter as though
expressly written therein. (7 Fletcher, pp. 760-761.)
’See note 2 under Secs. 13-14.

149

(2) As to corporations created by special laws, the charter
consists of:

(Names and signatures of Treasurer)

A charter3 is an instrument or authority from the sovereign power
bestowing the right or privilege to be and act as a corporation.
(Humphrey v. Peues, 16 Wall. [U.S.] 244, 21 L. ed. 326.)
With regard to corporations, the term is correctly used in its
limited sense only with reference to special incorporation by act
of the legislature. In the case of a corporation organized under a
general law, however, the corporation's charter is not limited to its
articles of incorporation, (see 18 Am. Jur. 2d 622.)

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

Sec 14

and

(c) Rules and regulations applicable to such corporations;

(d) All laws applicable thereto, including the Revised
Corporation Code which apply suppletorily. (see Sec. 4.)

Nature of corporate charter.
The corporate charter describes several relationships. It is
described as a contract of a three-fold nature, that is, a contract
between the State and the corporation, a contract between the
corporation and its stockholders (or members), and a contract
between the stockholders inter se. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 625-626.)
(1) A contract between the State and the corporation.
It is
commonly said that corporations are created by an act of the
sovereign by an act of the Legislature and in a sense, this is
true. But it is not to be understood from this that the Legislature
can bring a private corporation into existence of its own accord, and
without the consent of the members who compose it. The charter
of a private corporation has been regarded as a contract between
the corporation and the State. For this reason, courts apply to the
formation of a private corporation the principles governing offer and
acceptance in the formation of contracts. (Clark on Corporations,

—

—

—

p.55.)
The consideration for the grant of power and privileges by the
State is found in the liabilities and duties which the incorporators
assume by accepting the terms specified in the charter. (18 Am. Jur.
2d 626.)
(a) Acceptance of original charter.

—

4E.g., the Uniform Charter for Government Corporations. (E.O. No. 399, Jan. 5,
1951.) See RD. No. 2029 and Letter of Instructions No. 1520 which apply to governmentowned or -controlled corporations, whether chartered by special law or organized under
the Corporation Code, and Administrative Code of 1987 (E.O. No. 292.), Book IV, Chapter
9, Sec. 42.

150

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 14
Sec 14

1) If persons apply to the legislature for a charter, this is

sufficient evidence of consent on their part and when the charter
is granted, no acceptance of it by them, other than will be
implied from their previous application, need be shown. They
may be considered as having made an offer, and the State as
having accepted it.
2) If, however, without such application, the legislature
offers a charter, either to particular persons by a special act,
or to persons or a class of persons generally by a general law,
an acceptance must be shown. Until acceptance, the offer of a
charter, either by a general or a special law, can have no effect.
An act of the legislature authorizing persons to become a
corporate body by complying with certain terms and conditions
is, until accepted by the persons authorized, only an offer by
the State, which may be withdrawn by it at any time; and it
is withdrawn, so as to be no longer open for acceptance, by
a repeal of the act by the legislature, or by the adoption of a
constitutional provision rendering such an act void.
(b) Acceptance of amendment to existing charter. The rule that a
charter must be accepted before it can have any effect applies to acts
amending existing charters under a right reserved to the State when
the charter was granted; for though the State may reserve the right
to amend the charter of a private corporation, it cannot compel the
members to accept the charter as amended, any more than it could
compel them to accept the original charter. If they do not adopt the
amendment, they may give up their charter altogether.
The acceptance of an amendment, like the acceptance of an
original charter, may be implied from the conduct of the corpo¬
ration or its members and it will be conclusively presumed if the
powers conferred by the amendatory act are exercised. (Clark on
Corporations, p. 55.)
(2) A contract between the corporation and the stockholders.
It is generally held that a corporate charter constitutes a contract
between the corporation and its stockholders. The stockholders are
presumed to have entered into such a contract with knowledge of
the provisions thereof, are bound, and their rights as stockholders
are defined and limited by the charter. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 626.)

—

—

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

151

The articles of incorporation or the corporate charter being
considered a contract, the corporation is bound to observe all the
provisions thereof. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 22, 1986.)
(3) A contract between the stockholders inter se.
The charter
of a corporation constitutes a contract between the stockholders
which is entitled to protection as against attempted action by the
corporation, though authorized by law and the majority of the
stockholders, insofar as the interests of dissenting stockholders are
concerned. Thus, there is contractual obligation on the corporation
regarding its stockholders and on the stockholders regarding each
other that no fundamental, radical, or material changes on the
purposes of the corporation shall be made, at least absent express or
implied consent of the stockholders thereto. (Ibid.; see Sec. 80.)

—

Meaning of articles of incorporation.
(1) The articles of incorporation' is the document prepared by the
persons establishing a corporation and filed with the SEC containing
the matters required by the Revised Corporation Code.
(2) It has been described as one that defines the charter6 of the
corporation and the contractual relationships between the State and
the corporation, the stockholders and the State, and between the
corporation and the stockholders. (Government of the Phil. Islands
vs. Manila Railroad Co., 52 Phil. 699 [1929].)

Contents and form of articles of incorporation.
(1) Section 13 enumerates the matters (mandatory provisions)
that must be stated in the articles of incorporation of domestic
’A corporation created by special law (see Sec. 4.) has no articles of incorporation.
‘A copy of the articles filed which is returned with the certificate of incorporation
issued by the SEC under its official seal becomes its corporate charter enabling
the
corporation
to exist and function as such, (see Sec. 18.)

The special law creating a government-owned or -controlled corporation (see Sec
4.) is often called "charter." The older word, charter,
at one time referred to an individual
statute that through the first quarter of the 19th century was the only device
by American State Legislatures for permitting the establishment of a private employed
The corporation laws of the United States and foreign countries alike now corporation.
provide for the
creation and licensing of a business corporation by action of administrative
authorities.
(E.I., Kohler,
op. al., p. 36.)

152

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14

corporations, except as otherwise prescribed by the Revised
Corporation Code or by special law.
(a) The articles of incorporation may include such other
matters as are not inconsistent with law and which they may
deem necessary and convenient (No. 10.), such as the classes of
shares which the corporation may issue (Sec. 6.), provisions on
preemptive right (Sec. 38.), etc. An arbitration agreement may
be provided in the articles of incorporation pursuant to Section
181 of the Revised Corporation Code.
(b) The contents of the articles of incorporation may be held
valid as an agreement between the parties thereto, even though
the validity of such may be subject to question. (18 Am. Jur. 2d
585.)
(c) The articles of incorporation may provide other matters
or items (optional provisions) which the incorporators may
deem necessary and convenient if they are not contrary to any
provision of the Revised Corporation Code or special law.
(d) While under the Revised Corporation Code, there is no
general requirement of Philippine citizenship, there are areas of
business and industry where ownership is reserved, wholly or
partially, in favor of Filipino citizens by virtue of the Constitution
and special laws. To safeguard the interest of transferees of stock
who may not know the citizenship requirement and to secure
compliance with the limitation on alien ownership, Section
14(Eleventh) requires the articles of incorporation to provide the
restriction stated. Such restriction serves as notice to all persons
who may be dealing with the stock of the corporation, and is
intended to deter the issue or transfer of shares in favor of aliens
in violation thereof. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 14, 1990.)
(2) Section 14 provides the form of the articles of incorporation
of all domestic corporations, unless otherwise prescribed by special
law.
(a) The SEC may reject the articles of incorporation or any
amendment thereto if the same is not substantially in accordance
with the forms prescribed above, (see Sec. 16[1].)

Sec 14

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

153

(b) The articles of incorporation must be written in any of
the official languages, i.e., English or Filipino7 duly signed and
acknowledged or authenticated by all of the incorporators.'

Filing of the articles of Incorporation.
(1) Actual filing or registration with SEC required.
The mere
recording of the articles of incorporation without the intention or
the fact of allowing the same to remain in the office of the SEC is not
a sufficient filing to complete the organization of the corporation or
vest it with corporate powers. Literal filing of the papers is necessary
because it is so written in the law.’
The term "filing" and the verb "to file," as related to this subject,
include the idea that the papers are to remain in their proper order
on file in the office. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 586.)
(2) Rule where corporation created by special law. A corporation
created by special law or charter need not file with the SEC its
articles of incorporation and bylaws since the grantee of such a
special charter draws its life not from compliance with a general
law, but from a direct act of Congress. (SEC Opinion, May 28, 1970.)
(3) Rule with respect to a joint venture. The SEC has ruled that
two or more corporations may enter into a joint venture through
a contract if the nature of the venture is in line with the business
authorized by their charters. The contract need not be registered with
it, provided that the joint venture will not result in the formation of
a new partnership corporation.

—

—

—

’The Constitution provides that "the official languages of the Philippines are
Filipino and until otherwise provided by law, English." (Art. XIV, Sec. 7 thereof.) Under
P.D. No. 155 (issued March 15, 1973), however, it is provided that "the Spanish language
shall continue to be recognized as an official language in the Philippines while important
documents in government files are in the Spanish language and not translated either in
English or Filipino." This will make Spanish an official language for an indefinite length
of time, for nobody can know when these "important documents" will be translated
in
English or Filipino. It is clear from the Constitution that Spanish is no longer an official

language.

'An incorporator may delegate to an attomey-in-fact the signing of the articles of
incorporation in a special power of attorney to such effect. However, the acknowledgment
(see See. 14.) must reflect this fact so that the same must be prepared
in the following tenor.
". . ., that Mr. A (agent) is signing for and in behalf of B (incorporator) as his
fact after due presentation of his power or attorney." (SEC Opinion, Dec. 26, attomey-in1972.)
’SEC Memo. Circ. No. 16(4/29/20)prescribesguidelinesonauthenticationofarticles
of incorporation in applications for registration of domestic
corporations including those
with foreign investments or equity.

154

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 14

However, if the parties to the agreement want the joint venture

to be treated as a separate entity or have a separate personality
because they intend to secure for the joint venture project a
Taxpayer's Identification Number of its own from the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, registration with the SEC is necessary to have
a legal personality to obtain a separate Taxpayer's Identification
Number. (SEC Opinion, March 30, 1995.)
Power of SEC to reject articles of incorporation.
The duty of the SEC, on
(1) Compliance with statute.
of
presentation of articles incorporation and tender of proper fees, to
file the articles, and to issue a certificate of incorporation, is controlled
by the statute. If the articles of incorporation substantially comply
with the statute, the SEC has no discretion, but may be compelled
by mandamus to file them. The discretion to be exercised by the SEC
does not extend to the merits of an application for incorporation,
although it may be exercised as to matters of form. On the other
hand, it is under no duty to file articles of incorporation not entitled
to be filed for any reason, and hence, it will not be compelled by
mandamus to act in such a case.

—

Stated in another way, the duty of the SEC to file and record
incorporation papers exists only when they are in the form in
compliance with the statute. Furthermore, it should refuse to file for
record incorporation papers not complying with the statute.

—

(2) Truthfulness of matters stated.
Generally, the officer
concerned has no discretionary power to look beyond the face of
the incorporation papers and to determine from matters outside of
such papers whether or not to file the papers. He cannot consider
extraneous matters.10 Thus, he does not have to make inquiry outside
the articles of incorporation filed with him to determine whether
the matters stated are true, or whether all conditions precedent

'“Exception: In order to effectively exercise its jurisdiction over all corporations,
partnerships, and other forms of associations, the SEC is given the power "to pass
upon, refuse or deny after consultation with the Board of Investments, Department of
Industry (now Department of Trade and Industry), National Economic and Development
Authority or any other appropriate government agency, the application for registration of
any corporation, partnership or association or any form of organization falling within its
jurisdiction, if their establishment, organization or operation will not be consistent with
the declared national policies." (RD. No. 902-A, Sec. 6[k].)

Sec 14

TITLE U. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

155

have been performed. Ordinarily, if the association has complied
with all the pre-requisite requirements, and its purpose is a lawful
and authorized one, conditions cannot be imposed on granting the
certificate, (see 1 Fletcher, pp. 511-515; see also 14 C.J. 147-148.)

In fine, although the SEC must exercise some judgment in
die performance of its duty to determine whether articles of
incorporation are in the proper form and entitled to be filed, it is
not clothed with judicial discretion or arbitrary power. (18 Am. Jur.

2d 587.)
(3) Lawfulness of object or purpose.
But simply because the
duties of the SEC happen to be ministerial, it does not necessarily
follow that it has no authority to pass upon the lawfulness of the
object or purpose of the corporation as expressed in the articles of
incorporation. (Asuncion vs. De Yriarte, 28 Phil. 67 [1914].)

—

Its duties are ministerial and it has no authority to exercise
discretion in receiving and registering articles of incorporation, but it
may exercise judgment, that is, the judicial function, in determining
the question of law whether or not the objects of a proposed
corporation are lawful. If it errs in determining the question and
refuses to file the articles of incorporation, its decision is subject to
review and correction by the court. (Asuncion vs. De Yriarte, ibid.)
Purpose or purposes of the corporation.

The clause in the articles of incorporation which states the
specific purpose or purposes for which the corporation is being
incorporated is called the object or purpose clause. The Revised
Corporation Code allows corporations to have more than one stated
purpose.11

(1) The statement of the purpose or purposes operates as
an authorization to the management to enter into contracts and
transactions which may be considered as included within or
incidental to the attainment of said purposes. It also imposes implied
limitations on the powers of the corporation by excluding lines of
The purpose clause describes the kinds of business which may be transacted
by a corporation. The purpose is to be distinguished from a power which refers
to the
authority exercised by a corporation in the carrying on its business or businesses.

156

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14

activity which are not covered.12 Allowed to have separate "modus
operandi" for each of the stated corporate purposes. (SEC Opinion,
Sept 9. 1993.)
(2) There is no legal need to repeat in the articles of incorporation
the powers granted by the law upon the corporation. (Ballantine, p.
55 (1946 Ed.].)
(3) A nonstock corporation may not include a purpose which
would change or contradict its nature as such. Section 88 enumerates
the allowable purposes for which a nonstock corporation may be
organized.
Purpose or purposes must be lawful.

—

(1) Effect if unlawful.
A corporation may be organized only
for "any lawful purpose or purposes." (see Sec. 10.) A corporation,
the primary object of which is without statutory authority can have
no lawful existence, even though some of its declared purposes
may be lawful. (13 Am. Jur. 2d 580.) That the "purpose or purposes
of the corporation are patently unconstitutional, illegal, immoral
or contrary to government rules and regulations" is one of the
grounds for the rejection or disapproval by the SEC of the articles
of incorporation (or the amendment thereof). (Sec. 16[2].)
(a) A corporation was held incorporated for an illegal
purpose where the object of the incorporators is to organize a
pueblo or barrio in a municipality into a separate corporation because
it seeks to deprive the municipality in which the pueblo or barrio
is situated of its property and its citizens of the right of enjoying
the same and would, if permitted, disrupt and destroy the
government of municipalities of the country and abrogate the
laws relating to the formation and government of municipalities.
(Asuncion vs. De Yriarte, 28 Phil. 67 [1914].)
(b) Where the purpose of the proposed corporation in
its articles of incorporation is "to study the possibility of the
of the American Union
Philippines becoming a member
and, for the purpose, to undertake surveys, polls, researches,
and hold seminars, and publish and disseminate the results of
,2De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 120 [19891, cited
by the Supreme Court in Philippines Statehood U.S.A., Inc. vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, L-82493, January 24, 1990.

Sec. 14

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

157

these undertakings by way of helping promote and enhance the
incorporation of the Philippines as an American State....," this
portion of the purpose for registration was held objectionable
because the intention to promote the statehood of the Philippines
"shall adversely affect the independence and sovereignty of
the country." The denial of registration is not violative of the
freedom of association and expression guaranteed under the
Constitution which freedom can be exercised without a group
of individuals incorporating themselves to acquire juridical

personality.
But the purpose to conduct a study, survey, research, and
publish or disseminate the results thereof as a corporation is not
objectionable. (Philippines Statehood U.S.A., Inc. vs. Securities
and Exchange Commission, L-82493, Jan. 24, 1990.)
(2) Where powers merely unauthorized by law.
In authorizing
the formation of corporations for "any lawful purpose," the word
"unlawful," as applied in this connection, is not used by the Revised
Corporation Code exclusively in the sense of malum in se or malum
prohibitum. It is also used to designate powers which corporations
are not authorized to exercise, or contracts which they are not
authorized to make, or acts which they are not authorized to do
in other words, such acts, powers, and contracts as are ultra vires.
(18 Am. Jur. 2d 582; see Sec. 45.)
Thus, a corporation cannot be formed for the practice of
professions absent express authority in the corporation law. (1
Fletcher, p. 339.) In the Philippines, no legislation authorize the
formation of professional corporations. The practice of a profession
is not a business and is open only to persons with the necessary
qualifications. In corporations, the profit motive is the principal
factor.13

—

—

,3To accommodate professionals, most states in the United States have
enacted
professional incorporation laws that give lawyers, accountants, doctors, and other
professionals the right to practice their profession through a corporation. Under the
proposed American Bar Association Model Professional Corporation Act, the professional
corporation may practice only one profession and may not mix professional services with
non-professional services and only licensed professionals may perform the services of the
corporation. Non-licensed employees of the corporation may not assume a position of
control over the acts of licensed professionals when they perform their services to clients.
"... Congress has not adopted a unanimous position on the matter of prohibition
on indirect practice of optometry by corporations, specifically on the hiring and

158

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 14

The law, however, permits the formation of a partnership for
exercising a profession (Arts. 1767, 1783, Civil Code.) for in such
case, it is the individual partner and not the partnership firm who
exercises the profession and is responsible for his acts as such.
(3) Determination of question of lawfulness. As a rule, whether
the purposes for which a corporation has been formed are lawful is
to be determined by the description of those purposes as stated in
the articles of incorporation.
(a) A corporation is not illegal unless it is shown that the
end it has in view is illegal, or the means by which it proposes
to attain that end are illegal.
(b) If, as expressed on the face of the instrument of
incorporation, the purpose for which the corporation is formed
is not necessarily unlawful, it will be presumed that it was for a
purpose for which a corporation might lawfully be formed; and
this presumption holds in case of a foreign corporation.
(c) Where the object of a corporation as expressed in the
articles of incorporation is not illegal, that such corporation
afterwards entered upon illegal projects does not make it an
illegal corporation and such illegal acts cannot be urged as a
defense, in an action to recover unpaid subscription to the capi¬
tal stock. (14 C.J.S. 427-428.)
(4) Inquiry into purpose other than those stated. The best proof
of the purpose of a corporation is its articles of incorporation
(Supra.) and bylaws, (see Sec. 45.) The articles of incorporation
state the primary and secondary purposes of the corporation,
while the bylaws outline the administrative organization of the
corporation which, in turn, is supposed to insure or facilitate the
accomplishment of the purposes. If the corporate purpose as

—

—

employment of licensed optometrists by optical corporations. It is clear that Congress
left the resolution of such issue for judicial determination, and it is therefore proper for
this Court to resolve the issue. ... In analogy, it is noteworthy that private hospitals
are maintained by corporations incorporated for the purpose of furnishing medical and
surgical treatment. In the course of providing such treatments, these corporations employ
physicians, surgeons and medical practitioners, in the same way that in the course of
manufacturing and selling eyeglasses, eye frames, and optical lenses, optica) shops hire
licensed optometrists to examine, prescribe and dispense ophthalmic lenses. No one
has ever charged that these corporations are engaged in the practice of medicine. There
is indeed no valid basis for treating corporations engaged in the business of running
optical shops differently." (Acebedo Optical Company vs. Court of Appeals, 329 SCRA
314 [2000].)

Sea 14

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

159

stated in the articles of incorporation is lawful, then the SEC has
no authority to inquire whether the corporation has purposes other
than those stated, and mandamus will lie to compel it to issue the
certificate of incorporation. (Gala vs. Ellice Agro-Industrial Corp.,
418 SCRA 431 [2003].)
Purpose or purposes must be stated

with sufficient clarity.
(1) May be in broad terms. The purpose or purposes stated in
the articles of incorporation need not set out with particularity the
multitude of activities in which the corporation may engage. The
effect of broad purposes or objects is to confer wide discretionary
authority upon the directors and management of the corporation as
to the kinds of business in which it may engage. Dealings which are
entirely irrelevant to the purposes are unauthorized and called ultra
vires, (see Sec. 44.)
It is, therefore, important that the corporation's purposes be
specified in the articles of incorporation with sufficient clarity to
define with certainty the scope of its business. However, the articles
of incorporation of a manufacturing corporation need not state
the particular kind of manufacturing in which it is proposed to
engage, unless it is required by statute. And in forming a charitable
corporation, it is unnecessary to specify with exactness who are to
be the ultimate recipients of the charity, (see 1 Fletcher, pp. 372-386,
400-406; 14 C.J.S. 435-436.)

—

—

(2) May not be indefinitely stated. While the purposes may be
in broad and general terms, they should not be so stated indefinitely;

otherwise, the articles of incorporation may be rejected. Thus, an
articles of incorporation authorizing the corporation "to carry on
any lawful business or purpose" (1 Fletcher, p. 367.) or one, after
stating certain distinct purposes, adding "and for such other
purposes as may be agreed upon by the corporation in the future,"
will be rejected because the purpose or purposes are not definitely
stated. (In re Chapter of Journalists Fund of Philadelphia, 8 Pa. 272.)
It is not also sufficient to state that the purpose is to carry on
any business which may be deemed profitable. Such all-embracing
proviso cannot be stretched to include purpose not incidental,
implied or necessary to further the purposes stated in the articles of

incorporation.

160

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Primary purpose must be stated. •

Sec. 14

.

The purposes for which a corporation is organized, where it has
more than one stated purpose, shall state which is the primary or
main purpose and which is /are the secondary or subsidiary purpose
or purposes.*14 (Sec. 13[b].) The main purpose must be specified. The
law allows a corporation to have secondary purposes because the
primary purpose may not turn out to be profitable, and in such case,
all it has to do is invest its funds in any such purposes instead of
organizing a new corporation. Evidently, a corporation may have
only one (1) primary purpose.
Under Section 41, a corporation is prohibited from investing its
fund "for any purpose other than the primary purpose for which it
was organized" unless it is approved by both its board of directors
or trustees and its stockholders or members. No such disclosure is
required in the case of a partnership. (SEC Opinion, March 28, 1985.)
Purposes must be capable of being
lawfully combined.

Although Section 10 allows the formation of corporations "for
any lawful purpose or purposes," the purposes, where there are
more than one (1), must be capable of being lawfully combined.
Thus, banks governed by the General Banking Law (R.A. No.
8791.) are prohibited from directly engaging in insurance business
as the insurer. (Sec. 53 thereof.)15 Similarly, insurance companies
governed by the Insurance Code (RD. No. 612, as amended by R.A.
No. 10607.) are not allowed to engage in banking operations. The
,4A term that describes the business of a corporation in its name should refer to its
primary purpose. If there are two (2) such terms, the first should refer to the primary
purpose and the second, to the secondary purpose. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 5, Series of

2008.)

15The Act prohibits banks from engaging as principals in the insurance business or
through fully-owned subsidiaries but not investing in insurance companies themselves.
The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) has classified investments
in insurance companies as investments in allied undertakings, allowing universal banks
to increase their equity participation in these firms up to 51%. Through "bancassurance,"
an insurer utilizes bank branches to distribute insurance policies. Presently, the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) allows banks to sell insurance product at their branches. To
comply with the ownership rules, a major insurance company may set up a subsidiary
and sells five percent (5%) equity to a bank. Under present rules, only commercial and
universal banks are authorized to enter into a bank assurance tie-up with insurers.

Sec. 14

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

161

business of banking or insurance or other forms of business affected
with a public interest must be had under the general laws applicable
to those classes of business. The manifest purpose of excepting such
corporations from the general incorporation law is that they should
be restrained by strict requirements securing the safe conduct and
correct administration of their affairs. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 580.)
Subject to the limitation mentioned the secondary purposes
need not be allied to each other or to the primary purpose provided
they are not contrary to law. But a nonstock corporation, including
educational and religious corporations, may not include a purpose
which would change or contradict its nature as such (Sec. 13(b); see
Titles XI, XIII.), although it may be organized for any combination of
purposes mentioned in Section 87. The SEC may reject the articles of
incorporation of a nonstock corporation if its purpose is to engage
in election campaign or partisan political activity. (SEC Opinion,
April 10, 1983.)

Reasons for statement of purpose
or purposes.

"The law requires the statement of the purpose or the purposes
for which a corporation is formed in order that:
(1) A person who intends to invest his money in the business
corporation will know where and in what kind of business or
activity his money will be invested;
(2) The directors and the officers of the corporation will know
within what scope of business they are authorized to act; and lastly;
(3) A third person who has dealings with the corporation may
know by perusal of the articles whether the transaction or dealing he
has with the corporation is within the authority of the corporation
or not.

In other words, the main reason for stating the purpose of
the corporation is to determine whether the acts performed by
die corporation are authorized or beyond its powers. In the latter
case, they will be known as ultra vires acts." (C.G. Alvendia, op.
at, p. 80.) Thus, the purpose clause of the articles of incorporation
indicates the extent as well as the limitations of the powers which a
corporation may exercise, (see Secs. 2, 35(11], 44.)

162

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14
Sec 14

.„ , ।

Effect where primary purpose/secondary

purposes unauthorized.
(1) If the primary purpose of the corporation as stated in the
articles of incorporation is unauthorized, the corporation has no
legal existence even though other secondary lawful purposes are
included.
(2) If a principal lawful purpose is specified, but the articles
or certificate assumes for the corporation the existence of powers
which it is not permitted to exercise, then this additional and
unauthorized assumption may be treated as surplus-age and the
corporation regarded as entitled to exercise the lawful powers only.
(18 Am. Jur. 2d 585.)
Effect where corporation engages in Its secondary
instead of its primary purpose.
Generally, the primary purpose of a corporation as stated in the
articles of incorporation determines its classification.
However, where the corporation actually engages in one of its
secondary purposes instead of its primary purpose, the same may
be classified under said secondary purpose. Thus, a corporation
organized primarily to engage in mining and whose secondary
purpose is agriculture is a mining corporation. If such corporation
engages in agriculture instead of mining, the same may be classified
as organized to engage in agriculture. (SEC Opinions, Nov. 8, 1972
and March 22, 1974.)
• 1

I

Place where principal office of corporation

located.

—

The articles of
(1) City or municipality within the Philippines.
office of
where
the
principal
the
"place
incorporation must state
the
within
be
which
must
located,
place
the corporation is to be
fix
to
is
the
of
requirement
Philippines." (Sec. 13[c].) The purpose
allowing
of
the residence of a corporation in a definite place, instead
it to be ambulatory (Young Auto Supply Co. vs. Court of Appeals,

223 SCRA 670 [1993].) for effective regulation and supervision of the
corporation.
Under SEC regulations, the articles of incorporation shall state
the specific address of the corporation's principal office which shall

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

163

include, if feasible, the street number, street name, barangay, and
city or municipality. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 6-16, June 9, 2016.) The

indication of a general address such as a city, municipality, or Metro
Manila is no longer allowed.14 (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 6, Series of
2014.)

(2) Place where its books and records are ordinarily kept and meetings
held. The "place of the principal office" does not necessarily mean
the place where the business of the corporation is transacted but the
place where its books and records are ordinarily kept and its officers
usually meet to manage the affairs and transact the business of the
corporation. (1 Fletcher, p. 478, citing Harris v. McGregor, 20 Cal.
124; Sec. 73.)

—

(

Therefore, the principal office may be located at one place and
the place of business at another.
(3) Residence at place where its principal office is located.
A
corporation has no residence in the same sense in which this term is
applied to a natural person. But for practical purposes, a corporation
is in metaphysical sense a resident of the place where its principal
office is located as stated in its articles of incorporation (Ibid.; Cohen
vs. Benguet Commercial Co., Ltd., 34 Phil. 526 [1916]; Clavecilia
Radio System vs. Antilion, 19 SCRA 379 [1967].) filed with the SEC.
The place where the principal office of the corporation is located
determines its residence and the venue in an action by or against it.17

—

“It is required by the SEC that all corporations and partnerships applying for
registration should state in their Articles of Incorporation or Articles of Partnership the
”(i) specific address of their principal office, which shall include, if feasible, the street
number, street name, barangay, dty or municipality; and (ii) specific residence address
of each incorporator, stockholder, director, trustee, or partner," in line with the "full
disclosure" requirement of existing laws. "Metro Manila" is no longer allowed as address
of the principal office. (SEC Circ. No. 3, Series of 2006.) If applicable, the name of the
building the number of the building and name or number of the room or unit should be
indicated. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 6, Series of 2014.)
There is no need to amend the articles of incorporation (AOI) if the principal office
of the corporation is merely to another floor of the same building, inasmuch as locating
the same will still be possible. However, if the change is from one (1) building to another
building, even if within the same dty or munidpality, an amendment of the AOI is
required. With more reason, when the transfer a street to another. (SEC Opinion No 12r
12, Aug. 9, 2012.)
l7A corporation has only one (1) residence at a time. The fact that it maintains branch
offices in some parts of the country does not mean it can be sued in any of these places,
for to allow such action to be instituted would create confusion and work
untold incon¬
venience to the corporation. (Clavecilla Radio System vs. Antilion, supra.) By the same

164

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 14

—

(4) Change of address. In case of change of the principal office,
an amended articles of incorporation stating the new address must
be filed with the SEC. (Sec. 15.)

Incorporating directors or trustees.

The incorporating directors or trustees are those chosen by the
incorporators (Sec. 5.) and named in the articles of incorporation.
The term "trustees" is used to refer to members of the board of a
nonstock corporation.

—

The
(1) Matters to be specified in articles of incorporation.
nationalities,
names,
and
articles of incorporation must specify the
residences of the incorporators. (Secs. 13(e), 14.)
The statement of the nationalities of the incorporators will enable
the SEC to determine prima facie compliance with constitutional
or legal requirements regarding ownership by Filipino citizens of
certain percentage of the capital stock of certain corporations. It is
also necessary that the articles of incorporation specify the names,
nationalities, and residence addresses of the persons who will be
the first directors or trustees of the corporation, (see Sec. 13 (g); Sec.
14[Sixth]; Sec. 16(d].)
(2) Number. Under Section 13[f], the number of the directors
is determined by the incorporators but such number "shall not be
more than fifteen (15) or the number of trustees which may be more
than fifteen (15);" (see Sec. 13.) Section 91 provides that the board of
trustees of a nonstock corporation "may or may not be more than
fifteen (15) as may be fixed in its articles of incorporation or bylaws."
(3) Term of office. The incorporating directors or trustees shall
hold office until their successors are duly elected and qualified.
(Ibid., [7].) They are intended to be replaced by the regularly elected
directors or trustees (see Sec. 23.) who shall hold office for one
(1) year (Secs. 22, 23.), when the corporation is organized by the
adoption of bylaws (see Sec. 45.) at the first meeting of stockholders
or members, (see Sec. 49.)

—

—

token, a corporation cannot be allowed to file personal actions in a place other than its
principal place of business unless such place is also the residence of a co-plaintiff or a
defendant. (Young Auto Supply Co. vs. Court of Appeals, supra.)

Sec 14

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

165

—

Under Section 22 (par. 2.), "every
(4) Subscribers to stock.
(1)
share of the capital stock of the
least
at
own
director must
The requirement applies to the
director."
which
he
is
of
corporation
directors elected after incorporation, and to incorporating directors
who must "be a subscriber to at least one (1) share of the capital
stock of the corporation." (see Sec. 10.)
Capital stock/capltal and subscribers/
contributors.
(1) Stock corporations. The articles of incorporation of a stock
corporation under Section 13(h) must state:
(a) The amount of its authorized capital stock in pesos;1'
(b) The number of shares into which it is divided;
(c) The par value of each share;
(d) The names, nationalities, and residence addresses of the
original subscribers;
(e) The amount of capital stock subscribed and paid by
each on the subscription; and
(f) A statement that some or all of the shares are without
par value, if applicable.
(2) Nonstock corporations.
If the corporation is a nonstock
corporation, the articles of incorporators must state;
(a) The amount of its capital;
(b) The names, nationalities, and residence addresses of the
contributors; and
(c) The amount contributed by each. (Sec. 13[i].)

—

—

Where shares with par value.
Where the shares issued by a corporation have only one (1) par
value, the authorized capital stock would be the number of shares
multiplied by the par value.
"U.S. dollars representing the payment on subscription of a proposed corporation
should be duly converted in Philippine Peso so that the same may be treated as "cash";
otherwise, the U.S. dollars shall be considered payment by way of property, in which
event the payment shall be subject to the requirements of Sec. 61. (SEC Opinion, July 28,

166

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14

Each class of shares may be assigned varying par values, and
likewise, one class of shares may be more than the others. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 10-09, May 19, 2009.)” If a corporation is authorized
to issue different classes of shares with different par values, the
authorized capital stock would be the total of the products of the
number of shares in each class multiplied by the par value of such
class of shares.
Thus, where the number of shares authorized to be issued is
1,000,000 with a par value of Pl .00 per share, the authorized capital
stock is Pl,000,000.00. If for example, 600,000 of the shares are
classified into Class "A" with a par value of Pl .00 and 400,000 of
the shares, into Class "B" with a par value of Pl.50, the authorized
capital stock is Pl,200,000.00, the total of the products of P600,000
multiplied by P1.00, or P600,000.00, and of 400,000 multiplied by
Pl.50 or P600,000.00.

Where shares without par value.

If the capital stock consists of shares without par value, the
articles of incorporation need state only such fact, with the number
of shares into which the capital stock is divided.
If the shares have par value, the amount of the authorized
capital stock in pesos is specified in the articles, but if they have
no-par value, no amount of capital stock is specified in the articles
which need only state the number of shares into which the capital
stock is divided, (see Sec. 14[seventh].) The reason is that the price
of no-par value shares varies from time to time (see Sec. 61; last
par.) and, therefore, the total amount of the capital stock cannot be
known until all the shares are issued.
Where shares with par value and without
par value.
If some of the shares of the capital stock have par value and some
are without par value, the articles of incorporation must state such
fact, the number of shares into which the capital stock is divided,
’’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 66 (2002).

Sea 14

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

167

the number of shares with par value and their par value, and the
number of shares without par value. (Sec. 14[seventh].)
I J

Where business of corporation reserved
for Filipino citizens.

/i

Corporations that will engage in any business or activity reserved
citizens shall provide in their articles of incorporation
Filipino
for
against the "transfer of stock or interest which shall
restriction
the
reduce the ownership of Filipino citizens to less than the required
percentage of the capital stock as provided by existing laws"... (Ibid.

[eleventh].)
If the required percentage of ownership has not been complied
with, the articles of incorporation will not be accepted by the SEC.
(Sec. 16[4].)

Filipino percentage ownership requirement
regarding corporate capital.

By specific constitutional and legal provisions, Filipino
ownership of a certain percentage of the capital stock or capital is
required in certain cases, such as:
(1) Corporation for exploration, development, and utilization of
natural resources. At least 60% of the capital of which is owned
by citizens of the Philippines. (Constitution of the Philippines, Art.
XII, Sec. 2.) The word "capital" in the above constitutional provision
should be understood to mean "outstanding capital stock" in case
of stock corporation;
(2) Public service corporations.
At least 60% of the capital of
which is owned by citizens of the Philippines. The participation
of foreign investors in the governing body of any public utility
enterprise shall be limited to their proportionate share in its capital,
and all the executive and managing officers of such corporation
must be Filipino citizens (Ibid., Art. XII, Sec. 11.);
(3) Educational corporations.
Other than those established
by religious orders and mission boards, at least 60% of the capital
of which is owned by citizens of the Philippines. The control and
administration of educational institutions shall be vested in Filipino
citizens (Ibid., Art. XIV, Sec. 4[2].);

—

—

—

168

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 14

—

(4) Corporations engaged in mass media and advertising industry.
The first must be wholly (i.e.,100%) owned and managed by Filipino
citizens,20 while at least 70% of the capital stock of the second must
be owned by citizens of the Philippines. The participation of foreign
investors in the governing body of a corporation engaged in the

advertising industry shall be limited to their proportionate share
in the capital thereof, and all the executive and managing officer of
such corporation must be Filipino citizens (Ibid., Art. XVI, Sec. 11.);
(5) Banking corporations.
At least 60% of the voting stock of
a domestic corporation shall be owned or controlled by Filipino
citizens (R.A. No. 8791, Sec. 11.); R.A. No. 1064 allows the full entry
of foreign bank in the Philippines subject to guidelines approved by
the Monetary Board of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);
(6) Corporations engaged in retail trade.
Corporations with
less than U.S. $2.5 million paid-up capital are generally reserved
exclusively for Filipino citizens and corporations wholly-owned by
Filipino citizens (R.A. No. 8762, Sec. 5.);
(7) Rural banks. Before, no less than 40% of the voting stocks of
which shall be owned by citizens of the Philippines or corporations
at least 60% of whose capital is owned by such citizen (R.A. No.
7353, Sec. 4.); Foreign investors are now allowed to own acquire or
purchase up to 60% of a voting stock in a rural bank;
(8) Corporations engaged in coastwise shipping. At least 60% of
the capital stock must be owned by citizens of the Philippines (P.D.
No. 1464 [Tariff and Customs Code], Sec. 806.);

—

—

—

—

—

(9) Corporations engaged in the pawnshop business.
At least
70% of the voting capital stock shall be owned by citizens of the
Philippines (P.D. No. 114, Sec. 8.);
(10) Corporations engaged in the recruitment and placement of
workers, locally or overseas.
At least 75% of the authorized and
voting capital stock must be owned and controlled by Filipino
citizens (P.D. No. 442 [Labor Code], as amended, Sec. 27.); and

—

20While a 60% Filipino/40% foreign-owned corporation may be considered a
'Philippine National" (see Sec. 123.) for purposes of investment in another corporation,
it is not qualified to invest in business activities the ownership of which under the
Constitution or other special laws is limited to Filipino citizens only. (SEC Opinion, June
18, 1998.)

Sec 15

169

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

(11) Corporations engaged in operating a private detective, watchman
or security guard agencies. The corporation must be 100% Filipino
owned (R.A. No. 5487, Sec. 4.).

—

Acknowledgment, signature, and verification.

Section 13 requires that the articles of incorporation be duly
signed and acknowledged or authenticated.
To become a corporation de jure (see Sec. 18.), the provisions
requiring the incorporation papers to be acknowledged and signed
must be complied with. Each signatory must acknowledge his
signature to the articles and there is no corporation de jure unless
acknowledged by the minimum number required by law. However,
unless otherwise provided by the statute, the acknowledgment of
the signatures of the incorporators is not a part of the articles of

incorporation.
The purpose of the law in requiring acknowledgment under
oath is to secure the State and all concerned against the possibility of
any fictitious names being subscribed to the articles, and to furnish
proof of the genuineness of the signatures, (see 1 Fletcher, p. 506; 18

C.J.S. 440.)

—

Sec. 15. Amendment of Articles of Incorporation. Unless
otherwise prescribed by this Code or by special law, and
for legitimate purposes, any provision or matter stated in
the articles of incorporation may be amended by a majority
vote of the board of directors or trustees and the vote or
written assent of the stockholders representing at least
two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, without
prejudice to the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders
In accordance with the provisions of this Code. The
articles of incorporation of a nonstock corporation may be
amended bv the vote or written assent of majority of the
trustees and at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members.
The original and amended articles together shall
contain all provisions required by law to be set out in the
articles of incorporation. Amendments to the articles,
shall be indicated by underscoring the change or changes
made, and a copy thereof duly certified under oath by
the corporate secretary and a majority of the directors or

170

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 15
Sec 15

trustees with a statement that the amendments have been
duly approved by the required vote of the stockholders or
members, shall be submitted to the Commission.

amended.

Such an amendment would go against the meaning and
concept of the word "incorporators" as defined in Section 5 as
those "mentioned in the articles of incorporation as originally
forming and composing the corporation and who are signatories
thereof." (SEC Opinion,1 May 24, 1983.)
(b) Similarly, the names, etc. of the subscribers, the treasurer
of the corporation elected by the subscribers (Ibid, [eighth, ninth,
tenth].), and the witnesses cannot be amended except to correct
mistakes.

—

(1) Constitutional and statutory authority.
The certificate of
incorporation is a contract primarily between the State and the
corporation. (Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. [U.S.]
518.) Hence, it can be amended only by or under constitutional or
statutory authority.

—

Necessity of stockholders’ or members’
meeting for amendment

(2) Exercise of power.
The reservation of the power is an
incident of the contract between the State and the incorporators. The
dissolution of a corporation without cause is void as impairing the

(1) Under the first paragraph of Section 15, the amendment
may also be effected by the "written assent" of the stockholders
representing at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock of the
corporation or 2/3 of its members, meaning that such action need
not be taken at a meeting and upon a vote. Even holders of non¬
voting shares or non-voting members, as the case may be, are
entitled to vote on the amendment, (see Sec. 6, par. 3[a].)

obligation of a contract between the incorporators and the State.
Note, however, that with respect to the franchise of a public
utility, the only limitation is that the power can be exercised only
"when the common good requires."

Power of stockholders or members and the board
to amend articles of Incorporation.

—

(1) Power granted. The authority of stockholders or members
to amend the articles of incorporation which forms part of the
corporate charter is conferred by Section 15.

The amendment must also be approved by the majority vote of

the board of directors or trustees.

—

(2) Matters not subject to amendment.
Certain provisions or
matters stated in the articles of incorporation cannot be amended.
(a) The portion of the articles of incorporation stating the
names of the incorporators and the first set of directors /trustees
(see Sec. 14 [fifth and sixth].) cannot be amended by substituting

171

for the name of an incorporator the name of another, for the
reason that the same states an accomplished fact, just as the
place and date of the execution of the articles and the original
subscriptions of the incorporators cannot be changed or

The amendments shall take effect upon their approval
by the Commission or from the date of filing with the
said Commission if not acted upon within six (6) months
from the date of filing for a cause not attributable to the
corporation.

Reserved power of State to amend
corporate charter.

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

'(

Where written consent or assent is allowed, the same number
of votes shall be observed, and nothing can be done by proxy. (SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 4, Series of 2004; see Art. 58.)
(2) If the amendment consists in extending or shortening the
corporate term (Sec. 36.), or increasing or decreasing the capital stock
(Sec. 37.), a meeting of the stockholders or members is necessary.
(3) In a close corporation, if the amendment of the articles of
incorporation refers to the matters mentioned in Section 102, the
same shall not be valid or effective unless approved by the required
vote of the stockholders at a meeting duly called for the purpose. A
mere written assent would not also be sufficient.

'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp. 118-119.

172

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 15

Sec 16

I

Limitations on power of corporation to amend
articles of incorporation.
Section 15 imposes limitations on the power of a corporation to
amend its articles of incorporation. They are:
(1) The amendment of any provision or matters stated in the
articles of incorporation is not allowed when it will be contrary to
any provision or requirement prescribed by the Revised Corporation
Code or by special law, or change any provision in the articles of
incorporation stating an accomplished fact (Supra.);
(2) It must be "for legitimate purposes." (see Sec. 15.) The
power of amendment must not be exercised in such a manner as
to work injustice. The majority stockholders owe a duty to at least
act fairly to the minority interest, and they cannot avoid that duty
merely because the amendment is legally authorized (In the Matter
of Ayala Corporation, SEC En Banc Decision, Sept. 1, 1989.);
(3) It must be approved by the required vote of the board of
directors or trustees and the stockholders or members;
(4) The original articles and amended articles together must
contain all provisions required by law to be set out in the articles of
incorporation;
(5) Such articles, as amended, must be indicated by underscoring
the change or changes made, and a copy thereof duly certified under
oath by the corporate secretary and a majority of the directors or
trustees stating that the amendment or amendments have been duly
approved by the required vote of the stockholders or members must
be submitted to the SEC.
(6) Filing fees must be paid;

(7) The amendments shall take effect only upon their approval
by the SEC.
(a) They are deemed approved by the SEC from the date of
filing if not acted upon within six (6) months from said date for
a cause not attributable to the corporation, assuming that the
amendments are not illegal.
(b) If the cause is attributable to the corporation, the
amendment cannot take effect without approval thereof by the
SEC.

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

173

The provision on automatic approval in Section 16 does not
apply to the voluntary dissolution of corporations under Section
135 (SEC Opinion, March 30, 1982.); and
(8) If the corporation is governed by a special law such as banks,
banking and quasi-banking institutions, insurance companies,
etc., the amendments must be accompanied by a favorable
recommendation of the appropriate government agency to the effect
that such amendments are in accordance with law (Sec. 16, par. 2.);
(9) In the case of foreign corporations authorized to transact
business in the Philippines, they are merely required to file, within
60 days after the amendment to the articles of incorporation (or
bylaws) becomes effective, with the SEC and in proper cases, with

the appropriate government agency, a duly authenticated copy of the
articles of incorporation (or bylaws) for record purposes. The filing
thereof, however, shall not of itself enlarge or alter the purpose or
purposes for which such corporation is authorized under its license
to transact business in the Philippines (see Secs. 147, 142.);

(10) Such portion of the articles of incorporation which states
an established or accomplished fact at the time of incorporation,
e.g., the portion stating the names of the original subscribers or
incorporators (Sec. 5.), cannot be changed or amended.

Sec. 16. Grounds When Articles of Incorporation or
Amendment May be Disapproved. — The Commission may
disapprove the articles of Incorporation or any amendment
thereto If the same is not compliant with the requirements
of this Code: Provided, That the Commission shall give the
Incorporators, directors, trustees or officers a reasonable
time from receipt of the disapproval within which to modify
the objectionable portions of the articles or amendment
The following are grounds for such disapproval:
(a) The articles of Incorporation or any amendment
thereto Is not substantially in accordance with the form
prescribed herein;
(b) That the purpose or purposes of the corporation
are patently unconstitutional, Illegal, Immoral, or contrary
to government rules and regulations;

(c) The certification concerning the amount of capital
stock subscribed and/or paid is false; and

I

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

174

Sec. 16
Sec 16

(d) The required percentage of Filipino ownership of
the capital stock under existing laws or the Constitution
has not been complied with.

—

Grounds for disapproval of articles of incorporation
or amendment thereto.

(2) Any decision of the SEC rejecting the articles of incorporation
or disapproving any amendment thereto is appealable by petition

for review in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Court.
(P.D. No. 902-A, Sec. 6, last sentence.)
(3) In case of corporations governed by special laws such as
banks, banking and quasi-banking institutions, preneed, insurance
and trust companies, NSSLAs pawnshops and other financial
intermediaries, the articles of incorporation or amendment shall
not be approved by the SEC unless accompanied by a favorable
recommendation of the appropriate government agency (e.g.,
Monetary Board of the Central Bank, with respect to banking
institutions) that such articles or amendments are in accordance

with law.

*See note 3 under Secs. 13-14.

175

Suspension or revocation of certificate
of registration of corporations.

No articles of incorporation or amendment to articles
of incorporation of banks, banking and quasi-banking
Institutions, preneed. Insurance, and trust companies,
NSSLAs, pawnshops, and other financial intermediaries,
shall be approved by the Commission unless accompanied
by a favorable recommendation of the appropriate
government agency to the effect that such articles or
amendment is in accordance with law.

Section 16 enumerates the grounds for the disapproval or
rejection of the articles of incorporation' or disapproval of any
amendment thereto. The grounds are not exclusive.
(1) The SEC is required to give the incorporators reasonable
time within which to correct or modify the objectionable portions of
the articles of incorporation or amendment when the same is rejected
or disapproval for non-compliance with the Revised Corporation
Code, (see Secs. 13, 14 and 15.)

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

|

The SEC may suspend or
(1) Under Pres. Decree No. 902-A.2
revoke, after proper notice and hearing, the franchise or certificate
of registration of corporations, partnerships, or associations upon
the grounds provided by law, including:
(a) Fraud in procuring its certificate of incorporation (such
as making it appear that it has cash paid-up capital when
actually it has none, the money being merely borrowed and
returned to the lender after the incorporation);
(b) Serious misrepresentation as to what the corporation
can do or is doing to the great prejudice of, or damage to, the
general public;
(c) Refusal to comply with or defiance of a lawful order of
the SEC restraining the commission of acts which would amount
to a grave violation of its franchise;
(d) Continuous inoperation for a period of at least five (5)
consecutive years (see Sec. 21, infra.);
(e) Failure to file bylaws within the required period; and
(f) Failure to file required reports in appropriate forms as
determined by the SEC within the prescribed period. (P.D. No.
902-A, Sec. 6[1J.)

—

(2) Under Sections 137 and 170.
The authority of the SEC to
suspend, cancel or revoke corporate franchise or registration also
emanates from Sections 137 and 170 of the Revised Corporation
Code?

’It reorganized the SEC with additional powers and placed the said agency under
the administrative supervision of the Office of the President. This Decree is superseded
by the Securities Registration Code. (Appendix "A.") The grounds provided by P.D. No.

902-A still apply, (see Sec 5[mL SRC.)
’An order of revocation of a corporation's certificate of registration is not tantamount
to the dissolution of the company in which case, the company may file a petition to lift the
order of revocation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 38-11, Sept. 20, 2011.) SEC Memo. Circ. No.
15 (Sept. 5, 2009) extends by one (1) year from the date of revocation the period within
which corporations whose certificates of registration were revoked by non-compliance
with reportorial requirements to file a petition to lift the order of revocation.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

176

Sec 17

(a) It may not continue to operate its business (see Sec. 139.')
and issue shares.

(b) It may, however, sell its assets pursuant to Section 139
but it may only purchase property if such purchase will be
consistent with liquidation.
(c) It may sue to recover its property. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 24-09, July 28, 2009.) The capacity of a corporation to
institute an ejectment suit is not affected by the subsequent
suspension and revocation of certificate of registration. (Paredes
vs. Don Luis Dison Realty, Inc., 548 SCRA 273 [2008].)

A corporation whose existence is deemed terminated may not
allege in its complaint in court that it is a corporation duly organized
and existing under Philippine laws. (Clemente vs. Court of Appeals,
242 SCRA 717 [1995].)

—

(3) Lifting of order of revocation.
The lifting restores the
corporation to its original status as if there was no revocation order
issued against it, with the capacity to exercise all the powers of a
duly registered corporation under the Corporation Code. (SECOGC Opinion No. 29-09, Nov. 11, 2009.)
Sec. 17. Corporate Name. — No corporate name shall be
allowed by the Commission if it is not distinguishable from
that already reserved or registered for the use of another
corporation or if such name is protected by law or when its
use is contrary to existing law, rules and regulations. (SA)

A name is not distinguishable even if it contains one or
more of the following:
(a) The word “corporation”, “company", “limited”,
“limited liability”, or an abbreviation of one such words;
and
(b) Punctuations, articles, conjunctions, contractions,
prepositions, abbreviations, different tenses, spacing, or
number of the same word or phrase. (N, from 2nd par. to

M)

Sec. 17

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

177

to law, rules and regulations, may summarily order the
corporation to immediately cease and desist from using
such name and require the corporation to register a new
one. The Commission shall also cause the removal of
all visible signages, marks, advertisements, labels, print
and other effects bearing such corporate name. Upon the
approval of the new corporate name, the Commission shall
issue a certificate of incorporation under the amended
name. (N)
If the corporation fails to comply with the Commission’s
order, the Commission may hold the corporation and its
responsible directors or officers in contempt and/or hold
them administratively, civilly and/or criminally liable under
this Code and other applicable laws and/or revoke the
registration of the corporation. (N)

Name of the corporation.

—

The corporation acquires juridical personality
in the certificate of incorporation. (Sec. 17.)
the
stated
name
under
the
of succession by its corporate name.
has
power
A corporation
(Sec. 35[2].) It is the name of the corporation which identifies and
distinguishes it from other corporations, firms, or entities in the
same manner as the name of an individual designates the person and
distinguishes him from other persons. By its name, a corporation is
authorized to transact business.’
The name of a corporation is, therefore, peculiarly essential to
its existence and to its identity.
(2) Nature.
A corporate name is regarded in the nature
of a trademark even though composed of individual names, and
its simulation may be restrained. After adoption, it follows the
corporation. (9-A Words and Phrases 391-392; see Sec. 18.)
A corporation's right to use its corporate and trade name is a
property right, a right in rem which it may assert and protect against
the whole world in the same manner as it may protect its tangible
property against trespass or conversion. It cannot be impaired or
(1) Importance.

—

The Commission, upon determination that the
corporate name is: (1) not distinguishable from a name
already reserved or registered for the use of another
corporation; (2) already protected by law; (3) contrary

’A corporation need not register with the Department of Trade and Industry if it
does not have the intention to use another business name other than the corporate name
registered with the SEC. (SEC Opinion No. 21 -04, April 2, 2004.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

178

Sec 17

defeated by subsequent appropriation by another corporation in the
same field. (Philips Export B.V. vs. Court of Appeals, 206 SCRA 457
[1992].)
Limitations upon use of corporate name.
(1) Similarity with, or not distinguishable from, another corporate
name. Under the old Corporation Code, the corporate name must
not be identical or deceptively or confusingly similar to that of any
existing corporation, or is patently deceptive or confusing, (see Sec.
18). Under the Revised Corporation Code, the corporate name must
be distinguishable from that already reserved or registered for use
of another corporation.2
(a) A corporation acquires its name by choice and need
not select a name identical with or similar to one already
appropriated by a senior corporation while an individual's
name is thrust upon him. It can no more use a corporate name
in violation of the rights of others than an individual can use
his name legally acquired so as to mislead the public and injure
another. (Philips Export B.V. vs. Court of Appeals, 206 SCRA 457
[1992].)
•
-.1
•
.

—

^corporation gives protection to the name of the corporation. Before the Securities
and Exchange Commission registers any articles of incorporation, the records are
checked to make sure that the proposed name is not identical with or closely similar to
the name of an entity previously registered with it. Moreover, the registrant is required to
submit a written undertaking that the corporation will change its name in the event that
another person, firm or entity has acquired a prior right to the use of the same name or
one similar to it. (SEC Opinion, May 26, 1968.) Such entity may be a foreign corporation
whose trade name, being a property right, a right in rem, is entitled to protection even in
countries where it does not transact any business. (Western Equipment & Supply Co. vs.
Reyes, 51 Phil. 115 [1927].) A corporation need not register with the Department of Trade
and Industry the SEC-approved corporate name if it does not have any intention to use
another business name. (SEC Opinion No. 21-04, April 2, 2004.)
Neither the Corporation Code nor the Guidelines contains any provision restricting
the use of the words "United States" or the initials "U.S." as part of the corporate name.
Hence, for as long as they would not be deceptive in the light of the purposes for which
the corporation is organized, the use of such words may be allowed, without prejudice
to the provision of any existing international agreement to the contrary. (SEC Opinion,
April 12, 1988.)
The SEC has prohibited domestic operations from using the names of multinational
corporations unless they are set up as subsidiaries or affiliates of these multinational
corporations to prevent misimpressions created by new corporation organized by

obscure investors.

Sec 17

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

179

For as long as a corporation is existing whether or not it is
its corporate name cannot be used by any other
operation,
in
group. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 2, 1993.)
(b) If any corporation could adopt at pleasure the name
of another corporation, the practice would cause confusion in
using corporate names and unfair and fraudulent competitions,
open the door to frauds upon the public, promote the evasion
of legal obligations and duties, and result in difficulties of
administration and supervision over corporations. (Wycott v.
Howe Scale Co., 122 Fed. 348; Red Line Transportation vs. Rural
Transit, 30 Phil. 549 [1915]; Industrial Refractories Corporation
of the Philippines vs. Court of Appeals, 390 SCRA 252 [2002].)
The enforcement of the protection accorded by Section 17 to
corporate names is lodged exclusively in the SEC. (GSIS Family
Bank vs. BPI Family Bank, 771 SCRA 284 [2015].) Not only for
the protection of the corporations involved but more so for the
protection of the public. It has the authority to deregister at
all times and under all circumstances corporate names which
in its estimation are likely to generate confusion. (De La Salle
Montessori International of Malolos, Inc. vs. The La Salle
Brothers, Inc., etc., 855 SCRA 38 [2018].)
(c) A name is not distinguishable even if contains one or
more of:
1) The
"company",
"corporation",
word
"incorporated", "limited", "limited liability", or an
abbreviation of one of such words; and
2) Punctuations, articles, conjunctions, contractions,
preposition, abbreviation, different tenses, spacing, or
number of the same word or phrase.
(d) The SEC, upon determination that the corporate name
is: (1) not distinguishable from a name already reserved or
registered for the use of another corporation; (2) already
protected by law; or (3) contrary to law, rules and regulations,
may summarily order the corporation to immediately cease
and desist from using such name and require the corporation to
register a new one. The SEC shall also cause the removal of all
visible signages, marks, advertisements, labels, prints and other

effects bearing such corporate name.

I

I
180

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 17

If the corporation fails to comply with the SEC's order, the
SEC may hold the corporation and its responsible directors
or officers in contempt and/or hold them administratively,
civilly and/ or liable under the Revised Corporation Code and
other applicable laws and/or revoke the registration of the
corporation. (Sec. 17.)

Rules on the use of corporate name.

The SEC has laid down these guidelines on the use of corporate
and partnership names:3
(1) The corporate name shall contain the word "Corporation" or
"Incorporated," or the abbreviations "Corp." or "Inc." respectively;
(2) In the case of a One Person Corporation, the corporate
name shall contain the word "OPC" either below or at the end of its
corporate name;
(3) The partnership name shall bear the word "Company" or
"Co." and if it is a limited partnership, the word "Limited" or "Ltd."
A professional partnership name may bear the word "Company,"
"Associates," or "Partners," or other similar descriptions;
(4) The corporate name of a foundation shall use the word
"Foundation";

(5) The corporate name of all nonstock, non-profit corporations,
including non-govemmental organizations and foundations,
engaging in microfinance activities shall use the word "Microfinance"
or "Microfinancing"; provided that said corporations shall state in
the purpose clause of their articles of incorporation that they shall
conduct microfinance operations pursuant to Republic Act No. 8425
or the Social Reform and Poverty Alleviation Act;
(6) A term that describes the business of a corporation in its
name should refer to its primary purpose. If there are two such
terms, the first should refer to the primary purpose and the second
to the secondary purpose;
(7) The name shall be distinguishable from other corporate or
partnership name registered with the SEC or with the Department
of Trade and Industry, in the case of sole proprietorships;
’See Appendix D: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 13-19, June 21, 2019 (Amended Guidelines
•nd Procedures on the Use of Corporate and Partnership Names).

Sec 17

TITLE fl. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

181

(8) If the name applied for is similar to that of a registered

corporation or partnership, the applicant shall add one or more
distinctive words to the proposed name to remove the similarity or
differentiate it from the registered name.
However, the addition of one or more distinctive words shall
not be allowed if the registered name is coined or unique unless
the board of directors or majority of the partners of the subject
corporation or partnership gives its consent to the applied name;
(9) Punctuation marks, spaces, signs, symbols, and other similar
characters, regardless of their form or arrangement, shall not be
acceptable as distinguishing words for purposes of differentiating a
proposed name from a registered name;
(10) A name that consists solely of special symbols, punctuation
marks or specially designed characters shall not be registered;
(11) Business or trade name which is different from the
corporate or partnership name shall be indicated in the articles of
incorporation or partnership. A company may have more than one
business or trade name;
(12) A trade name or trademark registered with the Intellectual
Property Office may be used as part of the corporate or partnership
name of a party other than its owner if the latter gives its consent to
such use;
(13) The full name or surname of a person may be used in a
corporate or partnership name if he or she is a stockholder, member
or partner of the said entity and has consented to such use; if the
person is already deceased, the consent shall be given by his or her

estate;

(14) A single stockholder of a One Person Corporation
(OPC) may use his/her name; provided, that said name shall be
accompanied with descriptive words aside from the suffix OPC;

The single stockholder may also use the name of another person
provided consent was given by the said person or if deceased, his
estate. The name shall be accompanied by the descriptive words
other than the suffix OPC.
(15) The SEC may require a registrant to explain to its satisfaction
the reason for the use of a person's name;

182

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 17
Sec 17

(16) The meaning of initials used in a name shall be stated by
the registrant in the articles of incorporation, articles of partnership
or in a separate document signed by an incorporator, director or
partner, as the case may be;
(17) The name of an internationally known foreign corporation,
or something similar to it, cannot be used by a domestic corporation
unless it is its subsidiary, and the parent corporation has consented
to such use.
However, a name written in a foreign language, even if registered
in another country, shall not be registered if the name violates
good morals, public order or public policy, or has an offensive or
indecorous meaning in any of the country's official languages or
major dialects;
(18) The name of a local geographical unit, site or location cannot
be used as corporate or partnership name unless it is accompanied
by a descriptive word or phrase, e.g., Pasay Food Store, Inc;

(19) Pursuant to existing laws, these words and phrases can be
used in the corporate or partnership name in the manner enumerated
below:
(a) "Finance Company," "Financing Company," "Finance
and Leasing Company," and "Leasing Company," "Investment
Company," "Investment House" by entities engaged in the
financing or investment house business (R.A. 8556 and Pres.
Decree 129);
(b) "Lending Company" and "Lending Investor" by lending
companies (R.A. 9474), or "Pawnshop" by entities authorized to
operate pawnshops (P.D. 114);
(c) "Bank," "Banking," "Banker," "Savings and Loan
Association" (R.A. 8367), "Trust Corporation," "Trust Company"
or words of similar meaning by entities engaged in the banking
or trust business (R.A. 8791);
(d) "United Nations," "UN," in full or abbreviated form
exclusively by the United Nations and its attached agencies
(R.A. 226);
(e) "Bonded" by entities with licensed warehouses (R.A.
247);

TITLE II INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

183

(f) "SPV-AMC" by corporations authorized to act as special
purpose vehicle (R.A. 9182);

(g) The name of an international governmental organization,
such as "International Criminal Police Organization"
(INTERPOL), "International Monetary Fund" (IMF), and
"International Labour Organization" (ILO) may not be used
as part of a corporate or partnership name unless when duly
authorized or allowed by the SEC; and
(h) ASEAN (protected under Article 6ter of the Paris
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, adopted in
1883 and revised in Stockholm in 1967).

(20) The practice of a profession regulated by a special law
which, among others, provides for the permissible use of the
profession's name in a firm, partnership or association shall govern
the use of the name, e.g., "Engineer" or "Engineering" (R.A. 1582),
"Architect" (R.A. 9266), or "Geodetic Engineer" (R.A. 8560).

Notwithstanding the limitations mentioned above, any
association registered by entities engaged in the listed activities
may use the profession's name, e.g., Association of Engineers of the

Philippines, Inc.

(21) Unless otherwise authorized by the SEC the words
and phrases enumerated below can be used only by the entities
mentioned:
(a) "Investment(s)" or "Capital" by entities organized as
investment house or investment company;
(b) "Capital" by entities organized as investment house,

investment company or holding company;
(c) "Asset /Investment /Fund /Financial Management," or
"Asset /In vestment /Fund /Financial Adviser," or any similar
words or phrases by entities organized as investment company
adviser or holders of investment management activities (IMA)
license from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas;
(d) "National," "Bureau," "Commission," "State," and
other similar words, acronyms, abbreviations that have gained
wide acceptance in the Philippines by entities that perform
governmental functions;

184

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 17

(e) "Association" and "Organization" or similar words
which pertain to nonstock corporations by entities primarily
engaged in non-profit activities; and

Exchange /Futures Exchange /Derivatives
Exchange," "Stock Broker /Securities Broker /Derivatives
Broker," "Commodity /Financial Futures Merchant /Broker,"
"Securities Clearing Agency /Stock Clearing Agency," "Plans"
or any similar words or phrases by entities organized as an
exchange, broker dealer, commodity futures broker, clearing
agency, or preneed company under the Securities Regulation
(f) "Stock

Code (R.A. 8799).
(22) Pursuant to Republic Act 10530, or "The Act Defining the
Use and Protection of the Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Crystal
Emblems," the use of the words "red cross," "red crescent," or "red
crystal" or their translation in any official language and dialect
cannot be used or registered as part of a corporate or partnership
name, unless with the consent of the Philippine Red Cross. (SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 13-19, June 21, 2019.)

Use of changed or abandoned corporate name.
(1) The name of a corporation or partnership that has been
dissolved or whose registration has been revoked shall not be used
by another corporation or partnership within five (5) years from the
approval of dissolution or five (5) years from the date of revocation,
unless its use has been allowed at the time of the dissolution or
revocation by the stockholders, members or partners who represent
a majority of the outstanding capital stock or membership of the
dissolved corporation or partnership, as the case may be.
(2) A corporate or partnership name, which was previously
used but become the subject of amendment, shall not be re-registered
or used by another corporation or partnership for a period of three
(3) years from the date of the approval of the adoption of the new

corporate or partnership name.
An earlier period may be allowed for the registration or use
of the former corporate or partnership name provided that the
corporation or partnership, which previously owned the used
corporate or partnership name, gives its consent.

Sec 17

’ TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION

185

OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

(3) The name of the absorbed /constituent corporation may not
be used unless it is the surviving corporation intending to use the

said absorbed /constituent corporate name. Another corporation
may use the names of absorbed /constituent corporation if consent
of the surviving corporation is obtained. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 13-

.

19, June 21, 2019.)

•

Remedy of corporation whose name has
been adopted by another.

—

(1) Injunction.
A corporation has an exclusive right to the
use of its name, which may be protected by injunction upon a
principle similar to that upon which persons are protected in using
trademarks and trade names.4
(a) Fraud upon the aggrieved corporation.
The use of a
name similar to one adopted by another corporation, whether
a business or a non-profit organization, if misleading or likely
to injure in the exercise of its corporate functions, regardless of
intent, may be prevented by the corporation having a prior right,
by a suit for injunction against the new corporation to prevent
the use of the name. (Philips Export B.V. vs. Court of Appeals,
206 SCRA 457 [1992]; Ang Mga Kaanib sa Iglesia ng Dios Kay
Kristo Hesus, H.S.K. sa Bansang Pilipinas, Inc. vs. Iglesias ng
Dios Kay Cristo Jesus, 372 SCRA 171 [2001].)

—

,

Such principle proceeds upon the theory that it is a fraud
on the corporation which has acquired a right to that name and
perhaps carried on its business, that another should attempt to
use the same name, or the same name with slight variation in
such a way as to introduce persons to deal with it in the belief
that they are dealing with the corporation which has given a
reputation to the name. (Philips Export B.V. vs. Court of Appeals,
supra.)

—

(b) Interference with its business.
Broadly speaking, the
rule is that the right of a corporation to enjoin the use of a similar
4A trade name is any individual name or surname, first name, device or work used by
manufacturers, industrials, merchants and others to identify their businesses, vocations,
or occupations. It refers to the business and its goodwill while trademark refers
to the
goods. (Converse Rubber Corp. vs. Universal Rubber Products, supra.)

1
186

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 17

name by another depends upon whether such use has interfered
with the former's business whatever it may be and without
regard to whether it is commercial, trading or otherwise. Thus,
not only are corporations organized for pecuniary profit entitled
to protect their names by injunction, but it has also been held
that an injunction may issue to protect the name of a benevolent
fraternal society, a patriotic society, a social club, or a charitable
religious society, (see 6 Fletcher, pp. 26-47; 18 C.J.S. 579-580.)
(2) De-registration. To restrain the wrongful assumption of a
name by a corporation is not to annul the corporation by depriving
it of a name. If restrained from using a name chosen, it may choose
another name. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 684.) Section 17 empowers the SEC
to summarily order the corporation to immediately cease and desist
the use of a corporate name (see Ang Mga Kaanib sa Iglesia ng Dios
Kay Kristo Hesus, H.S.K. sa Bansang Pilipinas, Inc. vs. Iglesia ng
Dios Kay Cristo Jesus, supra.)

—

Change of corporate name.

—

(1) Compliance with formalities.
A corporate name is an
artificial name and is selected with an object, and may be changed
and a new one taken. (9-A Words and Phrases 391.)
A corporation can change the name originally selected by it after
complying with the formalities prescribed by law, to wit; amendment
of the articles of incorporation and filing of the amendment with the
SEC. (Sec. 15.) Hence, the mere approval by the stockholders of the
amendment of the articles of incorporation changing the corporate
name does not automatically change the name of the corporation
as of that date. (Phil. First Inc. Co., Inc. vs. Hartigan, 34 SCRA 252
[1970].)

—

When a change of name is approved, it
is required that the SEC must issue an amended certificate of
incorporation under the amended name. (Sec. 15.)
(2) Effectivity.

The change of name is deemed effective as of the date of the
SEC's approval of the amended articles or from the date of filing
with it if not acted upon within six (6) months from the date of filing
for a cause not attributable to the corporation. (Sec. 15, last par.) Said
change impliedly amends the corporate name as appearing in the

Sec 17

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

187

bylaws; hence, the corporation need not amend its bylaws to reflect
its new corporate name. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 2, 1986.)
An authorized change in the name of the
(3) Effect.
corporation, whether effected by a special act or under a general
law, has no more effect upon its identity as a corporation than a
change of name of natural person upon his identity.5

—

Effect of misnomer of a corporation.

—

(1) Contracts.
The rule is that the mere misnomer of a
corporation in a bond, note, or other deed or contract does not
render the same invalid or inoperative.

Nor will a grant or conveyance to or by a corporation be avoided
because of a misnomer. (18 CJ.S. 572-574; 1 Fletcher, pp. 742-743.)
This rule has also been applied in case of subscription to the stock of
a corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 680.)

—

(2) Suit by, or against, corporation.
The corporation may sue
or be sued thereon in its true name with proper allegation and
proof that it is the corporation intended; and its identity may be
established by parol evidence.

Generally speaking, a corporation if sued by the wrong name is
bound if duly served. (21 R.C.L. 599.) If there is enough expressed
to show there is such artificial being and to distinguish it from
all others, the body corporate is well named although there is a
variation of words and syllables. (10 C.J.S. 572; Moultrie Country v.
Fairfield, 105 U.S. 370, 26 L. ed. 945.)

’The change of name does not affect the property, rights, or Labilities of the
corporation, nor lessen or add to its obligations. After a corporation has effected a change
in its name, it should sue and be sued in its new name. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 682-683.) It is in
no sense a new corporation, nor the successor of the original corporation. It is the same
corporation with a different name and its character is in no respect changed. As a general
rule, officers and directors who acted in their capacity as agents of the corporation under
the old corporate name, bear no personal liability for acts done or contracts entered into
by them, if duly authorized. (Republic Planters Bank vs. Court of Appeals, 216 SCRA 738
(1992); PC. Javier & Sons, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 462 SCRA 36 [2005].)

188

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 18
Sec 18

Sec. 18. Registration, Incorporation and Commencement
of Corporate Existence. — A person or group of persons
desiring to incorporate shall submit the Intended corporate
name to the Commission for verification. If the Commission
finds that the name is distinguishable from a name already
reserved or registered for the use of another corporation,
not protected by law and is not contrary to law, rules and
regulations, the name shall be reserved in favor of the
incorporators. The incorporators shall then submit their
articles of incorporation and bylaws to the Commission.
(N)
If the Commission finds that the submitted documents
and information are fully compliant with the requirements
of this Code, other relevant laws, rules and regulations, the
Commission shall Issue the certificate of Incorporation. (N)

A private corporation organized under this Code
commences its corporate existence and juridical
personality from the date the Commission issues the
certificate of incorporation under its official seal and
thereupon the incorporators, stockholders/members
and their successors shall constitute a body corporate
under the name stated in the articles of incorporation for
the period of time mentioned therein, unless said period
is extended or the corporation is sooner dissolved in
accordance with law. (A)

Issuance of certificate of incorporation.
A person or group of persons organized under the Revised
Corporation Code commences corporate existence and juridical
personality from the date the SEC issues a certificate of incorporation
under its official seal; and thereupon the incorporators, stockholders /
members and their successors shall constitute a body corporate
under the name stated in the articles of incorporation for the period
of time mentioned, unless the period is extended or the corporation
is sooner dissolved in accordance with law.

An unregistered organization cannot exercise the powers, rights,
and privileges expressly granted by the Revised Corporation Code
to registered corporations. Its status is that of an ordinary association
which has no separate juridical personality. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 20,
1987.)

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

189

Acquisition of juridical personality.
A corporation
(1) Issuance of certificate of incorporation.
commences to have juridical personality and legal existence only
from the moment the SEC issues to the incorporators a certificate of
incorporation under its official seal.
(a) Such certificate is a final determination of the
corporation's right and competence to transact business or enter
into contracts in its name. Any entity without the necessary
corporate legal personality has the status of an "unregistered"
association and the members themselves shall be held personally
liable for their acts or contracts, and not the association.
(b) It is the certificate of incorporation that not only gives
juridical personality to a corporation but places it under the
jurisdiction of the SEC. This jurisdiction is not affected even
if the authority to operate a certain specialized activity is
withdrawn by the appropriate regulatory body other than the
SEC. (Filipinas Loan Company, Inc. vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 356 SCRA 193 [2001].)

—

(c) The issuance of the certificate calls the corporation into
being but it is not ready to do business until it is organized.
The corporation must formally organize and commence the
transaction of its business within five (5) years from the date of
its incorporation or, otherwise, its corporate powers shall cease
and it shall be deemed dissolved. (Sec. 21.) The law under which
the corporation is organized may require a separate permit or
license to operate from other government agencies.
(2) Filing of articles of incorporation.
In the case of religious
corporations, the Revised Corporation Code does not require the
SEC to issue a certificate of incorporation, (see Secs. 110, 133.) Section
110 states that from and after the filing with the SEC of the articles of
incorporation, the chief archbishop, etc., shall become a corporation
sole. (par. 2.)

—

—

(3) Registration of cooperative. A cooperative acquires juridical
personality upon registration with the Cooperatives Development

Authority. (R.A. No. 11364, Sec. 4[c, f].) It need not be registered
again with the SEC.

The methods or causes of dissolution of corporations are

discussed under Title XTV.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

190

Sec 19

Sec 19

TITLE fl. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

191

Sec. 19. De Facto Corporations. — The due Incorporation
of any corporation claiming in good faith to be a corporation
under this Code, and its right to exercise corporate powers,
shall not be inquired into collaterally in any private suit
to which such corporation may be a party. Such inquiry
may be made by the Solicitor General in a quo warranto

Mission of Seventh Day Adventist, Inc, G.R. No. 100416, July 21,
2006.)
Stockholders of a de facto corporation enjoy exemption from
personal liability for corporate obligations as do stockholders of de
jure corporations.

proceeding.

Existence of law.

De Jure corporation/de facto corporation
defined.

(1) A de jure' corporation is created in strict or substantial
conformity with the mandatory statutory requirements for
incorporation and the right of which to exist as a corporation cannot
be successfully attached or questioned by any party even in a direct
proceeding for that purpose by the State.
(2) A de facto2 corporation is one which actually exists for all
practical purposes as a corporation but which has no legal right to
corporate existence as against the State. (8 Fletcher, pp. 62-63.) It is a
corporation from the fact of its acting as such, though not in law or
right a corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 593-594.)

In order that there can be a de facto corporation, there must be
a law authorizing it to be a corporation de jure for there cannot be
a corporation de facto when there cannot be one (1) de jure, even
though there may have been an assumption of corporate powers.
(1) There cannot be a corporation de facto under an
unconstitutional statute for such statute is void and a void law is no
law. (Clark v. American Cannal Coal Co., 733 N.E. 1083.) A statute,
however, is presumed valid until it has been judicially declared

otherwise.
(2) Similarly, a corporation cannot be recognized as having a de
facto existence when its purpose is prohibited by law or contrary to
public policy. (Art. 1409, Civil Code.)

It has not complied with all the requirements necessary to be
a de jure corporation but has complied sufficiently to be accorded
corporate status as against third parties although not against the
State.

(3) Neither can there be a corporation for the practice of a learned
profession absent a law expressly permitting the organization of
such corporations. (1 Fletcher, p. 339.)

Requisites of a de facto corporation.

(1) Absence of bona fide attempt to incorporate. When there has
been no attempt in good faith to create a corporation de jure, there can
be no de facto corporation. Any other rule might well open the door
to fraud upon the public. Mere intent is not sufficient. In addition,
there must be a bona fide attempt to comply with the requirements of
the law (8 Fletcher, pp. 102-103.), which goes far enough to amount
to "colorable compliance" with the law. (Ballantine, p. 77.)

It is essential to the existence of a de facto corporation that there
be:
(1) A valid law under which a corporation with powers
assumed might be incorporated;

(2) Bona fide attempt to organize a corporation under such law;

and
(3) Actual use or exercise in good faith of corporate powers
conferred upon it by law. (see Seventh Day Adventist Conference
Church of Southern Philippines, Inc. vs. Northeastern Mindanao

—

'According to law.

2"

In fact"

’!

'

Bona fide attempt to incorporate.

—

—

(2) Defects precluding creation of corporation.
According to
the Supreme Court, "(t]he filing of articles of incorporation and
the issuance of the certificate of incorporation are essential for the
existence of a de facto corporation." In fine, it is the act of registration
with the SEC through the issuance of a certificate of incorporation that
marks the beginning of an entity's corporate existence. (Missionary

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

192

Sec. 19

Sea 19

I

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

193

I

Sisters of Our Lady of Fatima v. Alzona, G.R. No. 224307, August 6,
2018, citing Seventh Day Adventist Conference Church of Southern
Philippines, Inc. v. Northeastern Mindanao Mission of Seventh Day
Adventist, Inc., 528 Phil. 647 [2006].)

Colorable compliance with the law.
To constitute a corporation de facto, there must be a colorable
compliance with the statute, but there need not be a substantial
compliance. A substantial compliance makes the body a corporation
de jure. (Clark on Corporations, p. 107.)
There is no fixed rule on how far the proceedings must go or
what steps will amount to this colorable compliance. It will depend
on the situation and knowledge of the parties. The mere naked
claim and assumption of corporate name and capacity will not
give a pretended corporation the de facto status. It is not enough
to show that the associates have intended to incorporate and have
agreed among themselves to act and have acted as if they were a
corporation. The efforts to incorporate must give an appearance
of sufficiency of compliance with statutory requirements, so that
the associates may in good faith suppose that they have actually
become incorporated. (Ballantine, pp. 77-78.)

Thus, these defects which will preclude the creation of even a de
facto corporation:
(a) Absence of articles of incorporation;
(b) Failure to file articles of incorporation with the SEC
(Cagayan Fishing Dev. Co. vs. Sandiko, 60 Phil. 223 [1934].); and
(c) Lack of certificate of incorporation from the SEC.

In these cases, the omissions would be fatal to de facto corporate
existence for even its stockholders may not probably claim good
faith in being a corporation. The filing of articles of incorporation
and the issuance of certificate of incorporation may, therefore, be
considered essential for the existence of a de facto corporation. (Hall
vs. Picdo, 86 Phil. 603 [1950]; see Albert vs. University Publishing
Co., Inc., 13 SCRA 84 [1965].)

—

These are
examples of defects which do not preclude the creation of a de facto
corporation:
(a) The articles of incorporation fail to state all the matters
required by the Revised Corporation Code to be stated, or state
some incorrectly;
(b) The name of the corporation closely resembles that of a
pre-existing corporation that it will tend to deceive the public;
(3) Defects resulting in creation of de facto corporation.

Use of corporate powers in good

(c) The number of incorporators is more than 15;
1»

(d) An incorporator who is a natural person is not of legal

age;
(e) The percentage of Filipino ownership of the capital

stock required for the businesses is less than that prescribed by
law; and
(f) The failure to submit its bylaws on time. (Sawadjaen vs:
Court of Appeals, 459 SCRA 516 [2005].)

faith.

,

To create a corporation de facto, it is not sufficient to show the
existence of a law under which a corporation might be formed and
an honest attempt to comply with the requirement thereof, but it is
also necessary to show an actual use or exercise of corporate powers

or franchise.

—

(1) Use contemplated.
In substance, use consists in an
enjoyment and exercise (although not rightful) of such corporate
franchises and powers as would be given by the law to an association
had the attempted organization been perfected?

The acts relied upon as showing use must be corporate acts as
distinguished from acts which might as well be performed by an
incorporate association, or from acts of individuals which would not
be corporate acts if there were a charter. But if the business is such
that it can only be carried on by a corporation/ then the carrying on
’This element seems to be a factor of minor significance. (Ballantine, p. 77.)
^Taking subscriptions to and issuing shares of stock, electing directors and officers,

adopting bylaws and buying a lot and constructing and leasing a building upon it, are
sufficient acts of user of corporate powers to constitute a corporation de facto. It is doubtful.

I
194

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 19
Sec. 19

of such business is enough since its members must of necessity act
as a corporation, if they act at all. (8 Fletcher, pp. 149-159.)
Furthermore, it is
(2) Duty to correct defect if discovered.
faith
in claiming to
in
the
act
must
good
corporation
essential that
(Sec.
19.)
powers.
and
exercising corporate
be a corporation
Therefore, if after incorporation, the incorporators discovered
that they have not complied substantially with the law and still
continued transacting business as a corporation, without doing
anything to correct the defect, the privilege of de facto existence can
no longer be invoked.

(1) By the State.

—

— The State must bring

195

a direct proceeding

(quo warranto) against the corporation to oust it from exercising

corporate powers usurped by it and to have it dissolved. So far as
the State is concerned, the distinction between a corporation de jure
and a corporation de facto is that one can successfully resist a suit by
the State, brought directly to test the rightfulness of its existence,
and the other cannot.
(2) By private individuals. As to individuals dealing with it as
a corporation, there are no essential distinctions. The stockholders
or members of both are alike protected from individual liability
for debts except to the extent provided by the charter or act of
incorporation. (9-A Words and Phrases 96.)

—

Basis of de facto doctrine.

The recognition of de facto existence has been found necessary
to promote the security of business transactions and to eliminate
quibbling over irregularities.

Direct attack/collateral attack of corporate
existence defined.

(1) A third person dealing with a corporation will rarely be
prejudiced if the company is recognized as a corporation despite
minor defects in its formation.

(1) Direct attack is one whereby the State, in a proceeding
brought for that purpose, attacks the existence of an association

claiming to be a corporation. A direct attack can only be instituted
by the government through the Solicitor General by quo warranto
proceedings. (Sec. 19; see Sec. 137.)

(2) Seldom would it be just to allow a wrongdoer to quibble
over such objections to escape liability for wrongdoing.

(2) A collateral attack is one whereby corporate existence is
questioned in some incidental proceedings not provided by law for
the express purpose of attacking the corporate existence.

(3) Equally, it would be unjust to allow a claimant against a
supposed company to assert the individual liability of innocent
passive investors on the ground of flaws in the formal steps of
incorporation, when they have attempted in good faith to comply
with statutory requirements and the objecting party is not prejudiced.
(Ballantine, p. 87.)

ILLUSTRATION:
I

Questioning validity of corporate
existence.

The well-settled rule is that if a de facto corporation actually
exists, its existence as a corporation cannot be collaterally attacked

either by the State or by private individuals.
however, whether the mere organization of a corporation by the election of officers and
adoption of a board resolution authorizing a contract preliminary to the actual doing of
business with third parties will constitute "acts of user." (Ballantine, pp. 81-82.)

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

(

I
i

Upon failure of A to pay his debt, X Corporation sued A.
Can A interpose the defense that X, being a de facto corporation,
has no right to exist as a corporation and, therefore, has no
capacity to enter into any contract and to sue in its own name?
No, because A is attacking the existence of X collaterally.
The defense of A is merely an incident to the main action or
principal case the purpose of which is to enforce the contract
of X with A. The right of X to exist as a corporation can only
be inquired into directly in a quo warranto proceeding brought
precisely for the purpose and the proceeding can only be
instituted by the government through the Solicitor General
(Sec. 19.) and not by A.

196

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 19

Rule against collateral attack.

—

(1) Rationale. The rule against collateral attack upon corporate
existence is based upon the ground, not of equitable estoppel (see
Sec. 20.), but of public policy.
(a) Individual right is not invaded; it is the State's right and
authority which are invaded and usurped. If the State, which
alone grants the authority to incorporate, remains silent, an
individual would not be allowed and permitted to raise the
inquiry.
(b) It would produce endless confusion and hardship and
probably destroy the corporation if the legality of its existence
could be questioned in every suit to which it is a party, for then
no judgment could be rendered which would finally settle the
question. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 606.)
(c) Likewise, the rule is in the interest of the public
and is essential to the validity of business transactions with
corporations. (Ibid., 594.) (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 01-08,’

December 13, 2007.)

—

(2) When rule not applicable. The rule that collateral attack on
the organic entity or existence of a corporation will not be permitted,
does not apply, however, when the lack of right or the wrongdoing
of the corporation is in issue because in violation of public policy
or of express or implied statutory requirement, such as denial of
its right to enforce contracts entered into without compliance with
prohibitions of express or implied statutory or public policy. (Ibid.,
605.) Thus, the defendant may question the personality of a foreign
corporation transacting business in the Philippines to maintain a
suit because it is not duly licensed to do business in our country,
(see Sec. 150.)

Where organization not even a de facto
corporation.

If there has been a bona fide attempt to incorporate, and the law has
been so far complied with as to make the association a corporation
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp. 197-198

Sec 19

TITLE IL INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

de facto, the only way its corporate existence can be questioned is in
a direct proceeding by the State, brought for the purpose. Private
individuals cannot raise the objection in such a case, either directly
or indirectly, and nobody can raise the objection collaterally.

—

If failure to comply with
conditions precedent prevents the coming into existence of any
corporation either de jure or de facto, then, on principle and in reason,
the question may be raised collaterally and directly, and by private
individuals and by the State, unless there is something to operate as
an estoppel.
When a private individual, therefore, raises the objection that
conditions precedent has not been complied with, the question,
absent elements of estoppel, is whether there is a corporation de
facto. If there is, he cannot object; otherwise, he can.
(2) Capacity to sue or be sued. If a party is not either de jure or
de facto, it has no legal capacity to sue or be sued. And where the
corporate existence of the plaintiff suing as a corporation is defined,
the burden is on it to prove its corporate existence either de jure or de
facto, or at least to show an estoppel on the part of the defendant to
deny such existence.
(1) Direct or collateral attack.

—

—

(3) Liability as partners.
If neither a de jure nor a de facto
corporation results, the incorporators should be held liable as
partners with stockholders who subscribed to stocks knowing the
failure of the attempted incorporation of the business. (Sec. 21.)

It is regular courts, not the SEC, that have jurisdiction over
disputes or controversies among them.
(4) Estoppel as a defense. Where there is not even a corporation
de facto, a private person may, according to many cases, be barred
from raising the objection on the ground that he is estopped by
his conduct, as by having dealt with the pretended corporation as
a corporation, or by having held it out to the public as a legally
constituted corporation. (Ibid., Clark on Corporation, pp. 65-66.)

—

Proof of corporate existence.

—

(1) Proof of de jure existence.
The sufficiency of the proof of
corporate existence will depend upon the nature of the proceeding
in which the question is raised and the circumstances of the

198

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 19

particular case. In quo warranto proceedings by the State to test
the right of an alleged corporation to exercise corporate powers,
corporate existence de jure must be shown; and to show this, it must
be made to appear that there is a valid law creating or authorizing
such a corporation, that there was a valid organization under it and
a substantial compliance with all condition precedent.
(2) Proof of de facto existence.
On the other hand, as has been
stated, if the question of corporate existence is raised collaterally, it
is sufficient if a de facto existence be shown. Such proof is admissible
whenever the question comes up collaterally as in a criminal
prosecution for forgery or any other crime against an alleged
corporation, or in any civil proceeding, other than proceedings by
the State to test the existence of the alleged corporation. It is only
necessary, to prove de facto corporate existence, to show a law under
which the alleged corporation might have been formed, a colorable
bona fide compliance with that law, and an assumption or user of
corporate powers.
(3) Proof of facts operating as an estoppel.
Again, there are
many cases in which a party may, be his conduct, as by dealing
with or holding out a body as a corporation, be estopped to deny its
existence as a corporate body. Here, it is unnecessary to prove even
a de facto corporate existence. All that is necessary is to show the
facts that will operate as an estoppel.6 (see Sec. 20.)

—

—

Powers and liabilities of a de facto
corporation.

—

(1) In general. Such a corporation is practically as good as a
de jure corporation. It is deemed to have a substantial legal existence
and ordinarily, in its relation with all persons except the State, has
the same powers and is subject to the same liabilities, duties and
responsibilities, as a corporation de jure, and is bound by all such
acts as it might rightfully perform if it were a corporation de jure.

‘Where a person has contacted, or dealt with an association as a corporation, proof
of that fact alone is prima facie evidence of the corporate existence of the body as against
him, as in action by the alleged corporation on a subscription to its stock, (dark on
Corporations, Sec 40.) Thus, an indorsee for a note payable to a corporation need not
prove the corporate capacity of the payee since the maker "engages that he will pay it
according to its tenor, and admits the existence of the payee and his then capacity to
indorse." (Act No. 2031 [Negotiable Instruments Law,) Sec. 60.)

Sec 19

TITLE n. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

199

In other words, so long as the State acquiesces in its existence
and its exercise of corporate functions, it is under the protection
of the same law and governed by the same legal principles as de
jure corporations, and may legally do and perform every act and
thing which the same entity could do or perform were it a de jure
corporation. As to all the world except the paramount authority
under which it acts and from which it receives its charter, it occupies
the same position as though in all respects valid, and even as against
the State, except in direct proceedings to arrest its usurpation of
power, its acts are to be treated as efficacious.
(2) Liability to taxation. So, the property of a de facto corporation
is subject to taxation in the same manner as though it were a de
jure corporation and under the statutes relative to the taxation of
corporations of the latter class. (1 Fletcher, pp. 627-628.)

—

—

(3) Binding effect of contracts. Similarly, a transfer of property
to or by a corporation de facto is valid and binding against all persons
except the State; bonds, deeds, and mortgage executed by such a
corporation are valid, not only as against the corporation itself, but
also as against anyone making a claim against its assets, whether as
a creditor directly of the corporation or as a creditor of its creditors

or stockholders.
(4) Protection against unauthorized acts. Whether a corporation
is de facto or de jure, it is entitled to protect itself from unauthorized
acts. (26 Am. Jur. 2d 583-584.)

—

Liabilities of officers and members
of a de facto corporation.

—

(1) In general.
The officers and directors (or trustees) of a
de facto corporation are subject to all the liabilities and penalties
attending to officers and directors duly chosen by a corporation de
jure, including liability under the criminal law, and their acts are
binding when such acts would be within the power of such officers
if the corporation were one de jure. (Ibid., p. 655.)
(2) Liability as partners to third persons. The members of a de
facto corporation cannot be held liable as partners by third persons
who deal with them in their supposed corporate capacity, merely
because of a technical defect in the formation of the corporation.
This is especially true where the stockholders did not know of

—

200

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 20

the defects and had no intent to become partners and because the
ostensible corporation is apparent to third persons. On the other
hand, where an attempt to organize a corporation fails by omission
of some substantial step or proceedings required by the law, its
members or stockholders are liable as partners.
The decisive question is always whether what has been done
toward incorporation and organization is sufficient to constitute a
corporation de jure or de facto. (Ibid., 600-601.)
(3) Liability among themselves. In actions among the members
themselves, however, for advances, commissions, etc., the test of
whether the corporation is de jure or de facto has been disregarded.
When persons associate together and dobusiness as a corporation and
the latter is defectively organized, their rights, duties, and liabilities,
as between themselves, should be determined and governed by the
express or implied terms, conditions, and limitations contemplated
by their agreement. They are not partners unless they have agreed
to be such.

—

The result thus obtained is the same as that reached on the
theory or estoppel. (Ibid., 601.)
Sec. 20. Corporation by Estoppel. — All persons who
assume to act as a corporation knowing it to be without
authority to do so shall be liable as general partners for
all debts, liabilities and damages incurred or arising as
a result thereof: Provided, however, That when any such
ostensible corporation is sued on any transaction entered
by it as a corporation or on any tort committed by it as
such, it shall not be allowed to use its lack of corporate
personality as a defense. (A)
Anyone who assumes an obligation to an ostensible
corporation as such cannot resist performance thereof on
the ground that there was in fact no corporation.

Sec 20

-

201

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

its responsibility for a contract it entered into and by virtue of which
it received advantages and benefits. (Lim Tong Lim vs. Philippine
Fishing Gear Industries, Inc., 317 SCRA 728 [1999]; see Christian

Children's Fund vs. National Labor Relations Commission, G.R.
No. 84502, June 30, 1989.)
(1) Principles as to de facto corporation not applicable. In certain
or
circumstances, an organization not a corporation de jure
a
to
given
the
as
far
parties
so
may,
not
even
de
facto
perhaps
transaction are concerned, be regarded practically as a corporation,
being recognized as such by the parties themselves.
An organization which has not complied with the conditions
precedent to even de facto existence is not, for any purpose, a
corporation. Nevertheless, the incidents of a corporate existence may
exist as between the parties by virtue of an estoppel. Thus, besides
corporation de jure and de facto, there is sometimes a recognition of a
third class known as corporation by estoppel, also known as ostensible

— —

—

corporation.1 (18 Am. Jur. 2d 615.)
The
(2) jurisdictional requirements not subject to estoppel.
doctrine of corporation by estoppel cannot override jurisdictional
requirements. Jurisdiction is fixed by law and is not subject to
agreement of the parties. Thus, it cannot be acquired through,
or waived, enlarged or diminished by any act or omission of the
parties; neither can it be conferred by the acquiescence of the court
or SEC. (Lozano vs. De los Santos, 274 SCRA 452 [1997].)

—

—

(3) Foundation of doctrine. Corporation by estoppel is founded
on principles of equity and is designed to prevent injustice and
unfairness. It applies when persons assume to form a corporation
and exercise corporate functions and enter into business relations
with third persons. Where there is no third person involved and the
conflict arises only among those assuming the form of a corporation
who, therefore, know that it has not been registered, there is no
corporation by estoppel. (Ibid.)

Estoppel to deny corporate existence.
An incorporated association which represented itself to be a
corporation will be estopped from denying its corporate capacity in
a suit against it by a third person who relied in good faith on such
representation. It cannot allege lack of personality to be sued to evade

'It is generally conceded that corporations by estoppel are not based upon the same
principles as are corporations de facto. The doctrine of de facto corporation has nothing to
do with the principle of estoppel. A corporation de facto cannot be created by estoppel, the
only effect of an estoppel being to prevent the raising of the question as to the existence
of a corporation. (Ibid.)

202

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 20
Sec. 20

While the doctrine is generally applied to protect the sanctity
of dealings with the public, nothing prevents its application in the
reverse. The very wording of the law which sets forth the doctrine
of corporation by estoppel permits such interpretation, such that a
person who has assumed an obligation in favor of a non-existent
corporation, having transacted with the latter as if it was duly
incorporated, is prevented from denying the existence of the latter
to avoid the enforcement of the contract.
Jurisprudence dictates that the doctrine of corporation by
estoppel applies for as long as there is no fraud and when the
existence of the association is attacked for causes attendant at the
time the contract or dealing sought to be enforced was entered into,
and not thereafter. (Missionary Sisters of Our Lady of Fatima vs.
Alzona, G.R. No. 224307, August 6, 2018.)
The application of the doctrine applies to a third party only when
he tries to escape liability on a contract from which he has benefited
on the irrelevant ground of defective incorporation. (International
Express Travel & Tour Services, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 343 SCRA
674 [2000].)
(4) Reason behind doctrine.

—

The reasons are obvious:
(a) An unincorporated association has no personality and
would be incompetent to act and appropriate for itself the
power and attributes of a corporation as provided by law;
(b) It cannot create against or confer authority on another
to act in its behalf; thus, those who act or purport to act as its
representatives or agents do so without authority and their own

risk; and

(c) As it is an elementary principle of law that a person
who acts as an agent without authority or without a principal
is himself regarded as the principal, possessed of all the right
and subject to all the liabilities of a principal, a person acting
or purporting to act on behalf of a corporation which has no
valid existence assumes such privileges and obligations and
becomes personally liable for contracts entered into or for other
acts performed as such agent. (Lim Tong Lim vs. Philippines
Fishing Gear Industries, Inc., 317 SCRA 728 [1999]; International
Express Travel & Tour Services, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, supra.)

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

203

Corporation by estoppel without
de facto existence.
(1) In some jurisdictions, the rule is that a corporation must
have at least a de facto existence before there can be an estoppel to
deny its existence; but this is not the universal rule. (Ibid.) The better
doctrine seems to be that the estoppel prevails, notwithstanding that
not all the three (3) requisites to constitute as association of persons
a de facto corporation are present. Corporation by estoppel may arise
even if no de facto corporation exists.2
(2) A corporation by estoppel has no real existence in law. It
is neither a de jure nor a de facto corporation, but is a "mere fiction
existing for the particular case, and vanishing where the element of
estoppel is absent." (8 Fletcher, p. 219.) It exists only between the

persons who misrepresented their status and the parties who relied
on the misrepresentation. Its existence may be attacked by any third
party unless the attacking party is estopped to treat the entity other
than as a corporation.
(3) Even if the ostensible corporation is proven to be legally
non-existent, a party may be estopped from denying its corporate
existence. In order for one to be estopped to deny the corporate
existence of an organization, he must have contracted or dealt with
it as a corporation.
(a) Thus, where a mortgage, promissory note, or other
instrument is given to a corporation, the party giving it
admits and is estopped to deny its existence as a corporate
body involving such contract or dealing, unless its existence
is attacked for causes which have arisen, since making the
contract or dealing relied on as an estoppel. (Chinese Chamber
of Commerce vs. Pua Te Ching, 14 Phil. 222 [1909]; Asia Banking
Corporation vs. Standard Products Co., 46 Phil. 145 [1924].)
(b) But if one deals with the members of a corporation as
a partnership, he is not estopped to show this fact or hold such
individuals liable as partners. (18 Am. Jur. 2 618.) However, one
’The doctrine of estoppel supplements the de facto doctrine in case of serious defects
and applies to the third party as well as to the purported corporation. (Ballantine,
p.
88.) Thus, if a party deals with a corporation as though it were
validly formed, he may
later be estopped from questioning the validity of the formation or the existence
of the
enterprises.

204

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 20

induced to deal with an apparent corporation by fraud will not
be estopped to deny the corporate existence. (Ibid., 617-618.)
ILLUSTRATION:
Where a group of persons represented that their
organization called X & Co. is a corporation, when it is not,
to Y who recognized it as such, and on this representation,
entered into a contract with Y, and without assuming to act
as a corporation entered into another contract with Z, in an
action against them on such contracts, they are estopped from
denying the corporate existence of X & Co. as against Y but not
as against Z. Neither is Y allowed to question or challenge the
validity of the organization or formation of X & Co. in an action
by the latter against the former.
If not all the associates participated or consented to the
representation, as to them, the doctrine of estoppel will not
apply.
If the group of persons (would-be corporation) does not
qualify as a corporation, whether de jure, de facto, or by estoppel,
there is no corporation and the stockholders are individually
liable.
Estoppel of persons dealing with
a corporation.

The doctrine of estoppel to deny corporate existence applies to
domestic and to foreign corporations.
(1) The stockholders or members of a pretended or ostensible
corporation who participated in holding it out as a corporation
are generally estopped or precluded to deny its existence against
creditors to escape liability for corporate debts or for unpaid part
of a subscription to stock. (8 Fletcher, pp. 275-278.) A corporation
which continues its business instead of liquidating its affairs after
the expiration of its corporate term, is a corporation by estoppel for
the purpose of being sued on its contracts, not a corporation de facto
because it no longer exists in fact and in law as a body corporate,
except only for purposes of liquidating its affairs, (see Sec. 139.)
(2) So, also are the third persons who deal with such a
corporation recognizing it as such and the pretended corporation
itself, estopped from denying its corporate existence and raising

Sec 20

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

205

the defense of its lack of corporate personality to defeat a liability
growing out of the contractual relation between them and such
entity (Compania Agricola de Ultramar vs. Reyes, 4 Phil. 2 [1904];
Paz vs. New International Environmental University, Inc., 756 SCRA
284 [2015].), or any tort committed by it as such (Sec. 21.), or later
taking advantage of their non-compliance with the law, chiefly in
cases where such persons have received the benefits of the contract.
(Merrill Lynch Futures, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 211 SCRA 824
[1992].)
(3) All persons not stockholders or members who assume to act
as a corporation knowing it to be without authority to do so shall
be liable as general partners for all debts, liabilities, and damages
incurred or arising as a result thereof?
frhe pertinent provisions of the Civil Code are:
Art. 1816. AU partners, including industrial ones, shaU be liable pro rata with all their
property and after aU the partnership assets have been exhausted, for the contracts which
may be entered into the name and for the account of the partnership, under its signature
and by a person authorized to act for the partnership. However, any partner may enter
into a separate obligation to perform a partnership contract, (n)
Art. 1817. Any stipulation against the liability laid down in the preceding article
shall be void, except as among the partners, (n)

Art. 1822. Where, by any wrongful act or omission of any partner acting in the
ordinary course of the business of the partnership or with the authority of his co-partners,
loss or injury is caused to any person, not being, a partner in the partnership, or any
penalty is incurred, the partnership is liable therefore to the same extent as the partner so
acting or omitting to act. (n)
Art. 1823. The partnership is bound to make good the loss:
(1) Where one partner acting within the scope of his apparent authority receives
money or property of a third person and misapplies it; and
(2) Where the partnership in the course of its business receives money or property
ot a third person and the money or property so received is misapplied by any partner
while it is in the custody of the partnership, (n)
Art. 1824. AU partners are Uable solidarity with the partnership for everything
chargeable to the partnership under Articles 1822 and 1823. (n)
Art. 1825. When a person, by words spoken or written or by conduct, represents
himself, or consents to another representing him to anyone, as a partner in an existing
partnership or with one or more persons not actual partners, he is liable to any such
persons to whom such representation has been made, who has, on the faith of such
representation, given credit to the actual or apparent partnership, and if he has made
such representation or consented to its being made in a public manner he is liable to such
person, whether the representation has or has not been made or communicated to
such
person so giving credit by or with the knowledge of the apparent partner making
the
representation or consenting to its being made.
(1) When a partnership liability results, he is liable as though he were
an actual
member of the partnership;

206

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 20
Sec. 21

(4) The SEC has opined that persons composing the organization
before its incorporation may be held personally and individually
liable to the extent of their entire obligation vis-h-vis third persons by
Section 20 which deals with corporation by estoppel. (SEC Opinion
dated February 22, 1983.)

Persons liable as general partners.

The Revised Corporation Code makes liable as general partners
"all persons who assume to act as a corporation," and they include
persons who attempt, but fail, to form a corporation and who carry
on business under the corporate name. A de facto partnership among
them is created.
Are both active and inactive members of an unsuccessfully
attempted corporation, neither de facto nor de jure, liable as partners?*
In a case, the Supreme Court ruled that while "stockholders"
of a defectively incorporated association become, in legal effect,
partners inter se, such a relation does not necessarily exist, for
ordinarily persons cannot be made to assume the relation of
partners, as between themselves, when their purpose is that no
partnership shall exist; it should be implied only when necessary to
(2) When no partnership liability results, he is liable pro rata with the other persons,
if any, so consenting to the contract or representation as to incur liability, otherwise

separately.
When a person has been thus represented to be a partner in an existing partnership,
or with one or more persons not actual partners, he is an agent of the persons consenting
to such representation to bind them to the same extent and in the same manner as though
he were a partner in fact, with respect to persons who rely upon the representation. When
all the members of the existing partnership consent to the representation, a partnership
act or obligation results, but in all other cases, it is the joint act or obligation of the person
acting and the persons consenting to the representation, (n)
‘The general rule under American law is that active managerial stockholders are
liable personally as partners, upon failure of the attempted incorporation, both de
jure and de facto, (see Bacon v. Christian, 184 Ind. 517.) Thus, it has been held that the
managing stockholders were personally liable as partners, but that the subscribers to
the stock of the supposed corporation were not personally liable. (Baker v. Bates Street
Shirt Co., 7 Fed. [2d] 854.) The creditors of the supposed corporation could recover from
subscribers to stock and inactive members of the corporation to the extent only of their
unpaid subscription. (Stevens v. Episcopal Church History Co., 140 N.Y. Appl. Div. 570.)
The rule is criticized. The emphasis, it is said, should be laid upon the reaping of
profits by the owners of a business, rather upon the management of the business, (see L.
Teller; Law of Partnership, 1949 Ed., pp. 18-19.)

TITLE U. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

207

do justice between the parties. Thus, one who takes no part except to
subscribe for stock in a proposed corporation never legally formed
does not become a partner with other subscribers who engage in
business under the name of the pretended corporation, as to be
liable as such in an action for settlement of the alleged partnership
and contribution. (Pioneer Insurance & Surety Corp. vs. Court of
Appeals, 175 SCRA 668 [1989], citing American cases.)
On the other hand, a third party who, knowing an association to be
unincorporated, nonetheless treated it as a corporation and received benefits
from it, may be barred from denying its corporate existence in a suit brought
against the alleged corporation. In such case, all those who benefited
from the transaction made by the ostensible corporation, despite
knowledge of its legal defects, may be held liable for contracts they
impliedly assented to or took advantage of. It is immaterial that a
party did not directly act on behalf of a non-existent corporation
and his name did not appear on any of the contracts entered by it.
Under the law on estoppel, those acting in behalf of a corporation
and those benefited by it, knowing it to be without valid existence,
are held liable as partners. (Lim Tong Lim vs. Philippine Fishing
Gear Industries, Inc., 317 SCRA 728 [1999].)

,

Sec. 21. Effects on Non-Use of Corporate Charter
and Continuous Inoperation.
If a corporation does not
formally organize and commence its business within five
(5) years from the date of its incorporation, its certificate
of incorporation shall be deemed revoked as of the day

—

following the end of the five (5)-vear period.

However, if a corporation has commenced its business
but subsequently becomes inoperative for a period of at
least five (5) consecutive years, the Commission may.
after due notice and hearing, place the corporation under
delinquent status.

A delinquent corporation shall have a period of
two (2) years to resume operations and comply with
all requirements that the Commission shall prescribe.
Upon compliance by the corporation, the Commission
shall Issue an order lifting the delinquent status. Failure
to comply with the requirements and resume operations
within the period given by the Commission shall cause the
revocation of the corporation. (N)

208

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 21

The Commission shall give reasonable notice to,
and coordinate with the appropriate regulatory agency
prior to the suspension or revocation of the certificate of
incorporation of companies under their special regulatory
jurisdiction. (N)

Statutory requirements before and after

incorporation.

The right of exemption from personal liability resulting from
incorporation, being entirely statutory, can be acquired only on the
terms specified by die statute. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 578.) Our corporation
law contains various requirements and conditions which must be
complied with in order that persons desiring to be so may become
a body corporate.
(1) Mandatory and directory conditions.
The courts have
established between mandatory and directory conditions. The
rule is that as to provisions of the statute which are mandatory,
non-compliance with its terms will prevent the creation of a de jure
corporation but as to those provisions which are merely directory,
a departure will not have these consequences. Strict compliance
with the terms of the statute is not required. The law requires only
substantial compliance, (see Sec. 13, par. 1; Sec. 14, par. 1; Sec. 16[i].)
(2) Substantial compliance with mandatory conditions.
Of
course, what constitutes substantial compliance is a question to be
determined in each case. It does not follow, however, that because
a substantial compliance is sufficient, any positive statutory
requirement may be omitted on the ground that it is unimportant.
There are conditions that cannot be dispensed with, (see 18 Am. Jur.
2dd 578.)

—

—

Mandatory and directory provisions
explained.

Whether a particular provision is mandatory or merely
directory must be determined by ascertaining the intention of the
legislature, to be gathered from the statute and its purpose. (Clark
on Corporations, p. 62.)

Generally, mandatory provisions prescribe formalities for
incorporation designed to protect the public. When a provision is
construed as directory, it is regarded as relatively inconsequential so

Sec. 21

209

TITLE II. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

that failure to comply with a directory provision will not be fatal to
a valid incorporation. (Steven on Corporations, pp. 112-114.)
Mandatory conditions may be conditions precedent or
conditions subsequent.
Conditions precedent explained.
Conditions precedent are those conditions non-compliance with
which will prevent the legal existence of a corporation.
Examples are:
(1) Filing of the articles of incorporation with the SEC as
required by Section 13; and
(2) The issuance of certificate of incorporation by the SEC under
Section 18.

Conditions subsequent explained.
Conditions subsequent are conditions to be complied with after
acquiring corporate existence in order that a corporation may legally
continue as such.
Under Section 21, the two required acts of organization and
commencement of its business operations are conditions subsequent,
failure to comply with which, it has been held, will result in
automatic cessation of corporate powers and the dissolution of the
corporation. (Perez vs. Balmaceda, [C.A.] 40 O.G. No. 9, Suppl. 194,

Aug. 30, 1941.)'

Formal organization and commencement
of business.
(1) Commencement of legal existence.

j

,

।

—

A corporation achieves
legal existence from the date the SEC issues a certificate of
'The SEC has opined, however, that the dissolution contemplated by Sec 21 of
the old Corporation Code is not automatic. The corporation continues to exist as such,
notwithstanding its non-operational status until dissolution or revocation has been
lawfully declared by the SEC after due notice and hearing. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 4, 1989;
see SEC Opinion dated April 20, 1987.) The SEC will take action on the
non-operational
status of a corporation only after the lapse of the two (2)-year period as prescribed under
Sec- 21. (SEC Opinion, May 22, 1998.) Note that under the second paragraph of Sec. 21.
(SEC
Opinion, May 22, 1998.)

210

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 21

incorporation under its official seal (Sec. 18.) but formal organization
brings the corporation to life.
It would include the adoption of bylaws, the filing of the same
with the SEC (Sec. 45.), the election of the board of directors (or
trustees) and of the officers by the board pursuant to the bylaws
(Sec. 24.), the establishment of the principal office, providing for the
subscription and payment of the capital stock, and the taking of such
other steps as are necessary to enable the corporation to transact
the legitimate business or accomplish the purpose for which it was
created, (see Benguet Consolidated Mining Co. vs. Pineda, 98 Phil.
711 [1956]; SEC Rules, Dec. 29, 1992.)

—

(2) Substantial compliance sufficient. Strict compliance with this
condition subsequent is not required. Thus, in a case, a corporation
was deemed to have formally organized, it appearing that from the
very day of its formation, the corporation had a governing board
which directed its affairs, and a treasurer and a clerk, and that
through these instrumentalities, it actually functioned and engaged
in the business for which it was organized, and therefore, it could
not be held to have forfeited its charter simply because it had not
specifically shown that it also had a president and a secretary. (Perez
vs. Balmaceda, supra.)
The substantial compliance rule is defined as "compliance with
the essential requirements, whether of a contract or of a statute."
(Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Ed. [1979], p. 1280; Alvarez vs. People,
677 SCRA 673 [2012].)
(3) Acts constituting commencement of business. A corporation
shall be considered to have commenced its business when it has
performed preparatory acts geared toward fulfilling the purposes
for which it was established such as but not limited to entering into
contracts or negotiation for lease or sale of properties to be used as
business or factory site; planning for and constructing the factory;
and taking steps to expedite the construction of the corporation's
working equipment. (SEC Rules, Dec. 29, 1992.)
The SEC has opined that a corporation has organized and
commenced business if the conditions subsequent to the registration
have been complied with, to wit:
(a) it should adopt and file its bylaws;

—

Sec 21

TITLE H. INCORPORATION AND ORGANIZATION
OF PRIVATE CORPORATIONS

211

(b) the board of directors should meet, elect a set of officers,
adopt pertinent board resolutions and submit information sheet
regarding its officers to this Commission;

(c) it should register its corporate name or business name
with the Department of Trade and Industry;
(d) it should register itself with the Bureau of Internal
Revenue and Social Security System and secure municipal or
dty license to operate its business; and
(e) it should establish an office and start its business
operations. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-07, December 4, 2007.)
(4) Effect of non-use of corporate charter. If a corporation does
not formally organize and commence business within five (5) years
from the date of its incorporation, its certificate of incorporation
shall be deemed revoked as of the day following the end of the
five-year period.
(5) Effect of subsequent continuous inoperation.
Where the
corporation has commenced the transaction of its business but
subsequently becomes inoperative for a period of at least five (5)
consecutive years, the SEC, after due notice and hearing, may place
the corporation in delinquent status.2
(6) Resumption of operations.
A delinquent corporation
is given a period of two (2) years operation and comply with all
requirements that the SEC shall prescribe. Upon compliance by the
corporation, the SEC shall issue an order lifting the delinquent status.
Failure to comply with the requirements and resume operations
within the period given by the SEC shall cause the revocation of the
corporation's certificate of incorporation.

—

—

—

2If the non-use of corporate charter or continuous inoperation of a corporation is
due to causes beyond its control as found by the SEC, the effects mentioned shall not take
place. Thus, where a corporation after its registration or incorporation elected its board
of directors and its officers, and in accordance with its corporate purpose and in order to
commence business operations made presentations to prospective investors but due to
the shift in the government's privatization policy, failed to entice investors and was not
able to continue with its business although it still intends to pursue its business when
the conditions are appropriate, there is no ground, given these conditions, to revoke or
suspends its regulation its registration and, therefore, it cannot be deemed dissolved.
(SEC Opinion No. 2307, Dec. 4, 2007.)

212

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 21

The SEC shall give reasonable notice to, and coordinate with, the
appropriate regulatory agency prior to the suspension or revocation
of the certificate of incorporation of companies under their special
regulatory jurisdiction.
Under the old Corporation Code, Section 21 does not apply if
the failure to organize, commence the transaction of its businesses
or the construction of its works, or to continuously operate is due to
causes beyond the control of the corporation as determined by the
SEC. (see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-07, December 4, 2007.)

Title III

BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/
OFFICERS
Sec. 22. The Board of Directors or Trustees of a Corporation:
Qualification and Terms. — Unless otherwise provided in
this Code, the board of directors or trustees shall exercise
the corporate powers, conduct all business and control all
properties of the corporation controlled. (SA)
Directors shall be elected fora term of one (1) year from
among the holders of stocks registered in the corporation’s
books, while trustees shall be elected for a term not
exceeding three (3) years from among the members of the
corporation. Each director and trustee shall hold office
until the successor is elected and qualified. A director who
ceases to own at least one (1) share of stock or a trustee
who ceases to be a member of the corporation shall cease
to be such. (SA)

The board of the following corporations vested
with public interest shall have independent directors
constituting at least twenty percent (20%) of such board:
(N)
(a) Corporations covered by Section 17.2 of Republic
Act No. 8799, otherwise known as “The Securities
Regulation Code”, namely those whose securities are
registered with the Commission, corporations listed with
an exchange or with assets of at least Fifty million pesos
(P50,000,000.00) and having two hundred (200) or more
holders of shares, each holding at least one hundred (100)
shares of a class of its equity shares; (N)
(b) Banks and quasi-banks, NSSLAs, pawnshops,
corporations engaged in money service business,
preneed, trust and insurance companies, and other
financial intermediaries; (N) and
213

214

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22
Sec. 22

(c) Other corporations engaged in business vested
with public interest similar to the above, as may be
determined by the Commission, after taking into account
relevant factors which are germane to the objective and
purpose of requiring the election of an independent
director, such as the extent of minority ownership, type
of financial products or securities issued or offered to
investors, public interest involved in the nature of business
operations, and other analogous factors. (N)
An independent director is a person who, apart from
shareholdings and fees received from the corporation, is
independent of management and free from any business
or other relationship which could, or could reasonably
be perceived to materially interfere with the exercise of
independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities
as a director. (N)

Independent directors must be elected by the
shareholders present or entitled to vote In absentia
during the election of directors. Independent directors
shall be subject to rules and regulations governing their
qualifications, disqualifications, voting requirements,
duration of term and term limit, maximum number of board
memberships and other requirements that the Commission
will prescribe to strengthen their independence and align
with international best practices. (N)

Structure of the corporate organization.

—

(1) Binding effects of acts or contracts. Actions proposed to be
taken by a corporation involve two (2) basic questions:

First, to bind the corporation, who within the organization must
act on its behalf?
Second, what is the result if the statutory requirements are not
complied with and the proper parties do not act?
(2) Tri-level structure. The standard operating procedure for
corporations, frequently called a corporate norm, might be described
as pyramidal in form.
At the base are the shareholders (or members) whose vote is
required to elect the board of directors (or trustees) and to pass on
other major corporate actions.

—

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

215

|
The next level are the officers tasked to execute policies
formulated by the board.
Finally, at the top of the pyramid is the board of directors who
constitute the policy-making body of the corporation and select
the officers annually. The keystone of corporate procedure is the
provision common to most corporate laws that the business of a

corporation shall be managed by its board of directors.
The board of directors and corporate officers are frequently
called management . In its strict sense, the term refers to the corporate
officers given the authority to implement the policies determined
by the board of directors as the governing body of the corporation.1
(3) Respective powers and functions.
In the light of this
tri-level structure, the question then arises: What are the respective
functions and powers of officers, directors, and shareholders within
the corporate organization? (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on
Corporations, 1969 ed., pp. 151-152.) Corporate powers may be
directly conferred upon corporate officers or agents by statute, the
articles of incorporation, the bylaws, or by resolution or other act of
the board of directors. (Citibank, N.A. vs. Chua, 220 SCRA 75 [1993].)
The rule is that absent authority from the board of directors, no
person (even its officers), can validly bind a corporation. (Olongapo
City vs. Subic Water and Sewerage Co., Inc., 732 SCRA 132 [2014].)

—

Corporate powers exercised by board
of directors or trustees.

All corporations, existing only in contemplation of law, can
only act and contract through the aid and by means of
individuals.
Such individuals may be those holding corporate offices or
agents
properly appointed by such officers. The same general principles
of law which govern the relation of agency for a
natural
govern the officer or agent of a corporation in respect to his person
power
or authority to act for the corporation.

‘The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), the Insurance Commission,
and the SEC have
•11 issued circulars and/or memoranda requiring
corporations to have at least two (2)
independent directors, i.e., BSP Circular No. 296, IC Circular
Letter 31-2005, and SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 6 (June 29, 2009) is the Revised Code
of Corporate Governance. It
superseded SEC Memo. Circ. No. 2 (April 5, 2002).

216

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22

—

(1) Governing body of the corporation. It is well established in
corporation law that the corporation, as a juridical entity, can act
only through the board of directors in the case of stock corporations,
or board of trustees in the case of nonstock corporations. The board
exercises most corporate power, lays down all corporate business
policies and is responsible for the efficient management of the

Sec 22

—

’Even if the corporate powers of a corporation are reposed in the board of directors,
it is of common knowledge and practice that the board is not directly engaged or charged
with the running of the recurring business affairs of the corporation. Depending on
the powers granted to them by the articles of incorporation, the members of the board
generally do not concern themselves with the day to day affairs of the corporation, except
those corporate officers who are charged with running the business of the corporation
and are concurrently members of the board like the president. (Ty vs. De Jemie, 638 SCRA
671 (2010); see Calubad vs. Ricarcen Development Corporation, 838 SCRA 303 [2017].)
The general principles of agency govern the relationship between a corporation and its
representatives.

’Impliedly, it is not necessary for the stockholders (or members) to ratify the acts of
the bard save instances wherein the Corporation Code or the bylaws provides otherwise,
e.g., investment of corporate funds (Sec. 41.), declaration of stock dividends (Sec. 42.), and
other acts where approval or consent of stockholders (or members) is necessary. (SEC
Opinion, May 21, 1982.)

217

business of the corporation (in all matters which do not require
the consent or approval of the stockholders) within the scope of
its charter, i.e., its articles of incorporation, bylaws, and relevant
provisions of law.

corporation.
Section 22 provides that "unless otherwise provided in this Code,
the board of directors or trustees shall exercise the corporate powers,
conduct all business, and control all properties of the corporation."2
The board of directors or trustees, therefore, not its officers, is the
governing body of the corporation chosen by the stockholders or
members? The officers have only such authority as given them by
the board. Thus, contracts or acts of a corporation must be made
either by the board of directors or trustees or by a corporate officer
duly authorized by the board. The rule is that absent authority or
valid delegation from the board of directors or trustees, no person,
not even its officers, can validly bind a corporation.
The stockholders
(2) Binding effect of stockholders' action.
trustees)
(or
to oversee the
directors
of
board
a
elect
or members
are not the
They
the
of
corporation.
and
operation
management
They have
acts.
their
it
bind
by
cannot
and
the
of
corporation
agents
With
votes.
their
through
the
of
corporation
control
indirect
only
stockholders
to
law
reserved
by
powers
some
of
the exception only
(or members), the directors (or trustees) have sole authority to
determine policy, enter into contracts, and conduct the ordinary

TITLE m. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

i

(a) Contracts between a corporation and the third persons
must be made by or under the authority of its board of directors
(or trustees) and not by its stockholders (or members). Hence,
the action of the stockholders in such matters is only advisory
or recommendatory and not in any wise binding on the
corporation? (Barreto vs. La Previsora Filipina, 57 Phil. 649
[1932].) The power to modify or nullify corporate contracts
generally remains in the board of directors. (Bonate vs. Phil.
Countryside Rural Bank, Inc., 626 SCRA 21 [2010].)
(b) Because a corporation can act only through the board
of directors, a resolution adopted at a meeting of stockholders
refusing to recognize a corporate contract effected with the
approval of the board of directors or repudiating it, is without
effect? (Ramirez vs. Orientalist, 38 Phil. 634 [1918].)
(c) Stockholders entrust their investments in the corporate
business to the management of the board of directors, thus
establishing a fiduciary relationship between them. It is the
prerogative and discretion of the board of directors of a parent
or holding corporation to choose its nominees in the board of
directors of its subsidiaries. The stockholders of the parent or
holding company cannot demand proportionate representation
in the board of directors of its subsidiaries. (SEC Opinion, Aug.
8, 1995.)

Reason for the rule.
The theory of every corporate organization is that the
stockholders may have all the profits but shall turn over to a
small and compact body
the board of directors the exclusive

—

—

‘Visayan vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 196
Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines, p. 168 [1989].SCRA 410 (1991), citing De
’It may well be recognized, however, that where the
stockholders unanimously vote
that certain actions be taken, this should control the discretion
of the directors. Directors
have no personal interest as such in their official acts. If the
real parties in interest
unanimously agree on lawful corporate acts, their voice should control. (Ballantine,
p. 123.)

I

218

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 22

authority to manage and control the transaction of its business and
the use of its assets, the power of the stockholders being limited to a
few specified matters concerning its internal affair.
This concentration of the power of control of the business and
of appointing of officers and managers in the board of directors
(or trustees) is deemed necessary to efficiency especially in a
large organization. It is impractical and unwise to entrust the
administration of corporate management. Stockholders are too
numerous and scattered and unfamiliar with the business of a
corporation to conduct its business directly. It is the plan of corporate
organization that the stockholders shall choose the directors who
shall control and supervise the conduct of the corporate business,
(see Ballantine, pp. 121-122; Ramirez vs. Orientalist, 38 Phil. 634
[1918]; Filipinas Port Services, Inc. vs. Go, 518 SCRA 483 [2007]; Cua,
the
Jr. vs. Tan, 607 SCRA 646 [2009].) If they are not satisfied with
of
policies or management of the board of directors, the remedy the
stockholders is to replace them, (see Sec. 28.)
In a close corporation, however, the articles of incorporation
may provide that the business of the corporation shall be managed
by the stockholders of the corporation rather than by a board of a
directors. (Sec. 96, par. 2.)
Extent of judicial review.

As long as the directors (or trustees) act honestly and their acts
or contracts do not disregard the rights of the minority, the courts
will not interfere. They are not liable for losses if the cause is
merely error in business judgment, not amounting to bad faith or

negligence.
The members of the board of
(1) Business judgment rule.
directors hold such office charged with the duty to act for the
corporation according to their best judgment, and in so doing they
cannot be controlled in the reasonable exercise and performance of
such duty. It is a well-known rule of law that questions of policy
or of management are left solely to the honest decisions of officers
and directors of a corporation, and the court is without authority to
substitute its judgment for the board of directors; the board is the
business manager of the corporation, and so long as it acts in good
faith its acts are not reviewable by the courts. Courts cannot supplant
the discretion of the board on administrative matters as to which they

—

Sec 22

TITLE IIL BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

219

have legitimate power of action, and contracts which are intra-vires
entered into by the board are binding upon the corporation and the
courts will not interfere unless such contracts are so unconscionable
and oppressive as to amount to a wanton destruction of the rights
of the minority. (SEC Opinion No. 15-05, Nov. 16, 2005; Gov't, vs.
El Hogar Filipino, 50 Phil. 399 [1927]; Gamboa vs. Victoriano, 90
SCRA 40 [1979]; Ingersoll vs. Malabon Sugar Co., 53 Phil. 745 [1929];
Estacio vs. Pampanga Electric Cooperative, Inc., 596 SCRA 542
[2009].)
Stated differently:

In general, courts will not undertake to review the expediency
of the business transactions authorized by the directors. A large
discretion is lodged in them. Hence, questions of value and policy
are for their business judgment and under the so called "business
judgment rule", it is sufficient that reasonable diligence and care
have been exercised in the management of corporate affairs. . . The
business judgment rule exists to protect and promote the full and free
exercise of the power of management given to the directors... Thus,
in Auerbach v. Bennett, 47 NY2d 619, 419 NYS2d 920, 393 NE2d 994,
(cited in Fletcher, Supra., p. 49), the Court held: "Business judgment
rule bars judicial inquiry into actions of corporate directors taken
in good faith and in the exercise of honest judgment in lawful and
legitimate furtherance of corporate purposes." Likewise, in Fields
v. Sax, 123 DI app 3d 460, 462 NE2d 983, (cited in Fletcher, Supra.,
p. 50), "absent bad faith, fraud or illegality, or gross overreaching,
the courts are not at liberty to interfere with the exercise of business
judgment by directors. Also, in Helfman v. American Light & Traction
Co., 121 NJEq. 1, 187 A 540, "Courts will not substitute its judgment
for that of directors in matters of purely business and economic
problems." In Lewis v. S.L. & E. Inc., 62 F2d, 764, (CA2, 1980),
citing
Fletcher Cyc. Corp., sec. 1239 (perm, ed.), it was further held that
"Business judgment rule places heavy burden on shareholders who
would attack corporate transactions."(SEC Opinion, December 9,

1988.)

—

(2) Questions of policy of management. A corporation
is but an
association of individuals, allowed to transact under an assumed
corporate name, and with a distinct legal personality. As
to its
corporate and management decisions, the State will
generally
not interfere with the same. Questions of policy of
are left solely to the honest decision of the board as management
the business

220

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22
Sec. 22

manager of the corporation, and the court is without authority to
substitute its judgment for that of the board, and as long as it acts
in good faith and in the exercise of honest judgment in the interest
of the corporation, its orders are not reviewable by the courts.6 (see
Montelibano vs. Bacolod-Murcia Milling Co., Inc., 5 SCRA36 [1962];
Sales vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 169 SCRA 109 [1989];
Philippine Stock Exchange, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 281 SCRA 232
[1997]; Filipinas Port Services, Inc. vs. Go, 518 SCRA 453 [2007]; Cua,
Jr. vs. Tan, 607 SCRA 645 [2009].) Its acts or contracts are presumed
to be valid and regular.
(a) Whether the business of a corporation should be operated
at a lost during depression, or closed at a smaller loss, is a purely
business and economic problem to be determined by the directors
and not by the court. (SEC Opinion No. 03-04, Oct. 26, 2004.)
(b) A judicial order to decrease capital stock without the assent
of directors and stockholders violates the "business judgment rule".
(Ong Yong vs. Tiu, 405 SCRA 1 [2003].)
(c) The creation of additional paid-in capital is a matter within
the business judgment of the corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.
14-19, March 28, 2019.)
(d) Determining who shall be assessed association dues is
already within the business judgment of officers of the condominium
corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 05-18, March 19, 2018.)
(e) Compensation is an issue of business judgment to be
questioned only in case of clear abuse. (SEC Opinion No. 32-04, May

—

*The reason for the rule is aptly explained thus: "Courts and other tribunals are
wont to override the business judgment of the board mainly because courts are not in
the business of business, and the laissez faire rule or the free enterprise system prevailing
in our social and economic set up dictates that it is better for the State and its organs to
leave business to the businessmen; especially so, when courts are ill-equipped to make
business decisions. More importantly, the social contract in the corporate family to decide
the course of the corporate business has been vested in the board and not with courts."
(Ong Yong vs. Tiu, 405 SCRA 1 (2003], citing Cesar L. Villanueva, Philippine Corporate
Law, 1998 Ed., p. 228.)

221

Note 5.) can be carried out by mere board resolution although the
activities or transactions involved may span beyond the term of the
directors or trustees and entail obligations to be bome by succeeding
boards if the action was done in good faith and for the best interest
of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 21, 1994.)
(4) Rule of the majority. The minority directors or stockholders
cannot come into court upon allegations of a want of judgment
or lack of efficiency by the majority and change the course of
administration. Corporate elections furnish the only remedy for
internal dissensions, as the majority must rule so long as it keeps
within the powers conferred by the corporate charter. (Flynn v.
Brooklyn City R. Co., 53 N.E. 520.)

—

Nature of powers of board of directors
or trustees.
(1) The powers of the board of directors or trustees are, in a
very important sense, original and undelegated. The stockholders
or members do not confer, nor can they revoke, those powers.
They are derivative only in the sense of being received from the
State in the act of incorporation. They cannot exercise powers
which the corporation does not possess, nor is their action valid
when inconsistent with valid bylaws. Neither can they perform
constituent acts, that is, acts which involve fundamental changes in
the constitution of the corporation, and which can be done only by
the stockholders or members as constituting the corporation. (14-A
CJ. 82.)

4, 2004.)

(3) Corporate transactions not requiring stockholders' or members'
approval. Any corporate act which does not fall under any of the
transactions requiring stockholders' or members' approval (see

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFF1CERS

i

Acts of management pertain to the board, and those of
ownership, to the stockholders or members. In the latter case, the
board cannot act alone, but must seek approval of the stockholders
or member. (Tan vs. Sydp, 499 SCRA 216 [2006], citing J. Campos,
Jr.
& M.C. Campos, The Corporation Code, 1990, Vol. 1, p. 490.) It has
been ruled that the approval by 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock
either prior to the voting of the board or by subsequent ratification,
is required for the temporary stoppage of operation of a corporation.
The cessation of business, though temporary, is a fundamental
concern of the stockholders who stand to be primarily affected
by such event. It involves not a mere exercise of management
prerogative. (SEC Opinion No. 03-04, Oct. 26, 2004.)

222

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 22

(2) The other view favors the delegation theory, which holds
that the directors are the officers and agents of the corporation,
representing the interests of that abstract legal entity and of those
who own shares of stock (see Mead vs. McCullough, 21 Phil. 95
[1911]; Angeles vs. Santos, 64 Phil. 697 [1937].), and as such, they
can bind the corporation provided they act within the scope of their

authority.
(3) The powers of the board of directors or trustees are directly
conferred by statute and, as a rule, the stockholders or members
cannot control their actions or exercise of judgment vested in them
by virtue of their office. Once the directors or trustees are elected,
the stockholders or members relinquish corporate powers to the
board as provided by law.
In certain corporate acts, however, the approved or authorization
of the stockholders or members is necessary for their validity. It has
been held, however, that where, except for one, the stockholders of
a corporation also sit as members of the board of directors, it will
illogical and superfluous to require the stockholders' approval of
subject resolutions requiring the authorization of the stockholders
on record. (Lopez Realty, Inc. vs. Fontecha, 247 SCRA 183 [1995].)
Limitations on powers of board of directors
or trustees.
The managerial authority of the board of directors or trustees is
subject to Sections 30-33 of the Revised Corporation Code and to at
least three (3) limitations.

Sea 22

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

223

(3) It cannot exercise powers not possessed by the corporation.7
(see Clark on Corporations, Sec. 192; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 43-04,’
October 26, 2004.)

Powers exercised by board of directors
or trustees as a board.
(1) Acting together as a body in a meeting. The board of directors
or trustees must act together as a body in a lawful meeting, not
individually or separately, to bind the corporation by their acts. In
other words, to exercise their powers, they must meet as directors or
trustees and act "at a meeting at which there is quorum." (see Sec. 24
as to requisites for board meetings.) If they act or give their consent
separately or if they act at a meeting which is not a legal meeting,
their action is not that of the corporation, although all may consent,
and the corporation is not bound.
(2) Binding effect individual declarations of board members. Absent
valid authorization /delegation, the declarations of an individual
director or trustees relating to the affairs of the corporation, but not
in the course of, or connected with, the performance of authorized
duties of such director, are not binding on the corporation. (Heirs of
Fausto C. Ignacio vs. Home Bankers Savings and Trust Co., G.R. No.
177783, Jan. 23, 2013.)

—

—

—

(3) Exceptions to rule. There are recognized exceptions to the
rule that a corporation cannot act except by authority of the board
of directors or trustees in a meeting duly convened. (Infra.)

These are:
(1) Limitations or restrictions imposed by the Constitution,
statutes, articles of incorporation, or bylaws of the corporation;

(2) The board cannot by itself, perform constituent acts, that
is, acts involving fundamental or major changes in the corporation

(such as amendment of the articles of incorporation under Sec. 15),
which require the approval or ratification of the stockholders or
members; and

’The corporate powers conferred upon the board of directors usually refer
only
to the ordinary business transactions of the corporation and
does not extend beyond the

management of ordinary corporate affairs nor beyond the limits of its
(SEC
Opinion, May 2, 1994.) There are powers reserved to the stockholders/authority.
and,
members
therefore, cannot be exercised solely by the directors /trustees until they are
ratified
or
approved by the stockholders/ members. It has been held that the power of the
of
directors to control the corporation's property and business does not empowerboard
them to
provide themselves compensation. The law is well-settled that
directors of a corporation
presumptively serve without compensation absent express agreement resolution
in
relation thereto, no claim can be asserted therefor. (Central CooperativeorExchange
Co.,
Inc. vs. Tiber, Jr., 33 SCRA 593 [1970|; see Sec. 30.)
•Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 221 [2002].

224

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 22

Sec 71

Reasons for the rule.
The rule that the directors or trustees can bind the corporation
only by action taken at a board meeting seems to rest upon two (2)

225

(3) The corporation is also bound by a particular transaction
ratified in a subsequent board meeting (Ramirez vs. Orientalist Co.,
38 Phil. 634 [1918].); the ratification may be express by a formal
affirmative vote or resolution of the board or it may be implied;
if implied, it may take diverse forms such as by silence or
acquiescence, by acts showing approval or adoption of the contract
or by acceptance and retention of benefits flowing therefrom ( Acufia
vs. Batac Producers Cooperative Assoc., Inc., supra.) and such
ratification relates back to the time of the contract and is equivalent
to original authority. (Board of Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo
Kalaw, supra.)
(4) The corporation is likewise bound by the acts of one of its
directors or agents held out by the corporation to the public as possessing
power to do those acts. (Yu Chuck vs. Kong Li Po, 46 Phil. 608 [1924].)
The authority to act for and bind the corporation may be presumed
from acts of recognition in other instances, where in the power was
in fact exercised with no objection from its board or stockholders.
(People's Aircargo & Warehousing, Co., Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,

reasons:
(1) A meeting is necessary in order that any action may be
deliberately adopted, after opportunity for discussion and an
interchange of views; and
(2) As agents of the corporation managing its affairs, directors
(or trustees) have no power to act other than as a board. (Ballantine,

p. 124.)
Unlike its officers (Sec. 24.), directors are not the agents of the
corporation per se and they have no power acting individually to
bind the corporation.
Exceptions to the rule.

The directors or trustees must act as a body and personally (see
Sec. 51.) to bind the corporation; proxies cannot act for them. This
requirement is not without any exception.
(1) It has been held that a contract entered into by the directors
without a meeting of the board is binding upon the corporation
where the directors happen to be the sole stockholders. (Zamboanga
Transportation Co. vs. Bachrach Motor Co., 52 Phil. 244 [1928].)
(2) The corporation is similarly bound by a contract entered
into by a corporate officer such as the general manager, authorized
by the board of directors either expressly or impliedly, to bind it by
contract. (Acuna vs. Batac Producers Cooperative Assoc., Inc., 20
SCRA 526 [1967].)
Settled jurisprudence has it that where similar acts have been
approved by the directors as a matter of general practice, custom,
and policy, the general manager may bind the company without
formal authorization of the board of directors. In varying language,
existence of such authority is established by proof of the course
of business, the usages and practices of the company, and by the
knowledge which the board of directors has, or must be presumed
to have, of acts and doings of its subordinates in and about the
affairs of the corporation. (Board of Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo
Kalaw, 20 SCRA 987 [1967].)

TITLE HL BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

4

'

I

{

297 SCRA 170 [1998].)
The rule that the members of the board have authority to act
only when convened in a board meeting is for the benefit of the
shareholders which they are authorized to waive. The stockholders
are the residuary owners, and the rule requiring directors' meetings
to authorize acts is for their benefit. (Merchants & F. Bank v. Harris
Lumber Co., 103 Ark. 283.)
(5) Where the stockholders, by acquiescence, invest the
executive officers of the corporation with powers of the directors
as the usual method of doing business, the board being inactive, the
acts of such officers will bind the corporation according to some
courts although not authorized by any vote either of stockholders
or directors. (Ballantine, p. 126.)
(6) The adoption or ratification of a contract by a
corporation is
nothing more nor less than making of an original contract. The theory
of corporate ratification is predicated in the right of a corporation to
contract and any ratification or adoption is equivalent to a grant of
prior authority. The ratification may be implied. (Virata vs.
Ng Wee,

860 SCRA 50 [2018].)
(7) The bylaws of a corporation may create
an executive
committee with authority to act on such specific matters within the

226

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22
Sec. 22

competence of the board, as may be delegated to it in the bylaws of
the corporation, or on a majority vote of the board, except on certain
matters specified in Section 34.
(8) A corporation is allowed, subject to certain limitations
provided in Section 43, to enter into a management contract under
which it delegates the management of its affairs to another
corporation for a certain period of time.
(9) In a close corporation, any action by the directors without a
meeting or at a meeting improperly held, shall, unless the bylaws
otherwise provide be deemed valid or ratified in the cases mentioned
Power of directors or trustees to delegate

—

The rule is that, absent authority from the
(1) General rule.
directors,
no person, not even its officers, can validly bind
board of
a corporation. The power to bind the corporation by contracts rests
in its board of directors or trustees.
The directors or trustees do not themselves exercise delegated
authority so as to be precluded from delegating power by the
maxim, delegata potestas non potest delegare.
(a) Just as a natural person may authorize another to do
certain acts for and in his behalf, the board may validly delegate,
either expressly or impliedly, some of its powers and functions
to other officers or agents of the corporation appointed by
it. (Yu Chuck vs. Kong Li Po, 46 Phil. 608 [1924]; Visayan vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 196 SCRA 410 [1991];
Banate vs. Phil. Countryside Rural Bank, Inc., 626 SCRA 21
[2010].) Although it cannot completely abdicate its power and
responsibility to act for the juridical entity, the board may
expressly delegate specific powers to the president or any of its
officers (Prime White Cement Corp. vs. Intermediate Appellate
Court, 220 SCRA 103 [1993].), particularly with respect to
employment of lower level personnel.
(b) The board may delegate to agents of its own
appointment the performance of any act which itself can legally
perform. As the governing body of the corporation vested with
the management of its corporate affairs (Sec. 23.), it has the

227

power and authority to adopt a resolution appointing one of its
members, or an executive committee, or a particular officer or
agent the power to perform purely ministerial acts. (19 C.J.S.
100.)

in Section 100.
authority.

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

(c) The same is true even in matters involving the exercise of
judgment and discretion. Their authority, to a large extent, must
be implied from necessity and usage for the directors or trustees
cannot attend to the details and business of the corporation. (2
Fletcher, p. 495.) Whatever authority the officers or agents of
a corporation may have is derived from the board of directors
or other governing body, unless conferred by the charter of the
corporation. (Vicente vs. Geraldez, 52 SCRA 210 [1973].)
(d) The delegation of corporate powers, except for the
executive committee, must be for specific purposes. Such
delegation to officers makes the latter agents of the corporation;
accordingly, the general rules of agency as to the binding effects
of their act would apply. (ABS-CBN Broadcasting vs. Court of
Appeals, 301 SCRA 572 [1999].)
(2) Exceptions. The rule recognizing the power of the board to
delegate authority is not without limitations.
(a) It has been held that discretionary powers which, by
provisions of law (e.g., to declare dividends, Sec. 42.) or the
bylaws or by the vote of the stockholders, are vested exclusively
in the board of directors or are especially delegated to them,
cannot be delegated to subordinate offices and agents. (Bliss v.
Kaweah Canal, etc., 65 Cal. 502; see Sec. 24, re other officers and
agents.)
(b) There is a limit, even to the power of the directors or
trustees to delegate authority. As their authority to delegate
is implied from the necessities in the management of the
corporation and from the usage, so also, it is limited by the
same considerations. It cannot delegate entire supervision and
control of the corporation to others for this is not only unnecessary
and contrary to usage, but it is inconsistent with Section 22,
which requires that "the corporate powers... shall be exercised,
all business conducted and all property of such
corporation
controlled and held by its board of directors or trustees." (see 2
Fletcher, pp. 378-379.)

—

(

I

228

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22

Sec 22

TITLE IH. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

229

(c) Neither can the board delegate special powers especially
conferred upon it by a resolution of the stockholders or members
of the corporation. Unquestionably, it may delegate purely
ministerial duties. (2 Fletcher, p. 537.)

The principle of hold-over is sanctioned by Section 22. Upon
failure of a quorum at any meeting of the stockholders or members
called for an election, the directors hold over and continue to
function until the successor directors are chosen and qualified. The

(d) It is clear that the power of the board to delegate author¬
ity is subject to restrictions as provided in the bylaws.

failure to elect does not terminate the terms of incumbent officers
nor dissolve the corporation. Similarly, the failure to hold an annual
meeting does not affect the power of a corporation to transact its
business since the directors in office continue in office with power
to act thereby averting the creation of a vacuum in the operation of
the corporation.
(a) To "hold over" when applied to an office implies that
the office has a fixed term which has expired, and the incumbent
is holding the succeeding term.10 (19 Words and Phrases 576.)
Although the members of the board are hold-over directors
or trustees, they still possess the powers of bona fide members
until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thus, a
hold-over board has the power to declare the position of the
president vacant and elect another. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 3, 1976.)
(b) The rule that where the articles of incorporation or
bylaws of a corporation provide for the annual election directors
and no election is held, the former directors hold over until their
successors are elected and qualified, applies to a going concern
where there is no break in the exercise of duties of directors. (2
Fletcher Cyc. Corp., p. 138 [1982 ed.].) One occupying an office in
a hold-over capacity can be removed at any time, without cause,
upon the election or appointment of his successor. (Barayaga vs.
Adventist University of the Phils., 655 SCRA 640 [2011].)
(c) Hold-over is a situation that arises when no successor is
elected due to valid and justifiable reason (e.g., pending election
protest on the outcome of the annual election), in which case the
incumbent holds over and continues to function until another
officer is chosen and qualified. (SEC Opinion, June 24, 1998.) The
corporation should, as soon as possible, call a special meeting
for such purpose with proper notice given to all stockholders or

Terms of office of directors or trustees.
As a rule, the directors or
(1) One (1) year/three (3) years.
trustees /officers of a corporation shall serve only for the term as
fixed in the bylaws. The word "term," in a legal sense, means the
fixed and definite period of time which the law prescribes that an
officer may hold office and a hold-over does not change the length
of the term but results in shortening the period served by his
successor.’
Section 22 provides that the directors "shall be elected for a term
of one (1) yea?' and trustees, "for a term not exceeding three (3)
years."
The rationale for fixing a term is to protect the corporation, and
its creditors and the public dealing with it so that if an improvident or
wrongful act is committed by the board of directors, the subsequent
board can redress or prevent the perpetration of the wrong, and
protect its stockholders, creditors and the public having dealings
with it. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 08-12, May 17, 2012.)

—

—

(2) Hold-over.
They shall hold "office until their successors
are elected and qualified" (Sec. 22, par. 2.) meaning that their term
may be extended on a hold-over basis.
*Being a fixed period, it cannot be split into two (2) or more terms so as to consider
the remaining period as another term. Thus, a director (previously elected in the
immediately preceding election) who merely served the remaining period of the original
term of a resigned director (subsequently elected) is not covered by the prohibition in the
bylaws against serving more than two (2) consecutive terms unless the clear intention is
to cover such a situation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 8, 1993.) Term is distinguished from tenure
in that the latter represents the period during which the incumbent actually hold office.
Thus, tenure may be shorter (or, in case of hold-over, longer) than the term for reasons
within or beyond the power of the incumbent. The holder-over period - that time from
the lapse of one year from a member's election to the board and until his successor's
election and qualification - is not part of the director's original term of office, nor is it a
new term. (Valle Verde Country Club, Inc. vs. Africa, 598 SCRA 200 [2009].)

members.

"“Election" is the choice of one man among a number to fill a certain office. In a

hold-over, an officer is merely allowed to continue functioning as such. He is not chosen
over other contenders for the position he occupies.

230

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22'

(d) The hold-over doctrine has a purpose which is' at
once legal as it is practical. It accords validity to what would
otherwise be deemed as dubious corporate acts and gives
continuity to a corporate enterprise in its relation to outsiders.
The old hold-over officer is a de facto officer and by fiction of law,
his acts as such are considered valid and effective. (Seneres vs.
Commission on Elections, 585 SCRA 557 [2009].)
(e) Where the reason for hold-over is not for failure to
elect but to give the incumbents more time to learn, or for
reasons of economy and the uncertainty that a quorum can
be secured, the hold-over violates the provision requiring an
annual election of the directors or trustees (SEC Opinions, July
3, 1989 and May 18, 1993.), and this is especially true where the
hold-over extends beyond the one (l)-year term. (SEC Opinion,
March 1, 1988.)

The regular election of directors as stated in the bylaws cannot
be dispensed with the board to extend the term of the incumbents.
(SEC Opinion, Feb. 3, 1994.)

—

(3) Modification of term.
Unlike in the case of nonstock
corporations (see Sec. 91.) and educational corporations (see Sec.
106.), stock corporations under the general provisions of Title III
are not authorized to divide the members of its board of directors
into groups with each group having a different term of office. (SEC
Opinion, Feb. 4, 1971.)
(a) Their term of office being fixed by law, the same cannot
be shortened or extended by agreement of the parties or by
those interested in the position. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 15, 1975.)
"An annual meeting required and stated for each year cannot
be dispensed with and the directors cannot so change the date
of the annual election so as to continue themselves in office for
more than a year," unless the reason in justifiable and proper
notice of the postponement is given. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 5, 1981,
citing 5 Fletcher, p. 22.)
(b) The corporation should hold an annual meeting and
not merely call a special election since the election of directors
or trustees occurs during such meeting of its members. The
non-holding of a regular meeting cannot be justified merely
because huge expenses may be incurred in holding another

Sec. 22

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

231

meeting and/or that securing a quorum may be uncertain.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 11-31, July 13, 2011.)

Number of directors or trustees to be elected.
(1) Under the Revised Corporation Code, the number of
directors in a stock corporation "shall not be more than fifteen (15)"
(Sec. 13[f].). The size of the board should be not small to be ineffective
nor too large to be unwieldy and inefficient."
(2) In ordinary nonstock corporations, the number of trustees shall
be fixed in the articles of incorporation or bylaws which may be
more than fifteen (15). (see Sec. 91, par. 1.)
(3) In a close corporation, the articles of incorporation may
provide that the business of the corporation shall be managed by
its stockholders rather than by a board of directors in which case no
meeting of stockholders need be held to elect directors, (see Sec. 96,
par. 2.)
(4) Trustees of nonstock educational corporation "shall not be less
than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15)," with the term of office of
1/5 of their number expiring every year, (see Sec. 106, pars. 1, 2.)
(5) In a corporation sole, there is no board of directors or trustees
as it consists of one member or corporator only. (Sec 108.)
(6) The board of trustees of religious societies "shall also be not
less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15)." (see Sec. 114[f].)
The limitation as to the number of directors or trustees seeks
to give ample representation to stockholders or members of a
corporation to its board while at the same time avoiding that it will
be too unwieldy.

Election of less than the required number.
The failure of the stockholders or members to elect the required
number of directors or trustees provided for by statute or its articles
"See Sec 38 of the Securities Regulation Code with respect to corporations required
to have at least two (2) independent directors. They shall serve for a maximum
cumulative
term of nine (9) years. In the instance that a company wants to retain an independent
director who has served for nine (9) years, the board should provide meritorious
justification/ s and seek stockholder's approval during the annual stockholder's meeting.
(SEC Memo. Circ No. 4, March 9, 2017.)

232

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 22

of incorporation does not invalidate the title of those elected if they
constitute a quorum. An election of less number of directors than
the number which the meeting was called to elect is valid.
Thus, the stockholders of a corporation may opt to elect only
three (3) directors instead of five (5) at the annual stockholders'
meeting. Such act would not violate the provisions of the Revised
Corporation Code, specifically Section 13(g), for such situation
merely gives rise to vacancies of two (2) seats in the board which
may be filled up in a subsequent special stockholders' meeting duly
called for the purpose. (SEC Opinions, Feb. 2, 1987 and June 10,

1992.)

Qualifications of directors or trustees.
(1) Stock corporations.
The only mandatory qualification
prescribed for a director under the Revised Corporation Code is
that he should appear in the corporate books (i.e., stock and transfer
book) as a stockholder or member of the corporation. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 51-19, October 11, 2019.) Thus, the requirements are:
(a) Every director including an incorporating director must
own at least one (1) share of the capital stock (see Detective &
Protective Bureau, Inc. vs. Cloribel, 26 SCRA 255 [1968].); and
(b) The share of stock held by the director must be registered
in his name on the books of the corporation; and12
(c) Every director must continuously own at least a share of
stock during his term, otherwise, he shall automatically cease to
be a director.

—

The bylaws can impose additional qualifications. Absent a
provision in the bylaws, a corporation cannot require additional
qualifications for directors other than the mandatory requirement
under Section 22 of the Revised Corporation Code. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 51-19, Oct. 11, 2019.) In this regard, mere board
resolution or approval is not sufficient to legally enforce a
qualification /disqualification because it has to be clearly provided
for in the corporate bylaws. Guidelines issued by the management
“The election of a person to the board of directors of a corporation does not
necessarily mean that he has paid for the shares recorded in his name. In most cases,
nominee directors do not pay for the qualifying shares assigned to them. (Baguio vs.
Court of Appeals, 226 SCRA 366 [1993].)

Sec 7?

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

233

requiring additional qualifications for directors, president and vicepresident, may be effective only if such are in the bylaws. Neither
can a corporation's committee on election issue a ruling requiring
additional qualification for a director if the same is not stated in the
bylaws. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 07-18, March 27, 2018.)
(2) Nonstock corporations.
Trustees of nonstock corporations
must be members in good standing thereof.
A person with the disqualification mentioned in Section 27 is
not qualified to hold the position of director or trustee.

—

Natural persons contemplated by law.
It is deducible from Section 22 that only natural persons can be
elected as directors or trustees (Infra.) and they must be elected from
among the stockholders or members.
However, a corporation which owns shares of stock or is a
corporate member in another corporation can give qualifying shares
to a natural person so that such natural person can be elected as
director.
Citizenship and residence requirements.
(1) There is no specific citizenship and resident requirement
demanded of the members of the board of directors or trustees
under the Revised Corporation Code.
(2) In corporations not organized under theRevised Corporation
Code, certain citizenship requirements are established. Thus, in case
of domestic banks, the General Banking Law of 2000 allows non¬
Filipino citizens to become members of the board of directors to the
extent of the foreign participation in the equity of said bank (Sec.
5, R.A. No. 2029.) and private development banks (Sec. 4, R.A. No.
4093.), all the members of the board of directors must be citizens of

the Philippines.
(3) Under the Constitution, aliens may not be elected as directors
or officers of corporations engaged in business or industries which
are totally or partially nationalized business or industries.13 (Art.
XU, Sec. 10 thereof.)
13A company engaged in the business of real estate development whose primary and
secondary purpose includes ownership of land is considered as undertaking a partiallynationalized activity. (SEC Opinion 02-16, Feb. 2, 2016.)

234

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 22
Sec. 22

TITLE UI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

235

Stock ownership requirement

—

(1) Holder of legal title. The rule is that the person who holds
the legal title to the stock as shown by the books of the corporations
is qualified although some other person may be the beneficial owner
of the stock recorded in his name, (see Sec. 63.)

The former Corporation Law required that "every director
must own in his own right at least one share of the capital stock
of the corporation." (Sec. 30 thereof.) Thus, under the former law,
the eligibility of director, strictly speaking, could not be adversely
affected by the simple act of such a director being a party to a voting
trust agreement (see Sec. 58.) inasmuch as he remained owner
(although beneficial or equitable only) of the shares subject of the
agreement. (Lee vs. Court of Appeals, 205 SCRA 752 [1992].)
The phrase "in his own right" is deleted in Section 23 of the
old Corporation Code (now Sec. 22.). A mere proxy who is not a
stockholder cannot be elected as a member of a corporation's board
of directors or trustees.
(2) Voting trustee. Whatever doubt may have existed before,
a voting trustee may now be considered as the legal owner of the
shares transferred to him by virtue of a voting trust agreement and,
therefore, eligible to office of director. With the omission of the
phrase "in his own right," the election of trustees and other persons
who, in fact, are not the beneficial owners of the shares registered
in their names on the books of the corporations becomes formally
legalized, (see Sec. 58.)

—

Consequently, the transferors who cease to own at least one (1)
share standing in their names on the books of the corporation as
required under Section 22 also cease to be directors. (Lee vs. Court
of Appeals, supra.)

—

(3) Transferee of qualifying share. A person to whom one share
of stock has been transferred for the express purpose of qualifying
him as a director is eligible. Ownership of the qualifying share need
only be in a nominal capacity, with the beneficial title remaining in
the transferor who or which actually owns the share. It is sufficient
that the title to the stock, as it appears in the books of the corporation,
is in the director. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 25, 1985.)

Said transfer would be more of a "trust" and not a transfer
of "ownership," hence, the beneficial interest in such shares will
remain with the assignor while the assignee will hold only the legal
title to the stock. In such case, the transferee should be described
in the transfer agreement, corporate books and certificate of stock
merely as a qualifying shareholder or nominee of the transferor.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-21, Feb. 18, 2021.)
The transfer need not comply with the restrictions in the articles
of incorporation such as giving the corporation the right of first
refusal thereon or prohibiting the transfer of founders' shares. To
rule otherwise would create an injustice to corporate stockholders
who, under the law, have the right to be represented in the board.14
(4) Grantee of security interest in shares. The legal title is what
counts. Hence, a person to whom shares have been transferred on
the books of the corporations as secured creditor by the stockholder¬
grantor is not qualified to be a director because he holds the shares
merely as security and not as owner. Upon like principle, a director
is not disqualified when he merely pledged his shares or entered
into an executing contract to sell the same.
(5) Subscriber of shares held in escrow.
A subscriber to shares
held in escrow cannot be eligible as a director since the holder does
not become the owner of the shares until the conditions for their
release are fully met. (see comments under Sec. 6.)
(6) Transferee of shares previously sold. Where a director makes
a valid and effective transfer of all his stockholdings, he ceases to be
a director and the subsequent purchase by him of shares does not
reinvest him with title to his former position. (SEC Opinion, June 6,

—

—

—

1971.)

—

(7) Transferee at time of assumption of office. It is not essential
to the validity of the election of one as a director that he be a legal
“The transfer is not violative of the transfer restriction dause in the articles of
incorporation, as it would be more of a "trust" and not a transfer of "ownership." The
transferee should be described in the deed of assignment, corporate books, and certificate
of stock merely as a qualifying stockholder or nominee of the
transferor or assignor. Such
description serves as notice to the corporation and third parties that the holder thereof
does not hold the share in his own right, but only as nominee for the benefit
of the real

owner. Any unpaid balance of the subscription to the qualifying share transferred would
remain the liability of the transferor-beneficial owner. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 4, 1995.)

236

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 22

owner of stock at the time of the election as director. (SEC Opinion,
April 5, 1990.)
(8) Co-owners of shares.
Where the system of absolute
community governs the property relations between husband and
wife, the provisions on co-ownership shall apply to the community
of property, (see Arts. 75, 90, Family Code.) Accordingly, the husband
or wife who desires to be elected as a member of the board must
secure standing by having their shares recorded in the corporate
books as co-owned by them, in which case either of them, not both,
may be voted for as director. Section 55 of the Revised Corporation
Code applies.
As co-owners of the shares, the husband and wife shall be
considered as one stockholder. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 4, 1990.)

—

Reason for the requirement.

The reason for requiring a director to own stock in the
corporation is simple enough. It is commonly felt that a man with a
financial interest at stake will devote more attention to the business.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-09, >» March 16, 2009.)
Today, however, management is chosen for its professional
competence rather than its financial contribution. If the financial
contribution of management is small, it is hardly an incentive to the
individual director to be more careful or a deterrent to carelessness.
On the other hand, to require a director that he invest substantially
all of his fortune to the company of which he is a director would
mean losing many valuable men. (Bonneville Dewey, and Kelley,
Organizing and Financing Business, 6th ed., p. 85.)

Additional qualifications in the bylaws.

—

(1) Consistency with corporation law.
The qualifications of
directors or trustees of the corporation, i.e., qualifications besides
those specified in Section 22 (par. 1.), may be prescribed by the
bylaws (Sec. 46[f].) but their qualifications may not be modified if
such modification would conflict with the requirements prescribed
by law.

15Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 235 [2002].

Sec. 22

UTLEni. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

237

(a) For instance, the bylaws may not provide that a director
need not be owner of stock. Such provision in the bylaws would
be invalid. But the bylaws may provide that no person may be
elected as director unless he owns two or more shares of stock.
This is not inconsistent with the law because "at least one share"
means one (1) or more shares. The requirement, while in the
form of disqualification, is really a qualification expressed in a
negative way.
(b) A provision in the corporate bylaw requiring that
persons elected to the board of directors must be holders of
shares of the paid-up value of a specified amount which shall
be held as security for their action, was held valid because
Section 21 (now Sec. 46.) of the Corporation Law expressly gives
the power to the corporation to provide in its bylaws for the
qualifications of directors and such provision "is highly prudent
and in conformity with good practice." (Gov't, vs. El Hogar, 50
Phil. 399 [1927].)

(c) Similarly, an amendment to the bylaws to the effect "that
no person shall qualify or be eligible for nomination or election
to the Board of Directors if he is engaged in any business (as
an officer, manager, or controlling person of, or the owner
of at least 10% of any of the outstanding class of shares of a
competing corporation) which competes with or is antagonistic
to that of the corporation" was sustained as valid, upon the
principle that where the director is so employed in the service
of a rival company, he cannot serve both but must betray one or

the other."14

—

(2) Approval by stockholders or members.
Additional
qualifications of directors or trustees cannot be enforced unless
approved by the stockholders or members and contained in the
bylaws of the corporations. (SEC Opinion, July 13, 1966.)
“"Sound principles of corporate management counsel against sharing sensitive

information with a director whose fiduciary duty to loyalty may well require that he
disclose this information to a competitive rival. These dangers are enhanced considerably
where the common director is a controlling stockholder of two (2) of the competing
corporations. It would seem manifest that in such situations, the director has an economic
incentive to appropriate for the benefit of his own corporation the corporate plans and
policies of the corporation where he sits as director." (Gokongwei, vs. Securities
Jr.
and
Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)

238

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 22
Sec. 23

TITLE Hl. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

239

I
Effect of want of eligibility.
(1) As to corporation. Votes cast for a person who is not eligible
as a director (or trustee) cannot elect him. In any event, one not
eligible as director because he does not own any stock is not a de
facto director where he never accepted the office, nor performed any
act as director, nor ever held himself out as director.

—

—

(2) As to third persons.
It does not follow, however, that
ineligibility of a person elected as an officer will invalidate
his acts. Persons dealing with a corporation are not required
to ascertain whether the directors or other officers of the
corporation have the qualifications prescribed by the
bylaws. Acts of a director or other officers are, therefore, valid so
far as third persons are concerned, although he may not possess the
qualifications prescribed, if he has been elected or appointed by the
corporation and permitted to act for it. (2 Fletcher, p. 98.)

Election of independent directors.
(1) The Revised Corporation Code requires corporations vested
with public interest to have independent directors constituting at

least 20% of such board.17 Such corporations are enumerated in
Section 22(a), (b), and (c). (see Sec. 179 [m].)
(2) An independent director is a person who, apart from
shareholdings and fees received from the corporation, is
independent of management and free from any business or other
relationship which could, or could reasonably be perceived to
materially interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in
carrying out the responsibilities as a director.

(3) Independent directors must be elected by the stockholders

present or entitled to vote in absentia during the election of directors.
(4) They shall be subject to rules and regulations governing
their qualifications, disqualifications, voting requirements, duration
of term and term limit, maximum number of board memberships
and other requirements that the SEC will prescribe to strengthen
their independence and align with international best practices.
(5) If the corporation is vested within public interest, the board
shall also elect a compliance offer.” (Sec. 24, par. 1.)
Sec. 23. Election of Directors or Trustees. — Except when
the exclusive right is reserved for holders of founders’
shares under Section 7 of this Code, each stockholder or
member shall have the right to nominate any director or
trustee who possesses all of the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications set forth In this Code. (N)

At all elections of directors or trustees, there must
be present, either in person or through a representative
authorized to act by written proxy, the owners of majority
of the outstanding capital stock, or if there be no capital
stock, a majority of the members entitled to vote. When so
authorized in the bylaws or by a majority of the board of
directors or trustees, the stockholders or members may
also vote through remote communication or In absentia:
Provided, That the right to vote through such modes may
be exercised in corporations vested with public interest,
notwithstanding the absence of a provision In the bylaws
of such corporations. (SA)

A stockholder or member who participates through
’’"To promote and reinforce board independence and to be consistent with recognized
regional best practice, the Securities and Exchange Commission in its en banc meeting on
09 March 2017 amended its rules on the term limit of independent directors as follows:
(1) A company's independent director shall serve for a maximum cumulative term of
nine (9) years; (2) After which, the independent director shall be perpetually barred from
re-election as such in the same company, but may continue toqualify as a non-independent
director; (3) In the instance that a company wants to retain an independent director who
has served for nine (9) years, the board should provide meritorious justification /s and
seek shareholders' approval during the annual shareholders' meeting; and (4) Reckoning
of the cumulative nine-year term is from 2012." (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4, March 10, 2017.)

remote communication or In absentia, shall be deemed
present for purposes of quorum. (N)

The election must be by ballot if requested by any
voting stockholder or member.

“SEC Memo. Circ. No. 20-2020 (Aug. 11, 2020) prescribes the rules on the number
of independent directions and sectoral representations of exchanges and other organized

markets.

240

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 23

In stock corporations, stockholders entitled to vote
shall have the right to vote the number of shares of stock
standing, own names in the stock books of the corporation
at the time fixed in the bylaws or where the bylaws are
silent, at the time of the election. The said stockholder
may: (a) vote such number of shares for as many persons
as there are directors to be elected; (b) cumulate said
shares and give one (1) candidate as many votes as the
number of directors to be elected multiplied by the number
of the shares owned; or (c) distribute them on the same
principle among as many candidates as may be seen fit:
Provided, That the total number of votes cast shall not
exceed the number of shares owned by the stockholders
as shown in the books of the corporation multiplied by the
whole number of director to be elected: Provided, however,
That no delinquent stock shall be voted. Unless otherwise
provided in the articles of corporation or in the bylaws,
members of nonstock corporations, may cast as many
votes as there are trustees to be elected but may not cast
more than one (1) vote for one (1) candidate. Nominees
for directors or trustees receiving the highest number of
votes shall be declared elected. (A)

If no election is held, or the owners of majority of the
outstanding capital stock or majority of the members
entitled to vote are not present in person, by proxy, or
through remote communication or not voting In absentia
at the meeting, such meeting may be adjourned and the
corporation shall proceed In accordance with Section 25
of this Code. (SA)

The directors or trustees elected shall perform their
duties as prescribed by law, rules of good corporate
governance, and bylaws of the corporation. (N)

Election of directors or trustees.

These limitations or conditions are imposed in the election of
directors or trustees:1
'The SEC has "original and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide cases
involving... controversies in the election or appointment of directors, trustees, officers,
or managers of such corporations, partnerships, or associations." (P.D. No. 902-A, Sec.
S[a].) Thus, in a labor case, the claim for unpaid salaries filed with the Ministry (now

Sec 23

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

241

I
(1) At any meeting of stockholders or members called for the
election of directors or trustees, there must be present in person or by
representative authorized to act by written proxy2 the owners of the
majority of the outstanding capital stock, or if there be no capital
stock, a majority of the members, (see Sec. 51.)
(a) In determining the presence of stockholders representing
"the majority of the outstanding capital stock" (see Sec. 173.),
non-voting stocks are to be taken into account although they are
not entitled to vote.
(b) Voting is on the bases of the number of shares (one

|

share-one vote) in stock corporations and not on the number of
stockholders present in the stockholders' meeting.
(c) The law prescribes who shall be entitled to vote for
directors or trustees of corporation. Hence, creditors of the
corporation cannot be given the right to vote at the meetings for
election of directors or trustees, or on other questions either by
a bylaw of the corporation or by contract, even with the consent
of all the stockholders or members.

r

(2) The election must be by ballot if requested by any voting
stockholder or member. (Sec. 23.) This means that voting by ballot
is the exception rather than the rule. Hence, voting by viva voce or
roll call (raising of hands) is valid unless there is a request that the
election be by ballot in which case such voting is mandatory;

Department) of Labor and Employment by complainant who was one of the controlling
stockholders and the general manager of a corporation who was suspended by its board
of directors was properly dismissed, as this question should be left to the SEC to decide
in conjunction with the case pending with the SEC bought by complainant assailing the
validity of his suspension. (Palma vs. Cost Plus Furniture, Inc., NLRC Case No. RBIV 20858-78, 3rd Division, June 30, 1980; see Phil. School of Business Administration vs.
Leaho, 127 SCRA 778 [1984].)
'The election can be held only at a meeting of stockholders or members because Sec
23 requires presence either in person or proxy. The bylaws of nonstock corporations may,
however, authorize voting through remote communication and/or in absentia. (Sec. 88.)
A stockholder or member who participates through remote communication or in absentia
shall be deemed present for purposes of the quorum. (Sec. 23, par. 3.) In the absence of
evidence to the contrary, the presumption is that the directors/ trustees were duly elected
as such.

i

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

242

Sec. 23

Sec 23

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

243

(3) A stockholder cannot be deprived in the articles of
incorporation or in the bylaws of his statutory right to use any of
the methods of voting in the election of directors;

may be later filled up. The power of the board is not suspended
by vacancies in the board unless the number is reduced below a
quorum. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 09-14, June 2, 2014.)

(4) No stockholder delinquent for unpaid subscription shall
vote. A delinquent stock is not entitled to vote or be represented for
any corporate purpose whatsoever;

Where directors or trustees merely

(5) If a quorum is present, the candidates receiving the highest
number of votes shall be declared elected? The law requires only
plurality, and not majority of the votes cast at the election. Delinquent
stock is not included in determining the existence of the required

quorum;
(6) In case of failure to hold an election for any reason, the
meeting may be adjourned from day to day or time to time but it
cannot be adjourned sine die or indefinitely;

(7) The requisite notice must be given (see Sec. 49, par. 1.); and
(8) Each stockholder or member shall have the right to nominate
any director or trustee unless such right is reserved exclusively for

holders of founders shares under Section 7.
(9) The right to vote through remote communication or in
absentia may be exercised only when so authorized by the bylaws
or by a majority of the board of directors or trustees. Such authority
is not required in corporations vested with public interest. (Sec. 23,
par. 2.)
(10) The stockholders or members of a corporation may opt
to elect a number of directors /trustees less than the number of
directors /trustees as fixed in the articles of incorporation. Such a
situation would merely give rise to vacancy in the board, which
’Deadlock in corporate elections may be decided by the drawing of lots (which is
an acceptable corporate practice) among the candidates concerned absent any provision
in the bylaws on the matter. Thus, in the event of a tie for the last regular director slot
the winner shall be determined by drawing of lots by the candidates receiving the same
number of votes. If they do not agree on drawing of lots, the stockholders or members
may vote again and elect among them the remaining members of the board. This matter
cannot be left for decision to the old board or to the newly elected directors. Pending
resolution of the deadlock, it is proper for the elected directors to convene and organize
and elect the officers of the corporation provided that the vote requirements of Sec. 25 are
complied with. (SEC Opinion, April 14, 1981; SEC Opinion No. 19-11, March 23, 2011.)

designated.

Section 22 is clear that the corporate powers of all corporations
shall be exercised by the board of directors or trustees.
Therefore, mere designation by the stockholders or by a
corporate officer empowered by the stockholders without election of
the directors in the manner as provided in the bylaws or applicable
provisions of the Revised Corporation Code will not be sufficient.
(SEC Opinions, March 18, 1981 and March 28, 1985.)
Time of annual election.

Since Section 22 fixes the term of office of directors and trustees at
one(l)year and three (3) years, respectively. The Revised Corporation
Code does not provide when the first election of directors or trustees

shall be held. It, however, authorizes the corporation to provide in
its bylaws "the time for holding the annual election of directors or
trustees." (Sec. 46[g].)
Incidentally, the old Corporation Code deleted Section 29 of
the former Corporation Law providing among others, that the first
election of directors shall be held "at the meeting for the adoption of
the original bylaws, or at such subsequent meeting as may be then
determined."
Postponement of the election.

The board of directors cannot change the date of the annual
meeting prescribed in the bylaws of the corporation so as to
lengthen their terms of office unless the reason is justifiable (e.g.,
lack of quorum) and proper notice of the postponement is given
to the stockholders of members. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 13-05/
October 10, 2004; SEC Opinion, April 23, 1987.)
‘Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated [1980].

244

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 23
Sec 23

If no election is held, the meeting may be adjourned and the
corporation shall proceed in accordance with Section 25. The
meeting must be held within a reasonable time for the date it has
been postponed, with proper notice of the change of date given to
all the stockholders of record. (SEC Opinion, April 17, 1986.)
Methods of voting.

Every stockholder entitled to vote shall have the right to vote
in the numbers of shares of stock standing in his name in the stock
books of the corporation at the time fixed in the bylaws (e.g., as of 10
days before the election), in his own name on the stock books of the
corporation5 (see Sec. 23, par. 5.) or, where the bylaws are silent, at
the time of the election, and the stockholders may vote his shares in
any of the ways mentioned below.
(1) Straight voting. By this voting method, every stockholder
may vote such number of shares for as many persons as there are
directors to be elected.

—

ILLUSTRATION:
A owns 100 shares of stock in a corporation. If there are five
(5) directors to be chosen, A is entitled to 500 votes obtained by
multiplying 100 by 5. He may give to the five (5) candidates he
wants to be elected 100 votes each.
Under this method, the votes are distributed equally
among the five candidates without preference.

—

(2) Cumulative voting for one candidate.
By this method, a
stockholder is allowed to concentrate his votes and give one (1)
candidate as many votes as the number of directors to be elected
multiplied by the number of the shares owned, (see SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 10-14,6 June 2, 2014.) In other words, the stockholder
has the number of votes which equals the number of directors to be
elected. Needless to say, straight voting does not benefit minority
’The stockholder of record (as of the cut-off date fixed in the bylaws, or where
the bylaws are silent, as of the day of the election) entitled to vote may no longer be a
shareholder at the time of the election by reason of the transfer of his shares before the
meeting, (see Sec. 63.) The buyer, however, has the right to compel the record owner to
give him proxy to vote the stock sold.
•Ci ting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp. 238-239
[2006].

TITLE m. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

245

stockholders for they would not be able to elect any director over
the objection of the stockholder or stockholders who own at least
51% of the capital stock.
(a) The privilege of cumulative voting is accorded for the
purpose of giving minority stockholders representation in the

board of directors by electing one of more directors but such a
provision has been held not to insure minority stockholders of
proportional representation or of representation in that board of
directors under all circumstances.
(b) The effectiveness of cumulative voting varies with
the number of directors to be chosen, the number of shares
represented at the meeting, their distribution among minority
stockholders (19 Am. Jur. 2d 169.), and the numbers shares
held by the minority stockholders. It is possible for minority
stockholders to obtain representation greater than it is entitled
to if the group controlling the majority of the shares does not
cumulate its votes or cumulates them improperly.
(c) A director elected because of the vote of minority
stockholders who united in cumulative voting cannot be
removed without cause. (Sec. 27, par. 2.)
(d) Minority stockholders cannot demand as a matter of
right for proportionate representation in the board of directors
of its subsidiaries. It is the sole prerogative and discretion of the
board of directors of a parent or holding corporation to choose
its nominees in the board of directors of its subsidiary.

However, the dealings of the parent company and its directors
with the subsidiary will be subjected to vigorous scrutiny, and
where their interest are adverse, they must be under a burden to
prove not only the good faith of the transaction by also its fairness.
The fiduciary obligation is designed not only for the protection
of the minority stockholders but for the creditors as well.
But the
fiduciary thereof will not be employed merely to enable a minority
to dictate corporate polices. (SEC Opinion, March 13,
1991, citing
Ballantine, pp. 326-328.)

ILLUSTRATIONS:
(1) If A owns 200 shares of stock and there are
five (5)
directors to be elected, he is entitled to 1,000 votes all of which

246

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 23

he may cast in favor of are candidate. If there are seven (7)
directors to be elected, each share has seven (7) votes. Thus, the
directors to be elected.

(2) Suppose that out of a total of 1,000 shares, A and B
(representing a group of stockholders) own 800 shares while C,
D, E, and F (representing another group of stockholders) own
200 shares.
If there are five (5) directors to be elected, A and B are
entitled to 4,000 votes and C, D, E and F, to 1,000 votes. The
highest number of votes that A and B can give each of their four
(4) candidates is 1,000. Hence, by cumulating their 1,000 votes
in favor of a candidate, C, stockholders D, E, and F would be
able to secure representation in the board of directors.
(3) If the majority group owns 501 shares and the minority
group, 499 shares, the former would have a total of 2,505 (501
x 5) votes, and the latter 2,495 (499 x 5) votes. By cumulating
its votes, the minority could elect two (2) candidates (one
receiving 1,248 and the other, 1,247 votes). Under straight
voting, the majority could always elect all its five candidates,
giving them 501 votes each, since the minority group cold cast
only a maximum of 499 for each of its candidates.

Now assume that the majority group cast 501 votes each
for five (5) candidates, and the minority group distributes its
votes (Infra.) to four (4) candidates (e.g., one [1] receiving 623
votes and the other three [3], 624 votes), the minority would
have control of the board. The same is true if the minority
group concentrates its votes, 831, 832, and 832 respectively,
while the majority group cumulates its votes also on the three
(3) candidates giving them 830, 835 and 840 votes, respectively,
the minority will have three (3) candidates elected to the board.

—

(3) Cumulative voting by distribution.
By this method, a
same principle
the
shares
the
on
distribute
stockholder may
as
candidates
many
as shall see fit.
distribute the same among

In electing directors by cumulative voting, "the total number of
votes cast by a [stockholder] shall not exceed the number of shares
owned by him as shown in the books of the corporation multiplied
by the whole number of directors to be elected."

Sec. 23

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFnCERS

247

ILLUSTRATIONS:
(1) With 100 shares of stock, A is entitled to 500 votes if
there are five (5) directors to be elected. A may distribute his
votes to candidates W, X and Y, giving W, 100 votes, X, 150 and
Y, 250. A may cast his votes in any combination desired by
him provided that the total number of votes cast by him does
not exceed 500, which is the number of shares owned by him
multiplied by the total number of directors to be elected.
(2) Suppose the total number of outstanding shares
entitled to vote in a corporation is 50,000 and the total number
of directors to be elected is 11. The total number of votes that
can be cast for the 11 directors is 550,000 (50,000 x 11). What is
the minimum number of shares necessary to elect six directors?
What is the minimum number of votes required to elect six (6)
directors?

Under the cumulative voting system, the number may be
calculated by using the following formula:
1. A X B
C + 1

2. D + 1 X C = E

Where:
A = Total number of outstanding shares entitled to vote (at
meeting);
B = Number of directors desired to be elected;
C Total number of directors to be elected;
D = Number of shares necessary to elect desired number of
directors; and
E = Number of votes required to elect desired number of

directors.
Thus

A. Total no. of outstanding shares
entitled to vote
B. No. of directors desired
to be elected

Divided by: Sum of:

—

—

50,000

x6

300,000

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

c. Total no. of directors

to be elected + 1 (11 + 1)

Plusl
D. = No. of shares necessary to
elect desired no. of directors
Multiplied by:
C. = Total no. of directors
to be elected
E. = No. of votes required to
elect desired no. of directors

—

—

Sec 23

25,000

—

25,001

—

2) 244,725 - 209,781 34,944 + 2 = 17,472
34,944 shares cannot elect two (2) directors, only one
(1).

xll

—

=

3) 209,781 + 12 = 17,481
(c) to elect 11 directors:

275,011

-

1) 18,825 X 11 = 207,075 + 14 14,791 + 1 14,792
=

X 13 = 192,296

1) 18,825(A) x 13 (B) = 244,725 + 14 (13 + 1)
= 17,480.36 + 1 = 17,482 (D; rounded off) X 13(C) =
227,266(E)
2) 17,481 X 13 227,253. This number of shares is
3) 244,725

-

1) 18,825 x 12(B) = 225,900 + 14 = 16,135.71 + 1
16,137 (rounded off) X 13 = 209,781

-

=

- 227,266 = 17,459. This number of

shares cannot elect one (1) director.

249

+1

(a) to elect 13 directors:

sufficient.

TITLE in: BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

4) 244,725 - 227,253 17,472. This number of
=
shares cannot also elect one (1) director.
(b) to elect 12 directors:

+12

Thus, the 275,011 votes may be distributed equally to six
(6) candidates for directors, five (5) of whom will receive 45,835
votes and the sixth, 45,836 votes. If the remaining 24,999 shares
are controlled by another group, it can only elect a maximum
of five directors with its 274,989 (24,999 x 11) votes which, if
distributed equally to six (6) candidates, will give each of them
only less than 45,835 votes.
(3) X, a stockholder, is a candidate to a nine-man board.
He expects that out of 3,000 outstanding shares, only 2,000
shares will be represented at the meeting. How many of the
2,000 shares does X need to get elected?
By applying the formula, X will need 200 of the 2,000
shares to be elected. Now, if X seeks control of the corporation
and desires to elect five directors, then, he will need 1,001 (or
simply 5/10[B/C + 1] A + 1) shares to elect the five.
(4) Assume: 18,825
total outstanding shares; 13
numbers of directors to be elected; all shares (244,725) will vote.

-

Sec 23

2) 244,725

- 192,296 = 52,429. This number of

shares cannot elect three (3) directors, only two (2).
192,296 + 11 = 17,481
(

52,429 +3 = 17,476

(d) to elect 10 directors:

-

-

1) 18,825 X 10 188,250 + 14 13,446 + 1 13,447
=
174,811

X 13

=

-

-

2) 244,725 174,811 69,914. This number of shares
cannot elect four (4) directors, only three (3).

174,811 + 10 = 17,481
69,914 + 4 = 17,478

(e) to elect three (3) directors:
1) 18,825 X 3 = 56,475 + 14 4,034 + 1 4,035 X 13
=

= 52,

=

2) 244,725 - 52,445 = 192,270. This number of
shares cannot elect 11 directors only 10.

192,+ 11 = 17,
52, + 3 = 17,

(f) to elect two (2) directors:
1) 18,825 x 2 = 37,650 + 14 = 2,689 + 1 2,690 X
=
13 = 34,970

I
THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

250

Sec 23

2) 244,725- 34,970 = 209,755. This number shares
cannot elect 12 directors, only 11.
209,755 + 12 = 17,479

34,970 + 2=17,485

(g) to elect one (1) director:
1) 18,825 X 1 = 18,825 + 14 = 1,345 + 1 = 1,346 X
13 = 17,498
2) 244,725 - 17,498 = 227,227. This number shares
cannot elect 13 directors, only 12
227,227 + 13 = 17,479

17,499 + 1 = 17,499

Right of stockholder to use
cumulative voting.

Cumulative voting being a statutory right, a corporation is
without power to deprive the stockholders of its use (SEC Opinion,
October 4, 2001; SEC Opinion,7 Oct. 20, 1964.) or even the restrict
the right to vote to only one way or method. A stockholder may
or may not exercise the right as "he shall see fit." (Sec. 23.) He may
contract with other stockholders with reference to his stock or such
right, (see Secs. 58, 99.)
Cumulative voting may not be used as a device to achieve
stealthily or indirectly what the law does not allow such as to
undermine the local majority "ownership in industries where
constitutional and legal requirements reserve controlling ownership
to Filipino citizens by the election, through the combined cumulative
votes of a group of foreign investors, of more them the number of
directors which the group is entitled to elect under a joint venture
agreement." (Aurbach vs. Sanitary Wares Manufacturing Corp., 180
SCRA 130 [1989].)
Situations Involving cumulative voting.
In a study of proxy fights, situations involving cumulative
voting were generally of six (6) types:
(1) Cases growing out of conspicuous management or board

See 23

TITLE JD.. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

(2) Situations grounded in conflicts of important business
interests among stockholders, or between stockholders and

management;
(3) Where stockholders became convinced on rather general
grounds that the board of directors was unrepresentative of, and
generally insensitive to, stockholders' interest;
(4) Instances involving clashes of strong personalities;
(5) Struggles for control of the corporation in which
representation through cumulative voting was an intermediate
objective; and
(6) Cases of "anglers"
opposition leaders who appeared to
seek board membership in order to push narrow and selfish interest
of their own. (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on Corporation, 1969
ed., p. 285, citing C.M. Williams, Cumulative Voting, 33 Harv. Bus.
Rev. 108, at 113 [May-June, 1955].)

—

Arguments for cumulative voting.

They have been summarized:
(1) Perhaps, foremost of the varied arguments made
by
proponents of cumulative voting is that it is basically fair. They
argue that it is only equitable that stockholders with a large stake in
the corporation can gain representation on the board of directors, in
proportion to their holdings;
(2) Minority representation under cumulative
voting does
not constitute a breakdown of the principle of majority rule
since
the number of directors elected by each group will vary with its
proportions of ownership;*
(3) Significant conflicts of interest can
develop between
the stockholders' groups (or the stockholders in
general) and
management and the board of directors. Unless minority groups can
gain representation on the board, they may fail to
get an adequate
voice in policy (Illustration of conflict: dividend policy or
majority
shareholders taking out profits in salaries);

failures;
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 209 [19931-

251

Thus, cumulative voting cannot be considered

undemocratic

252

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 23

(4) In the case of many larger corporations, proponents of
cumulative voting argue that the management virtually controls
the typical board of directors - the stockholders merely ratify that
selections. Thus, cumulative voting represents potential power to

assert stockholders' points of view;
(5) The position of the management and the controlling interest
in generally very strong; the balance of power lies heavily with the
"ins" who hold great advantages in the event of a proxy fight; and
(6) Minority representation on the board can be helpful in
protecting or advancing the interests of minority groups. If the
board is composed of individuals who think essentially alike, and
operations are conducted in a private club atmosphere - as does
happen too often - an intelligent gadfly can prove useful. (Ibid., pp.
287-288.)

Arguments against cumulative voting.

They have been summarized:
(1) A basic argument against cumulative voting is that it means
the election of directors who are, by their nature, partisans of
particular interest groups; and the role of a partisan on the board
of directors is inherently inconsistent with the proper function of a
director, which is to represent all interest groups in the corporation;
(2) The board of directors is an integral part of the management
team;

(3) Disharmony in the board can dissipate and destroy the
energy of management and lead to an atmosphere of uncertainty
and inaction at the top level. Officers susceptible to unfriendly
criticism are like to avoid action which might result in failure and
hostility, even when such drastic and risky action is appropriate and

necessary;
(4) A director who cannot be trusted may leak such information
to the harm of the corporation;
(5) Too frequently, cumulative voting tends to be used in practice
by persons motivated by narrow selfish interest rather than by the
broader interests of the stockholders (which they may profess to
represent); and

Sec. 23

TITLE in. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

253

(6) Not infrequently, opposition groups use cumulative voting
to secure a toe-hold in a long-run fight for control of the company.
The result is that each board meeting becomes a skirmish in a
continuing battle. Each group keeps trying to get something on the
other group that can be used in the next proxy fight. The board
neglects its real functions, top management is demoralized, and
serious harm is done to the corporation. (Ibid., p. 288.)
Voting in a nonstock corporation.

Unless limited, broadened, or denied in the articles of
incorporation or in the bylaws, each member shall be entitled to one

vote, (see Sec. 88.)

ILLUSTRATION:
If A is a member of a nonstock corporation and there are five
(5) directors to be elected, he is entitled only to five (5) votes.
He may give one (1) vote to each of the five (5) candidates he
wants to be elected.
If he has only one (1) candidate, he can cast only one (1)
vote for said candidate unless cumulative voting is authorized
in the articles of incorporation or in the bylaws. Thus, where
cumulative voting exists, and there are nine (9) trustees to be
elected, a member is entitled to cast nine (9) votes for one (1)
candidate or to distribute the same among as many candidates
as he shall see fit.

Separate voting by zones or regions
not allowed.
It is clear from Section 23 that in the election of the trustees of a
nonstock corporation, it is necessary that at least "a majority of the
members entitled to vote" must be present at the meeting held for
the purpose. It follows that trustees cannot be elected by zones or
regions, each zone or region electing independently and separately
a member of the board of trustees of the corporation, such
method
being violative of Section 23. (SEC Opinions, Jan. 30, 1969 and April
1, 1981.)

However, the bylaws of a nonstock corporation can validly

provide in its bylaws for the election of trustees

by category (e.g.,
age bracket, regional area), a practice followed by most
corporations
with nationwide membership. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 22, 1972.)

254

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

To elect directors or trustees, the bylaws may divide the
members into groups, with each group entitled to nominate qualified
members coming from the group, but the nominated members shall
be elected not by the group itself but by the entire members of the
corporation in accordance with Sections 22 and 23. (SEC Opinion,’
Oct 29, 2001; see SEC Opinion, Sept. 4, 1989.)
Segregation of votes for regular and independent
directors.
The election procedure for segregation of votes for regular
and independent directors is not contrary to any provision of the

Revised Corporation Code or the Securities Regulation Code and its
implementing rules and regulations.
The segregation is a practical device to ensure that at least two
(2) nominees for independent directors are elected to the board in
accordance with Section 38 of the Securities Regulation Code. Thus,
it may be provided that one (1) vote cast for each of the two (2)
nominees for independent director will already be sufficient to elect
them. (SEC Opinion No. 19-11, March 23, 2011.)

—

Immediately after their
Sec. 24. Corporate Officers.
election, the directors of a corporation must formally
organize and elect: (a) a president, who must be a director;
(b) a treasurer, who must be a resident: (c) a secretary,
who must be a citizen and resident of the Philippines; and
(d) such other officers as may be provided in the bylaws.
If the corporation Is vested with public interest, the board
Shall also elect a compliance officer. The same person may
hold two (2) or more positions concurrently, except that no
one shall act as president and secretary or as president
and treasurer at the same time, unless otherwise allowed
In this Code.

The officers shall manage the corporation and perform
such duties as may be provided in the bylaws and/or as
resolved by the board of directors. (N)

Sec 24

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFF1CERS

255

Corporate officers.

The board of directors or trustees, as we have seen, formulate
the board policy of the corporation and directs the conduct of its
business operations. (Sec. 22.) But the task of actual management
and carrying on the details of business operations and corporate
policy are delegated to the officers elected by it and over whom it
exercises supervision. Such officers shall manage the corporation
and perform duties as may be provided in the bylaws and/or as
resolved by the board of directors or trustees.
(1) Elected or appointed by the board of directors.
The only
officers of a corporation are those elected or appointed by the
board of directors and who are given that character either by the
Revised Corporation Code, specifically, the president, the treasurer,
the secretary, "and such other officers as may be provided for in its
bylaws. (Sec. 24.) The number of corporate officers is thus limited
by the Revised Corporation Code and the corporation's bylaws. The
rest can be considered merely as employees or subordinate officials.
(Gurrea vs. Lezama, 103 Phil. 553 [1958]; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 1709,' July 22, 2009.)

—

—

(2) Mere designation as corporate officer. The mere designation
as a high-ranking employee is not enough to consider one as a
corporate officer. There is a distinction between an employee
and a corporate officer, regardless of designation. Thus, although
the intention of the board of trustees of a corporation is to make
the "General Financial Secretary" an officer thereof, he cannot be
classified as such where the bylaws of the corporation discloses
that the position is not one of the officers provided therein. (SEC
Opinion, Nov. 1993.)

—

(3) Scope of the term "officers.''
The scope of the term in the
phrase "and such other officers as may be provided for in the
bylaws" (Sec. 25, par. 1.), would naturally depend on the bylaws
of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 4, 1991.) The
president,
vice-president, treasurer and secretary are commonly regarded as
the principal or executive officers of a corporation. (Tabang vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 266 SCRA 462 [1997]; SECOGC Opinion No. 17-09,2 July 22, 2009.)

•Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 213 [1993].

'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 252 [2002],
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 252
[2002].

256

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

However, if the bylaws enumerate the officers to be elected by
the board, the provision is conclusive, and the board is without
power to create new offices for corporate officers without amending
the bylaws unless it is empowered by the bylaws to create additional
officers as may be necessary.
(4) Appointive positions other than those of corporate officers.
The board may create appointive positions other than positions of
corporate officers but the persons occupying such positions are not
considered as corporate officers within the meaning of Section 24
and are not empowered to exercise the functions of the corporate
officers, except those functions lawfully delegated to them. Their
functions and duties are to be determined by the board. (SEC
Opinion, Nov. 25, 1993.)

Sec. 24

—

If, for example, the general manager of a corporation is not
listed as an officer, he is to be classified as an employee although
he has always been considered as one of the principal officers of
a corporation. But a Superintendent/ Administrator/Manager/

Assistant to the President included in the bylaws of an association
in its roster of corporate officers is an officer of the corporation
and not a mere employee. (Ongkinco vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 270 SCRA 613 [1997]; Union Motors Corporation vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 314 SCRA 531 [1999]; see
WPP Marketing Communications, Inc. vs. Goltha, 616 SCRA 422

[2010].)
(5) Position not expressly mentioned among officers of the corporation.
Where the bylaws of the corporation provides "and for such
other officers as the board of directors may from time to time does
fit to provide for" and "said officers shall be elected by majority
vote of the board of directors," a comptroller appointed by the
general manager which appointment was subsequently approved
by the board of directors, said comptroller is a corporate officer, not
an employee, although the position is not mentioned among the
officers of the corporation in the bylaws. (Nacpil vs. Intercontinental
Broadcasting Corporation, supra.)
(6) Corporate officer/ordinary employee.
The creation of the
position under the corporation's charter or bylaws and the election
of the officer by the directors or stockholders must concur in order
for an individual to be considered a corporate officer, as against an
ordinary employee or officer. (Wesleyan University-Philippines vs.
Maglaya, Sr„ 814 SCRA 171 [2017].)

—

—

|

TITLE m. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

257

Need for express mention of corporate
office in bylaws.
(1) Section 24 explicitly provides for the election of the president,
treasurer and secretary. If the position is other than any of them, it
must be expressly mentioned in the bylaws to be considered as a
corporate officer. Thus, the creation of an office pursuant to or under
a bylaw enabling provision (authorizing the President to create
corporate offices and appoint the individuals to assume the offices)
is not enough to make a position a corporate office, otherwise, the
guaranteed security of tenure of employees can easily be circumvented
by the expedient inclusion in the bylaws of an enabling clause or the
creation of just any corporate officer position. The dismissal by the
board of directors of a corporate officer renders the matter an intra¬
corporate dispute not a labor dispute, cognizable by the regional
trial court, not by the Labor Arbiters or the National Labor Relations
Commission. (Matling Industrial and Commercial Corporation vs.
Coros,3 633 SCRA 12 [2010]; Locsin vs. Nissan Lease Phils., Inc., 634
SCRA 392 [2010]; Marc II Marketing, Inc. vs. Joson, 662 SCRA 35
[2011]; see Barbara vs. Liceo de Cagayan University, 686 SCRA 648
[2012].)
(2) In most cases the "bylaws may and usually do provide
for such other officers" and that where a corporate office is not

specifically stated in the roster of corporate offices in the bylaws
of a corporation, the board of directors may also be empowered
under the bylaws to create additional officers as may be
necessary.4
(Nacpil vs. Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation, 379 SCRA
653 [2002].)
. •

Corporate employees.

-

•

*

—

(1) Appointed, not elected. An "office" has been
defined as a
creation of the charter of a corporation. An employee is appointed,
’The dicta in Tabang os. National Labor Relations Commission, 266 SCRA 462 (1997)
and Nacpil 05. International Broadcasting
Corporation, 379 SCRA 653 (2002) are no longer
controlling. (Ibid.)
•There are two (2) circumstances which must concur in order for an
to be
considered a corporate officer, as against an ordinary employee or officerindividual
(1) the creation
of the position is under the
corporation's charter or bylaws; and (2) the election of the
officer is by the board of directors or by the stockholders. (Cosare
vs. Broadcom Asia,
•nc., 715

SCRA 345 [2014]; see Malcaba vs. ProHealth Pharma Philippines, Inc, 864
SCRA
518 [2018].)

258

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

not elected, unless he is also a corporate officer. He usually occupies
no office and is generally employed not by the action of the directors
or stockholders but by the managing officer of the corporation who
also determines the compensation to be paid to such employee.
(Alldritt v. Kansas Central Global Exposition, Inc., 371 P 3f 818;
Nacpil vs. Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation, 379 SCRA
653 [2002]; Uy vs. Villanueva, 526 SCRA 73 [2007].)
(2) Duties of clerical or manual nature. Actually, all officers of
the corporation are its employees, although in common usage the
term "officers" is meant to refer to those elected by the board of
stockholders /members, occupying position involving the exercise
of authority and power in the management of corporate affairs,
while the term "employees," to those whose duties are of a clerical
or manual nature.
When the president, for
(3) President as an employee.
example, acts only as such, performing his regular executive duties
pertaining to his office, he is not considered an employee. However,
a corporation may hire its president to perform services under
circumstances which will make him an employee. (SEC Opinion,
May 9, 1989, citing 2 Fletcher, Chap, n, Sec. 266.1.)

—

Sec. 24

r

t

—

Election of officers by the board.
The directors or trustees of the corporation are elected to their
office by the stockholders or members to represent them in the
affairs of the corporation at the stockholders' or members' meeting.
(Sec. 23.)
(1) The Revised Corporation Code requires no particular
designations or titles for corporate officers, except that there must
be a president, a treasurer, and secretary. (SEC Opinion No. 10-11,
March 7, 2011.) The election of the administrative officers, such as

TITLE nt BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

259

by a vote of majority of all or entire number of its members may
elect a vice-president, a general manager, an auditor, and such other
officers are the needs and nature of the business may demand.6
(2) The articles of incorporation of a close corporation may
provide, however, that all officers or employees or that specified
officers or employees shall be elected or appointed by the
stockholders, instead of the board of directors. (Sec. 96, last par.)
(3) In a nonstock corporation, the officers may be directly
elected by the members unless otherwise provided for in the articles
of incorporation or the bylaws. (Sec. 91, last par.)
(4) In firms engaged in wholly or partially nationalized
activities, aliens are banned from being appointed to management
positions such as president, vice-president, treasurer, auditor,
etc. However, they can be elected directors in proportion to their
allowable participation or share in the capital of such activities in
accordance with the Anti-Dummy Law. (see Sec. 2, C.A. No. 108, as
amended by P.D. No. 715.)
(5) The Revised Corporation Code requires that the president
must be a director. (Sec. 24, par. 1.) Other officers may be elected
or appointed although they do not own shares of stock of the
corporation.
(6) Section 24 requires an election of a new set of
officers
immediately after the election of the newly elected members of the
board which is, therefore, not bound by the choice of the previous
board. Accordingly, a mere resolution of the stockholders and the
board of directors of a corporation amending the bylaws of the
stockholders and the board of directors of a corporation amendingthe
appointment of officers by the directors cannot be the subject of a
valid contract between
the directors and persons seeking such appointment (SEC Opinion,
March 18, 1981.)
‘In a case, the board of directors, at its regular meeting declared vacant
all corporate
positions in order to effect a reorganization, and
at the ensuing election of officers, the
respondent was not reelected as executive vice
It was held that the controversy
was fundamentally intra-corporate in nature president.
and not a case of dismissal. An intra¬
corporate controversy would call for SEC (now Regional Trial Court)
jurisdiction; a labor
dispute, that of the National Labor Relations Commission. The
matter of whom to elect is
a prerogative that belongs to
the board, and involves the exercise of deliberate choice and
the faculty of discriminative
a corporation, whether as selection. Generally speaking, the relationship of a person to
officer or as agent or employee, is not determined by the nature
of the services performed,
but by the incidents of the relationship as they actually exist
(Phil. School of
Business Administration vs. Leafio, 127 SCRA 778 [1984].)

the president, treasurer, secretary, and "such other officers as may
be provided for in the bylaws" is, in turn, entrusted to the board
of directors or trustees.5 Thus, pursuant to the bylaws, the board

•Where W Corporation obtained a Ioan from X Corporation and Y Corporation
guaranteed by Z Corporation, the condition in the guaranty agreement between W and
X requiring all appointments to executive positions in W should be made only with the
approval of X's management, though intended to protect the interest of X, denies W's
board of directors of prerogative to elect corporate officers and violates Sec. 25. The

i

h

I

260

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

bylaws of the corporation which would provide that the incumbent
vice-chairman of the board of directors shall automatically be the
chairman of the succeeding board if he is elected as a member of the
said board, is invalid as it would deny the newly elected board the
prerogative to elect the new chairman. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 4, 1995.)
(7) There is no prohibition as to the right of any elected board
member who is also a stockholder to participate in the election of
president or any other officer of a corporation. There is no conflict
of interest considering that a stockholder has the right to vote and
be voted upon in the corporate election process. (SEC Opinion No.
34-04, June 28, 2004.)

Compensation, terms of office, and removal.
(1) It is within the power of the board to fix the salaries of
corporate officers whom it appoints, for the power to employee
must necessarily include the power to grant compensation. It may
likewise grant bonuses to them subject to the test of reasonableness.
(2) The terms of office of these officers may be fixed in the
bylaws; otherwise, they shall be deemed for one (1) year and until
their successors shall have been elected by the board.
(a) It would seem that under Section 24 (par. 1.), the term
of the officers of the corporation cannot extend beyond that
of the directors which under Section 22 is only one (1) year
(par. 1, thereof.), since they shall be elected immediately after
the election of the board of directors. Section 46(h), however,
permits a corporation to provide in its bylaws a term of office
longer than one (1) year for its corporate officers, other than
directors or trustees.

(b) In the case of the president, since he must also be
a director, his term of office as such would necessarily be
co-terminus with his term as director.
(c) It has been a long-standing policy of the SEC not to allow
a provision in the articles of incorporation or bylaws providing
for a lifetime term of office of corporate officers to avoid possible
abuse of persons in power. Contracts of employment for life
or indefinite period of officers and other key personnel are
generally invalid because they bind the hands of future board of
directors. They also deprive other members of the corporation

\

See 24

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

261

of the opportunity to become officers of the corporation. (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 16, 1991.)
(d) The SEC has ruled on several occasions that holdover
of incumbent corporate officers whose term has expired is
allowable when no successors are elected due to justifiable or
valid reasons. (SEC Opinion, April 5, 1995.) Non-holding of the
annual meeting for the election of the board is subject to the SEC
Rules Governing the Filing of Information Sheet by Domestic
Corporations. Violations of the rules have the corresponding
penalty prescribed. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 16, 1995.)
(3) The power to remove an officer for cause inheres in every
corporation as part of its existence. (SEC Opinion,7 July 3, 2002.)
The power to elect or appoint corporate officers being vested with
the board, the power of removal must necessarily be exercised by it
as an incident to its power of appointment. However, in nonstock
corporations, if the officers are elected by the members, as allowed
under Section 91, the power to remove them is also vested directly
in the latter.
(a) In instances where the term of an officer is not fixed by
contract or in the bylaws, he may be removed at any time with
or without cause at the pleasure of the body. But the power must
not be exercised in bad faith or in such a manner as to work in¬
justice.
(b) Where the term of an officer as fixed in the bylaws or in
a contract of employment is for more than one (1) year, he has to
be reelected by the board until the expiration of the term; other¬
wise, the corporation may be held liable for damages.
(c) The election of successors to corporate officers after
the expiration of their term does not constitute their dismissal.
The matter of whom to elect is a prerogative that belongs to
the board and involves the exercise of deliberate choice and
the faculty of discriminate selection. Generally speaking, the
relationship of a person to a corporation, whether as officer or
as agent or employee is not determined by the nature of the
services performed, but by the incidents of the relationship as
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 217 [1993].

262

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

gee. 24

Sec 24

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

263

\

they actually exist. (Phil. School of Business Administration vs.

Leano, 127 SCRA 778 [1984].)

Positions concurrently held by same person.

The directors or trustees and officers elected shall perform the
duties enjoined on them by law and by the bylaws of the corporation.
Any two (2) or more positions may be held concurrently by the same
person except as provided in Section 24.’
(1) The same person may hold two (2) or more positions
concurrently except that no corporate officer shall act as president
and secretary or treasurer at the same time unless it is allowed in the
Revised Corporation Code. The positions of president and secretary
or treasurer are considered by law as incompatible with each other
due to the very nature appertaining to each office. The rationale
behind the provision is to ensure the effective monitoring of each
officer's separate functions. (Ong Yong vs. Tiu, 401 SCRA 1 [2003].)
(2) There is no prohibition in the law against a stockholder
being a director or officer of two (2) or more corporations.
(3) The Revised Corporation Code does not prohibit a corporate
officer from occupying the same position in another corporation
organized for the same purpose. However, such a situation may be
prohibited by special law, the articles of corporation, or the bylaws
of the corporation.
Acceptance of office and taking of oath
of office.
(1) To make one an officer of a corporation, his consent, and an
appointment or election, is necessary.
(a) A person who is appointed /elected without his
knowledge, and who does not accept the office, or act as an
officer, is not an officer, although he may have received stock
after his election.
(b) No formal acceptance is necessary. If a person enters
upon the duties of an office after his election or appointment, it
•in American law, directors who are also officers of a corporation are
inside
directors. Too many inside directors create the danger of the board beingcalled
under the

control of officers.

j

is a sufficient acceptance or, rather, efficient ground for implying
acceptance, absent proof to the contrary. Acceptance of an office
may be presumed without any act, absent evidence to the
contrary. (2 Fletcher, pp. 99-100; 19 CJ.S. 64.)
(2) There is no provision in the Revised Corporation Code
which requires taking an oath of office to qualify the elected directors
and officers. Oath of office constitutes no part of the office itself.
Acceptance of the office will suffice unless taking an oath is required
by the corporate bylaws in which case, they are not de jure but de
facto officers {Infra.) until they have taken the oath. (SEC Opinion,

Jan. 21, 1986.)
Sources of powers or authority
of corporate officers.

The actual authority of corporate officers to bind the corporation
is generally derived from laws, the articles of incorporation, the
bylaws, or the resolutions of the board, or authorization from the
board impliedly given by habit, custom or acquiescence in the
general course of business. (People's Aircargo & Warehousing Co.,
Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 287 SCRA 172 [1998]; Associated Bank
vs. Pronstoller, 558 SCRA 113 [2008]; Cebu Mactan Members Center,
Inc. vs. Tsukahara, 593 SCRA 172 [2009].)
(1) An officer's authority to act for the corporation in a particular
matter is determined by his actual office and not by the description
he may use in acting for the corporation.

This authority may be derived from some provision of statute or
the articles of incorporation. It may be contained in a bylaw, if the
bylaw is deemed not to violate rules of law such as the provision of
the Revised Corporation Code vesting powers of management in
the board of directors or trustees. Authority may also be conferred
on an officer by a resolution of the board of directors or trustees,
provided that the resolution does not attempt to delegate non¬
delegable powers. (W.L. Cary, op. cit., pp. 190-191.)
(2) Corporate officers shall perform the duties and functions
enjoined by the by law and the bylaws of the corporation. However,
powers of corporate officers under the bylaws are always subject
to the rule in Section 23 that the board of directors or trustees is
the governing body of the corporation. By virtue of Section 22,

264

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 24

the board may in its best judgment and for the best interest of the
corporation, appoint or authorize the president or another officer
or agent to act for and on behalf of the corporation, but in all cases
such officers shall be under the ultimate direction of the board.
(SEC Opinion, Jan. 18, 1995.) One may be an agent of a private
domestic corporation although he is not an officer thereof. (Aboitiz
International Forwarders, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 488 SCRA 492
[2006].)
It has been held that where the real party-in-interest is a body
corporate, neither the administrator of the agency or a project
manager could sign the certificate against forum shopping without
being duly authorized by resolution of the board of the corporation.
(Eslaban, Jr. vs. Onorio, 360 SCRA 230 [2001].)
Extent of powers or authority of corporate
officers.

—

(1) Determination of authority.
The full extent of the powers
or authority of any particular officer of a corporation is to be
determined by inquiring into:
(a) The authority which he has by virtue of his office;

(b) The authority expressly conferred upon him or is inci¬
dental to the effectualness of such express authority; and
(c) As to third persons dealing with him without notice
of any restriction thereof, the authority which the corporation
holds the officer out as possessing or is estopped to deny.
In determining the authority which certain officers may exercise
by virtue of their office, the nature of the corporate business must
also be considered.

Besides the foregoing, the act of an officer though originally
unauthorized may become binding upon the corporation by a

subsequent ratification. (13 Am. Jur. 875.)

—

(2) Exemption from liability.
Officers of a corporation who
acted for and in behalf of the corporation within the scope of
their authority and in good faith do not become liable with the
corporation, whether civilly or otherwise, for the consequences of
their acts. Those acts are properly attributed to the corporation

Sec 24

TITLE nr. BOARD OF D1RECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

265

alone and no personal liability is incurred by such officers. (Benguet
Electric Cooperative, Inc. vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
209 Relations, 6 SCRA 710 [1962].)
When they exceed their authority, the corporation is not bound
unless it has ratified them expressly or tacitly (see Art. 1910, Civil
Code.) or it may be held in estoppel. (Infra.)
(3) Authority to bind by contract.
The lack of authority of a
corporate officer to bind the corporate by contract executed in
its name, is a defense which should be especially pleaded by the
corporation. (Lao vs. Court of Appeals, 325 SCRA 694 [2000].) It
should first prove by clear evidence that its corporate officers are not
in fact authorized to act in its behalf the burden of evidence shifts to
the other party to prove, for example, that, by previous specific acts,
an officer was cloaked by the corporation with apparent authority.’
(Westmont Bank vs. Inland Construction and Development Corp.,

—

582 SCRA 230 [2009].)

Classification of powers or authority
of corporate officers.

The general principles of agency applicable to agents of
individuals govern the relation between the corporation and its
officers or agents, subject to the articles of incorporation, bylaws, or
relevant provisions of law.10 (San Juan Structural & Steel Fabricators,
Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 293 SCRA 631 [1998]; Litonjua, Jr. vs.
The general rule is that a contract, to be binding on the parties thereto, need not
be in writing, unless the law requires that such contract be in some form in order that it
may be valid or enforceable or that it be executed in a certain form, (see Art. 1356, Civil
Code.) Indeed, corporate policies need not be in writing. But a verbal promise made
by the corporation, through its chairman and president, obligating itself, as a matter of
policy, to grant petitioner (who retired as general manager, after 36 years of service) the
cash value of his vacation and sick leave credits cannot bind the corporation absent a
board resolution to that effect. (Kuok vs. Phil. Carpet Manufacturing Corp., 457 SCRA
465 [2005].)
“The elements of agency are: (a) consent of the parties to establish the relationship;
(b) the object is execution of a juridical act in relation to a third person; (c) the
agent acts
as a representative and not for himself; and (d) the agent acts within the scope of his
authority. (Yu Eng Cho vs. Pan American World Airways, Inc., 308 SCRA 7175 [2005].)
The mere fact that an entity may be a 100% subsidiary corporation of another corporation
does not necessarily mean that the former is a duly authorized agent of the latter, because
for a contract of agency to exist, it is essential that the consents so as to act. (Apex Mining
Co., Inc. vs. Southeast Mindanao Gold Mining Corp., 492 SCRA 355 [2006].)

266

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 24

Eternal Corporation, 490 SCRA 204 [2006]; Philippine Rabbit Bus
Lines, Inc. vs. Aladdin Transit Corp., 493 SCRA 358 [2006].)
(1) The inherent authority or power of an officer or agent is taken
to mean that authority to act and bind the corporation which the
officer has by reason of his office, although it may not be sanctioned
by express authority. (Ibid.)
(2) The express authority of an officer or agent includes every
power or authority expressly conferred upon him by law and the
bylaws of the corporation.
(3) The implied authority of an officer or agent of a corporation
includes all such incidental authority as is necessary, usual, and
proper to effectuate the main authority expressly conferred.
(a) A corporate officer entrusted with the general
management and control of the corporate business has the
implied authority to act or contract for the corporation which
may be necessary or appropriate to conduct the ordinary

business. If the act or contract comes within corporate powers
but it is done without any express or implied authority therefor
from the bylaws, board resolution or corporate practices, such
unauthorized act or contract does not bind the corporation
unless ratified by the board of directors or the corporation may
be held in estoppel (Infra.) from denying as against innocent
third persons the authority of the corporate officer. (Rural Bank
of Milaos vs. Ocfemia, 325 SCRA 99 [2000].)
(b) An officer of a corporation who is authorized to purchase
the stock of another corporation has the implied power to
perform all other obligations arising there from such as payment
of the shares of stock. (Inter-Asia Investments Industries, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 403 SCRA 452 [2003].)
(4) When in the usual course of business of the corporation, an
officer or agent is held out by such corporation, or has been permitted
to act for it in such way as to justify third persons who deal with him
in assuming that he is doing an act or making a contract within the
scope of his authority, the corporation is bound even though such
officer or agent does not have the actual authority to do such act or
make such contract. This authority is known as apparent or ostensible
authority. It is essentially a question of fact.

Sec. 24

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

267

(5) Apparent authority is naturally the same as and based upon
principle as authority by estoppel.
same
the
(a) Stating the rule in terms of estoppel, a corporation, which
by its voluntary act, places an officer or agent in such a position
or situation that persons of ordinary prudence are justified in
assuming that he has authority to perform the act in question,
is estopped as against such persons from denying the officer's
or agent's authority." (13 Am. Jur. 869-871; BPI Family Savings
Bank, Inc. vs. First Metro Investment Corp., 429 SCRA 30 [2004];
Hydro Resources Corp. vs. National Irrigation Administration,
441 SCRA 614 [2004]; Development Bank of the Phils, vs. Ong,
460 SCRA 170 [2005].)

1

(b) The authority of a corporate officer to act for and bind
the corporation may be presumed from acts of recognition in
other instances where the power was in fact exercised. Where
similar acts have been approved by the board of directors as a

matter of general practice, custom, and policy, a corporate officer
may bind the company without formal authorization of the
board.12
(c) Apparent authority is derived not merely from corporate
practice (defined as frequent or customary action). Its existence
may be ascertained through: 1) the general manner in which the
corporation holds out an officer or agent as having the power
"Thus, where the board secretary sent to VF a telegram purportedly signed by the
general manager of the GSIS accepting VF's offer to liquidate his daughter's mortgage
indebtedness and pursuant to such telegram VF paid P30,000.00 for which a receipt
was issued by the GSIS and subsequently, GSIS claimed that the telegram should
be disregarded in view of its failure to express accurately the contents of the board's
resolution due to the error of its minor employees and that the board secretary sent the
telegram without the knowledge of the general manager, it was held that GSIS could
not evade the binding effect produced by the telegram within the general
manager's
apparent authority. Corporate transactions would speedily come to a standstill where
every person dealing with corporation held duty bound to disbelieve every act of its
responsible officers no matter how regular they should appear on their face. (Francisco
vs. GSIS, 7 SCRA 577 [1963]; see Maharlika Publishing Corporation vs. Tagle, 142 SCRA
553 [1986); First Phil. International Bank vs. Court of Appeals, 252 SCRA 257,
259 [1996].)
"Thus, where the practice of the corporation had been to allow its general manager to
negotiate and execute contracts in its copra trading activities for and in the corporation's
behalf without prior board approval, it was held that the board itself, by its acts and
through acquiescence, practically laid aside the bylaws' requirement of prior approval.
(Board of Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo M. Kalaw, 20 SCRA 987
[1967]; see Lipat vs.
Pacific Banking Corporation. 402 SCRA 399 [2003].)

268

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

to act or, other words, the apparent authority to act in general,
with which it clothes him; or 2) the acquiescence in his acts
of a particular nature, with actual or constructive knowledge
thereof, whether within or beyond the scope of his ordinary

powers.
It requires presentation of similar act(s) executed either in
its favor or in favor of other parties. It is not the quantity of
similar acts which establishes apparent authority but the vesting
of a corporate officer with the power to bind the corporation.
(People's Aircargo & Warehousing, Co., Inc. vs. Court of
Appeals, 297 SCRA 170 [1998]; Advance Paper Corporation vs.
Arma Travels Corporation, 713 SCRA 313 [2013].)
(d) Where a power is one which would otherwise be
possessed by an officer, it is generally held that a bylaw (or
a board resolution or articles of incorporation provision)
restricting.
Thus, a corporation was held bound by a note signed by the
president and secretary where they had signed numerous other
notes which had been paid, although there was no evidence that
the plaintiff knew of this fact, notwithstanding a provision of its
bylaws requiring checks or notes to be signed by the president
and treasurer. (Ibid., citing Produce Exchange Trust Co. v.
Bierberbach, 176 Mass. 58 N.E. 167 [1900].)

(e) The rule that knowledge of an officer is considered
knowledge of the corporation applies only when the officer
is acting within the authority given to him or her by the
corporation. The corporation will not be bound by unauthorized
actions made on its account. (University of Mindanao, Inc. vs.
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 778 SCRA 458 [2016].)

Extent of authority of particular officers.

— The concept of board chairman and
his functions as an executive vary widely in different companies
(1) Chairman of the Board.

so
as to be indefinable. There is no settled practice. (2 Fletcher, p. 541;
Ballantine, p. 142 [1946 ed.].)
(a) The typical pattern of executive duties is that the
president or the chairman of the board is designated usually
by the bylaws but sometimes, in board resolutions, as the

Sec 24

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

269

general manager or chief executive officer of the corporation.
If the chairman of the board is so designated, the president
is frequently designated the chief administrative or chief
operating officer, or may simply be the officer who succeeds
to the chairman's executive duties in his absence or disability.
(Ballantine & Sterling, p. 42 [1982 ed.].)

In such a given situation, an alien cannot qualify as chairman
of the board of directors in enterprises where aliens are banned
by law or the Constitution from management positions. (SEC
Opinion, May 15, 1985.)
(b) Where the president is the chief executive officer,
typically, the duties of the chairman relate to presiding at
meetings of the board and of committees of which he is a
member, and of stockholders or members, and carrying out such
other duties as the board shall assign. The duty of the chairman
of the board as presiding officer is not an executive one.
Thus, where the functions of the chairman of the board
,
as provided in the bylaws consists merely of presiding at
the meetings of the board or of committees of which he is a
member, an alien may qualify as chairman of the board in such
enterprises. (SEC Opinion, May 15, 1985, citing 2 Fletcher, p. 542
and Ballantine & Sterling, supra.)
(c) If a vice-chairman is appointed, he presides at the
meetings absent the chairman. He shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties and functions as the board may, from
time to time, assign to him.

—

(2) President.
Generally, a president of a corporation is
defined as the one placed in authority over others, a chief officer, a
presiding or managing officer.

Customarily, he is given general supervision and management
of the business affairs of the corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.
13-15, Nov. 3, 2015.)
The president of a corporation is the principal executive officer
of the corporation. In general, he supervises and controls the
business and affairs of the corporation. From the foregoing, it can
be inferred that the position of a corporate president is reposed with
duties and responsibilities provided by the law and jurisprudence,

I

270

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 24

which can be further expanded by its bylaws. Therefore, it serves
not merely as a title of prestige or status, but also serves as a basis
for its stockholders and the other persons /entities transacting with
it to determine whether such person is clothed with authority to
perform the duties conferred by the law and the functions given
by the bylaws, within the general objectives of the corporation's
business. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 13-15, Nov. 3, 2015)
The president is the only officer required by law to be a member
of the board of directors. Upon the expiration of his term as member
of the board, he automatically ceases to be president for lack of
qualification. (Sec. 22, par. 2.)
(a) The powers of the president of the corporation are such
only as are conferred upon him by the board of directors or
trustees or vested in him by the bylaws. If there is nothing in
the bylaws conferring any particular authority upon him, he
has from his office and alone no more power over the corporate
property and business than has any other director. (Fisher,
op. cit., p. 357.) It is the board of directors or trustees, not the
president, that exercises corporate powers. (Safic Alcan & Cie
vs. Imperial Vegetable Oil Co., Inc., 355 SCRA 559 [2001].)
However, according to the view taken by many authorities,
regard must be had to the fact that presidents of corporations
are often given general supervision and control of the business
as chief executive officers from which is to be inferred that
contracts or acts made or done by the president in the ordinary
course of business are presumed to be duly authorized unless
the contrary appears.13 (2 Fletcher, p. 443; SEC-OGC No. 23-14,14
August 26, 2014.) Unless there is a charter or bylaw provision to
the contrary, the president may, as a rule, bind the corporation
“Even absent express delegation by the board or implied authority by ratification,
unless there is a charter or bylaw provision to the contrary, the president, as such, may,
as a genera) rule, bind the corporation by a contract in the ordinary course of business,
provided that the same is reasonable under the circumstances, (see Prime White Cement
Corp. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 220 SCRA 103 [1993].) Furthermore, a person
dealing with the president of a corporation is entitled to assume that he has the authority
to enter, on behalf of the corporation, into contracts that are within the scope of the powers
of the corporation. (People's Aircargo & Warehousing, Co., Inc vs. Court of Appeals, 297
SCRA 170 [1998].)
"Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 261 [2006].

Sec 24

TITLE ffl. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

271

on a contract in the ordinary course of business, provided that
the same is reasonable under the circumstances. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 23-14, Aug. 26, 2014.)
(b) On the other hand, where the president acts in matters
not within the scope of his authority although they may relate
to the company's business as where he acts in matters within
the exclusive province of the board of directors, the corporation
cannot be bound; or where he performs an act not incidental
to the business of the corporation, it must, as a general rule, be
shown that he was duly authorized by the board of directors.
(19C.J.S. 10010.)

(c) Absent a special power in favor or a president of a
corporation, no valid mortgage on the corporation's property
can be executed by him. Such a mortgage is void and cannot be
ratified. (Yasuma vs. Heirs of C.S. de Villa, 499 SCRA 466 [2006];
see Art. 1878, Civil Code.)
(d) A contract entered into by the president who was also
the chairman of the board, in behalf of the corporation, was
held void absent any provision in the bylaws conferring upon
him the authority to enter into such contracts independently
of the board of directors, particularly because the corporation
had a general manager who, under its bylaws, was given the
active management of the corporation, there being no evidence
adduced to show that the corporation clothed him with apparent
power to act for it. (Yao Ka Sin Trading vs. Court of Appeals,
209 SCRA 763 [1992].)
(e) Absent specific provisions governing the situation
and where circumstances of an emergency nature arise which
necessitate the exercise of discretion, the rule on agency may
be applied. (SEC Opinion, June 11, 1974.) Article 1881 provides:
"The agent must act within the scope of the agency. He may
do such acts as may be conducive to the accomplishment of the
purpose of agency."
(f) The unauthorized act of an agent is subject to ratification.
(Art. 1910, Civil Code.) Such ratification is implied from the
acceptance of benefits as where a corporation deposited in its
current account the proceeds of a loan obtained by its president,
allegedly without authority, retained and disbursed the same

272

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 24

for the corporate purposes. Such use may be taken as evidence
to be lie the claim of lack of authority. (De Asis & Co. vs. Court
of Appeals, 136 SCRA 599 [1985].)

(g) Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, in the absence of
the chairman, the president shall preside at all meetings of the
directors or trustees. (Sec. 53.) or in the absence of the chairman
or vice-chairman.
(h) The president of a corporation, by the authority of his
office alone, has no power to delegate the powers and duties
of his position as president to any member of the board of
director or trustees. Should he become incapacitated to perform
his functions, what should be done, in the absence of a vicepresident or any specific provision in the bylaws on the matter,
is for the board to temporarily elect an acting president.
Nevertheless, if the director, who was allowed to discharge
the duties of president, performed his functions and presided
over the board meetings without objection on the part of the
other members of the board, it would seem that if no irregularity
has been committed by him, his past actuations need not be the
subject of further inquiry. (SEC Opinion, May 21, 1971.)
(i) In some corporations, the chairman is made the chief
executive officer with most of the important and substantial
powers and duties ordinarily given to the president, with the
latter as chief operating officer in charge of daily operations
and carrying out the policies and instructions laid down by the
board of directors.
(j) Absent a charter bylaw provision to the contrary,
the president is presumed to have the authority to act within
the domain of the general objectives of the business of the
corporation and within the scope of his or her usual duties.
(Advance Paper Corporation vs. Arma Traders Corporation, 712
SCRA 313 [2013].)
(k) To allow three (3) more corporate officers, who
would each be called as "President" could mislead and create
confusion as to who should perform the duties enumerated by
the law to be performed by the president, and as to whom such
qualifications/disqualffications must apply. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 13-15, Nov. 3, 2015.)

Sec 24

TITLE IU. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

(3) Vice-President.

273

— The vice-president has always been

considered as an officer next-in-rank to the president.

(a) He is commonly referred to as "fifth wheel," i.e., a
conditional officer who acts as president in case of death,
absence, or inability of the president to act. "Prima facie, it would
seem that the only function of the vice-president, as his title
indicates, is to replace the president in case of the latter's death,
incapacity, etc." (SEC Opinion, May 20, 1975, citing 2 Fletcher, p.
774.)

He has no authority by virtue of his office alone to enter into
contracts in behalf of the corporation. However, it is frequently
the case that the vice-president of a corporation is given certain
executive duties by the board of directors or bylaws of the
corporation. (American Exh. Nat. Bk. v. Weird, III, F, 782, 55
L.R.A. 356.)
(b) Where the bylaws provide that it shall be the duty of
the vice-president to replace the president during the absence of
the latter, the vice-president should likewise be a director. (SEC
Opinion, Feb. 5, 1962.) If the vice-president is also a secretary
or a treasurer, he cannot act as president at the same time. (Sec.
24.) There may be more than one (1) vice-president, including an
executive vice-president.

—

(4) Secretary. The secretary must be a resident and a citizen
of the Philippines.15 The assumption is that the secretary, being the
custodian of corporate records, should at all times be available in
the regular conduct and operations of the corporation. He is not
allowed to act as president and secretary at the same time. (Sec. 24.)
He need not be a director unless required by the bylaws.

”No citizenship requirement is imposed by the Revised Corporation Code with
respect to other corporate officers. However, in enterprises or industries which are
totally or partially reserved for Filipino citizens, the election of aliens as officers and/
or members of the board of directors is prohibited or restricted under specific provisions
of the Constitution and special laws, (see Sec. 13.) Where an officer is required to be a

Filipino citizen, a Filipino with dual citizenship may be elected provided that prior to
such election he /she shall have complied with the requirements under the "Citizenship
Retention and Re-Acquisition Act of 2003 (R.A. No. 9225.) and its implementing rules
regulations."

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

274

Sec 24

(a) It is generally the duty of the secretary of a corporation
to make and keep its records and to make proper entries of
the votes, resolutions and proceedings of the shareholders (or
members) and directors (or trustees) in the management of the
corporation and all other matters required to be entered on the
records. (Ballantine, p. 142.) As custodian of corporate records,
corollarily, he keeps the stock and transfer book and makes
proper and necessary entries. (Torres, Jr. vs. Court of Appeals,
278 SCRA 793 [1997].)

(b) He issues notices of meetings and has custody of the
corporate seal which he uses when attesting the signatures of
the officers to important documents. The secretary may perform
other functions.

Where the corporate bylaws state, among others, that the
secretary shall also "send notices of all regular and special
meetings of the members and of the board of directors," this
connotes that the principal signatory to such notices is the
corporate secretary. The term "to send" may be deemed
synonymous with "issuance" of the notices, in accordance with
sound corporate practices, supported by jurisprudence. (SEC
Opinion, Oct. 1, 1981.)
(c) A secretary is not obligated to include everything that
is said in the minutes as long as he accurately transcribes what
has taken place. The minutes, however, should clearly record
the proceedings as they actually occurred and should positively
show what action was taken by the corporation. (5 Fletcher, Sec.
2190.)

(d) A corporate secretary's certification, when regular on
its face, is sufficient for a third party to rely on. It need not
investigate the truth of the facts contained in such certification.
Otherwise, business transactions of corporations would become
tortuously slow and unnecessarily hampered. (Esguerra vs.
Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 380 [1997].)
(e) The secretary is a ministerial officer who cannot bind
the corporation unless he is especially authorized to do so.
(Ballantine, p. 142.) There may be an assistant secretary.
(5) Treasurer. The treasurer may not hold at the same time the
position of president. He must be a resident. Unlike with respect to

—

Sec 24

TITLE. ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

275

the corporate secretary, the law does not require that the treasurer
shall be a citizen of the Philippines. (Sec. 24, par. 1.)
(a) The treasure of the corporation is the proper officer
entrusted with the authority to receive and keep the money of
the corporation and to disburse them as he may be authorized.
(b) The view is taken that he has no inherent power to bind
the corporation by contracts or to borrow money in behalf of the
corporation. (Ballantine, p. 143; 13 Am. Jur. 886.) There may be
an assistant treasurer.

Unless otherwise provided by the Constitution or existing laws,
a corporate officer need not be a resident or citizen.16

Before the enactment of the Revised Corporation Code, the SEC
has adopted as a matter of policy to require the treasurer of a private
corporation to be a resident of the Philippines. This policy would
prevent the possibility on the part of a non-resident treasurer to
effect the transfer of corporate funds out of the country, for, in view
of his status as a non-resident, he can easily leave the country and
escape. (SEC Opinion, May 27, 1991.)
A comptroller differs from a treasurer. The former is said to be
an officer appointed to control accounts and to check expenditures.
By virtue of his office, the authority of a comptroller is restricted to
doing those things which are usual and necessary in the performance
of his duties. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 599.)
(6) General Manager. The general business of corporations is
frequently entrusted to the management of a general manager or
managing officer who has power to bind the corporation by acts
within the scope of his apparent authority. Accordingly, the general
manager or managing officer has very broad powers, especially as
far as third persons are concerned.

—

“It has been opined, that there is all the more reason for the treasurer to also possess
the same qualifications as the secretary. Being the holder of the purse, the treasurer is
entrusted with the authority to receive, keep, and disburse funds of the corporation.
Furthermore, there is a need to provide to local investors ample protection from the
danger of getting victimized by foreign nationals. Thus, while the Revised Corporation
Code does not impose Philippine citizenship requirement, nevertheless, considering
*he nature of his functions, good corporate practice dictates that the treasurer must be a
resident of the Philippines. (SEC Opinions, April 13, 1989 and Jan. 30 1990.)

276

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 24

(a) He has been deemed by numerous authorities to be
the principal officer of the corporation, having general charge
of those business matters for the carrying on of which the
company was incorporated, and he has the implied or ostensible
power to do any act which is usual or necessary in the ordinary
transaction of the company's business. This power has been
broadly described as being co-extensive with the powers of the
corporation itself unless specifically restricted.

(b) He has implied authority to make any contract or do any
other act which is necessary or appropriate to the conduct of the
ordinary business of the corporation, including the authority to
institute proceedings against all accountable persons to protect
and preserve the assets of the corporation and to prevent their
dissipation. This authority, however, is generally qualified as
not extending to matters not properly incidental to the manage¬
ment of the corporate business nor to matters over which the
stockholders alone have control, (see 19 Am, Jur. 2d 599-560; see
Board of Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo Kalaw, 20 SCRA 987
[1967]; Central Cooperative Exchange, Inc. vs. Enciso, 162 SCRA
706 [1988].)
In a case, the general manager of a company terminated the
services of certain employees. There was no evidence on record that
he acted maliciously or in a bad faith. It was held that he could not
be made personally liable for damages as his act was within the
scope of his authority and was a corporate act. (Sunio vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 127 SCRA 390 [1984].)

Another corporation as director or trustee.

—

(1) General rule. A corporation is not qualified to occupy the
position of director (or trustee) because, being a juridical person,
it cannot act by itself but only through its officers and agents and
such being the case, it cannot attend personally board meetings as
a director and whoever represents it as a director is doing so in his
capacity as the "proxy" of the director or trustee. (SEC Opinion June
26, 1969, citing 19 C.J.S. 96.)
(2) Through a receiver.
Where the corporation is under
receivership, the appointment of a receiver for a corporation
terminates at least, for the most part, the powers of the corporate
officers as to the property in possession of the receiver where the

—

Sec. 25

TITLE Ifl. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

171

receivership is a general one, and not merely for the preservation of
the company7s property pending a suit in reference to it. A general
receiver succeeds to all the rights of the board of directors and
officers of the corporation. Where a corporation is under a general
receivership, it may be represented in the board of directors / trustees
of another corporation through its receiver.
(3) Through an authorized representative.
Only members of
a nonstock corporation can be elected to sit in its board. (Sec. 22,
par. 2; Sec. 91, par. 2.) A candidate should meet the qualification for
membership of the corporation as prescribed in its bylaws. While a
corporation is not qualified to occupy the position of a trustees, its
authorized representative may be elected as member of the board
if, under the bylaws, such representative is also considered as a
member of the corporation to qualify him as a trustee. (SEC Opinion,
Sept. 2, 1991.) In such case, the trustee is not the corporation but the
representative.

—

Sec. 25. Report of Election of Directors, Trustees end
Officers, Non-Holdina of Election end Cessation from Office.
Within thirty (30) days after the election of the directors,
trustees and officers of the corporation, the secretary, or
any other officer of the corporation, shall submit to the
Commission, the names, nationalities, shareholdings, and

—

residence addresses of the directors, trustees and officers
elected.
The non-holding of elections and the reasons therefor
shall be reported to theCommission within thirty (30) days
from the date of the scheduled election. The report shall
specify a new date for the election, which shall not be later
than sixty (60) days from the scheduled date. (N)

If no newdate has been designated, or if the rescheduled
election is likewise not held, the Commission may, upon
the application of a stockholder, member, director or
trustee, and after verification of the unjustified nonholding of the election, summarily order that an election be
held. The Commission shall have the power to issue such
orders as may be appropriate, including orders directing
the issuance of a notice stating the time and place of the
election, designated presiding officer, and the record date
or dates for the determination of stockholders or members
entitled to vote. (N)

278

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 25

i

TITLE in. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

Sec 26

279

b

Notwithstanding any provision of the articles of
incorporation or bylaws to the contrary, the shares of stock
or membership represented at such meeting and entitled to
vote shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting
an election under this section. (N)
Should a director, trustee or officer die, resign or in any
manner cease to hold office, the secretary, or the director,
trustee or officer of the corporation, shall, within seven (7)
davs from knowledge thereof report in writing such fact to
the Commission.

of the nature of the business, financial condition, and operational

status of the corporation together with information on its key
officers or managers so that those dealing it and those who intend
to do business with it may know or have the means of intend to
do business with it may know or have the means of knowing facts
concerning the corporation's financial resources and business

responsibility. (Premium Marble Resource, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
264 SCRA 1 [1996]; Monfort Hermanos Agricultural Development
Corp. vs. Monfort m, 434 SCRA 27 [2004]; see SEC-OGC-Opinion
No. 9-14, June 2, 2014.)
A corporation cannot coerce its members to attend members'
meetings for the same should be done voluntarily or of their own
volition. However, if the members' non-attendance results to no
quorum for at least two (2) attempts at meetings for the purpose of
electing directors /trustees, Section 25 of the Revised Corporation
Code applies. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 43-19, Sept. 19, 2019.)

Report of elections and vacancies.

Section 25 requires that:
(1) The secretary or any other officer of the corporation shall
submit to the SEC the names, nationalities, shareholdings and
residence addresses of the directors /trustees (see Sec. 13(7].) and
officers elected, which must be done within 30 days after the meeting
in which they were elected;
(2) The non-holding of elections and the reasons thereof shall be
reported to the SEC within 30 days from the date of the scheduled
election. The report shall specify a new date for the election.

Emergency quorum.
To solve the recurring problem of "no quorum-no meeting,"
the Revised Corporation Code provides for an emergency quorum
under paragraph 4 for purposes of conducting an election. It states
that notwithstanding any provision of the articles of incorporation
or bylaws to the contrary, "the shares of stock or membership
represented at such meeting and entitled to vote shall constitute a
quorum for purposes of conducting an election under this section."
Based on this provision, if no election is held consecutive times,
or if the non-holding of election is unjustified, the SEC may,
upon
application of a stockholder or member, director or officer and after
verification of the unjustified non-holding of the election, summarily
order that an election be held. The shares or members represented
at such a meeting and entitled to vote shall constitute a
quorum
for conducting an election. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 37-19,
Sept. 13,

(3) If no new date has been designated, or if the rescheduled
election is likewise not held, the SEC may, upon the application of
a stockholder, member, director or trustee, and after verification of
the unjustified non-holding of the election, summarily order that an
election be held. The SEC shall have the power to issue such orders
as may be appropriate in order that an election be held (see OGCSEC Opinion No. 49-19, Oct. 2, 2019); and
(4) Should a director / trustee or officer die, resign, or any manner
cease to hold office, the secretary or director/ trustee or officer of
the corporation, shall within seven (7) days from knowledge thereof
report in writing such fact to the SEC.
The filling of vacancies in the office of director or trustees is
governed by Section 28.

Sec. 26. Disqualification of Directors,

Trustees or Officers.
A person shall be disqualified from being a director,
—
trustee

or officer of any corporation if, within five (5) years
prior to the election or appointment as such, the

Objective of Section 25.

was:

The objective sought to be achieved by Section 25 is to give the
public information, under sanction of oath of responsible officers

(a) Convicted by final judgment;
i

person

280

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 26

(1) Of an offense punishable by imprisonment for
a period exceeding six (6) years;
(2) For violating this Code; and

1

Sec. 26

TITLE- III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

281

is immaterial, but the Commission (not conviction) of the violation
must have taken place within the five (5) years prior to the date of
the election or appointment.

(3) For violating Republic Act No. 8799 otherwise
known as "The Securities Regulation Code”;
(b) Found administratively liable for any offense
Involving fraudulent acts; and

The SEC, the primary regulatory agency, and the Philippine
Competition Commission are empowered by Section 26 to impose
qualifications or other disqualifications in the promotion of
good corporate governance or as a sanction in its administrative

(c) By a foreign court or equivalent foreign regulatory
authority for acts, violations or misconduct similar to those
enumerated in paragraphs (a) and (b) above. (N, from par. 1
to [c].)

De facto dlrectors/trustees or officers.

The foregoing is without prejudice to qualifications
or other disqualifications, which the Commission, the
primary regulatory agency, or the Philippine Competition
Commission may Impose in its promotion of good
corporate governance or as a sanction in its administrative
proceedings. (N)

Disqualification of dlrectors/trustees
or officers.
Section 26 disqualifies as a director or trustee a person:
(1) convicted by final judgment of an offense punishable by
imprisonment for a period exceeding six (6) years or for violating the
Revised Corporation Code, or the Securities Regulation Code (R.A.
No. 8799.); (2) found administratively liable for an offense involving
fraudulent acts, or (3) found guilty by a foreign court or regulatory
authority of acts, violations or misconduct similar to those above.
The purpose is to avoid the election or appointment of unworthy
officers in view of the fiduciary character of their positions.
The offense need not involve moral turpitude.' The rule applies
regardless of the nature or classification of the offense as long as
it is punishable by imprisonment for a period exceeding six (6)
years. If the disqualification is based on a violation of the Revised
Corporation Code (see Sec. 170.), the duration of the imprisonment

proceedings.

A person is an officer or director de facto where he is in possession
of the office and is exercising the duties thereof under color or
appearance of right, but is not an officer or director de jure on account
of irregularity in his election; or ineligibility; or disqualification
resulting from a non-residence or not being a stockholder; or failure
to take an oath of office or file a written acceptance of the trust when
required by statute or charter (19 C.J.S. 78.) or corporate bylaws.
(1) Where, for example, the directors are elected before the
amendment increasing the number of directors had become effective
upon its approval by the SEC (see Sec. 15.) and they act as such
without objection, they are de facto directors, (see SEC Opinion, Oct.

21, 1974.)

(2) Directors elected through voting by the government
of
shares sequestered by it and who in good faith assumed their duties
as such are de facto officers. Only the owners of the shares or their
duly authorized representatives or proxies may vote the sequestered
shares. Sequestration does not divest the owners of their ownership
of the shares, and the election of the board of directors is
distinctly
and unqualifiedly an act of ownership. (Cojuangco,
vs. Roxas,
Jr.
195 SCRA 797 [1991].)

(3) Conversely, a person is not a de facto officer or director
where
he is not holding office under some appearance or color of right, or
where he is not in actual possession of the office, or where he is not
exercising the functions and performing the duties thereof generally
as distinguished from the single instance in which his authority
is
questioned.

'In the exercise of its power of suspension, regulation and control over all
corporations, the SEC may require certificates of good moral character for directors/
trustees and officers of corporations.

While the term "de facto officer" is commonly applied to

directors and officers of a private corporation, yet, technically

282

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 26

speaking, it applies to a public officer only. Generally, there cannot
be a de facto office, nor can there be a de facto officer, where there is no
corresponding legally constituted office. (19 C.J.S. 78.)
Powers and rights of de facto officers
in general.
De facto directors and officer
(1) All powers of the jure official.
de
may exercise all powers of jure officials so as to bind all persons
who acquiesce in their management and direction, and they may
continue to exercise these powers in such binding manner until they
are, through proper legal steps, removed from office and replaced
by other legally constituted directors and officers. (In re Pearl Coal
Co., 30 F. Supp. 964 aff'd. 115 F [2d] 158; 2 Fletcher, p. 214, cited in
SEC Opinions, Oct. 21, 1974 and July 4, 1975.)

—

(2) Powers or acts within the scope of corporate business.

—

A. de
are
as
within
the
acts
such
perform
may
legally
of
directors
facto board
scope of the business of the corporations; and a de facto president may do
such acts pending a determination of who are the lawful officers of
the company, as are necessary to keep its machinery in motion.
Thus, a de facto board of directors may call a special meeting of
the stockholders to consider and act upon any matter pertaining to
the corporation, as to which, under the law, the stockholders may
act at a special meeting. If stock is registered in one's name on the
books of the corporation, de facto directors have power to issue a
certificate of such stock to the owner. A de facto board of directors
may, by the weight of authority, make a call on unpaid subscriptions

on capital stock.
(3) Right to possess office and to salary.
While de facto officers
officers,
de
they
jure
do not have the same
as
the
powers
same
have
office
a proper proceeding
in
ousted
from
be
may
they
rights since
the
the
of
office.
salary
recover
and they cannot
In Cojuangco (Supra.), however, the Supreme Court held that
the private respondents who were declared de facto officers in good
faith "are thereby legally entitled to the emoluments of the office
including salary, fees and other compensation attached to the office
until they vacate the same" (2 Fletcher, pp. 213-214.) or are removed
in an action for quo warranto or replaced by the election of other
persons.

—

Sec 27

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/ TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

283

Validity of contracts and acts of de facto

officers.
The contracts and acts of de facto officers, when acting within the
scope of their authority, are just as binding as the acts of the officers
dr jure; at least so far as third persons are concerned. (Consumers
Alt. Co. v. Riggings, 208 Cal. 537, 282 Pac. 954; 2 Fletcher, p. 214.)
(1) Inasmuch as de facto officers are held out to the world
by the corporation as its representatives and the corporation
has it within its power to oust a de facto officer and prevents
him from acting as its officer it is unquestionably the rule that a
corporation is bound by the acts of its de facto officers.
(2) Furthermore, so far as third persons are concerned, the
rule that the acts of de facto officers are binding in their favor is
ordinarily merely another way of stating that the corporation
is bound; and if a contract between de facto officers and third
persons binds the latter, then it cannot be attacked by the
corporation as the act of de facto officers.
This rule seems based on the principle of estoppel. Thus, it
is no defense to the foreclosure of a corporate mortgage that the
directors authorizing the mortgage were not legally elected as
such, (see 2 Fletcher, pp. 217-220; 19
C.J.S. 76-78.)
Sec. 27. Removal of Directors or Trustees. — Any director
or trustee of a corporation may be removed from office
by a vote of the stockholders holding or representing
two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, or if a
nonstock corporation by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
members entitled to vote: Provided, That such removal shall
take place either at a regular meeting of the corporation or
at a special meeting called for the purpose, and in either
case, after previous notice to stockholders or members of
the corporation of the intention to propose such removal
at the meeting. A special meeting of the stockholders or
members forthe purpose of removing any directorortrustee
must be called by the secretary on order of the president
or upon written demand of the stockholders representing
or holding at least a majority of the outstanding capital
stock, or a majority of the members entitled to vote. If there
is no secretary, or if the secretary, despite demand fails or

284

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 27

refuses to call the special meeting or to give any notice
thereof, the stockholder or member of the corporation
signing the demand may call for the meeting by directly
addressing the stockholders or members. Notice of the
time and place of such meeting, as well as of the Intention
to propose such removal, must be given by publication
or by written notice prescribed in the Code. Removal may
be with or without cause: Provided, That removal without
cause may not be used to deprive minority stockholders or
members of the right of representation to which they may
be entitled under Section 23 of this Code. (SA)

The Commission shall, motu proprio or upon verified
complaint, and after due notice and hearing, order the
removal of a director or trustee elected despite the
disqualification, or whose disqualification arose or is
discovered subsequent to an election. The removal of a
disqualified director shall be without prejudice to other
sanctions that the Commission may impose on the board
of directors or trustees who, with knowledge of the
disqualification, failed to remove such director or trustee.
(N)

Power of stockholders or members to remove
directors or trustees

—

(1) Generally.
Section 27 prescribes the rules on removal of
the directors or trustees of the corporation, by providing, among
others, the persons authorized to call the meeting and the number
of votes required for removal.
The law does not specify cases for removal of a director or
trustee nor even require that removal should be for sufficient cause
or reason. The legislative policy is that the stockholders shall be
the ultimate masters, not the directors, "to make the corporate
government responsible to the owners". If the directors have a right
to continue in office to the completion of their term, despite a change
in controlling stockholders, those who acquire control will have to
wait or else make some bargain with the existing directors to resign
so they may put in office a new board of directors representing their
views or policy. (Ballantine, pp. 434-435.)
The non-election of a director or trustee after serving for one (1)
year is not a case of dismissal or removal but expiration of his term.

Sec. 27

285

TITLE UI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

—

(2) Where director or trustee elected by cumulative voting.
A
director or trustee may be removed by the prescribed vote without
cause subject to the limitation that a director or trustee cannot
be removed without cause if such removal deprives minority
stockholders or members (who united in cumulative voting to elect
such director) of the right of representation to which they may
be entitled under Section 23. This proviso is necessary to protect
the minority against any abuse by the majority since there is no
cumulative voting in the removal of directors.
The rule does not apply where the removal is initiated by the
minority stockholders or members themselves.
(3) Where removal done by electing replacement. The incumbent
directors or trustees cannot be removed merely by electing a new set
of directors or trustees.
The reason is that the directors or trustees can be removed only
by at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or of the members
entitled to vote (Sec. 27.), while vacancies in the board, when they
exist, can be filled by mere majority (or plurality) vote. (Sec. 23.)
Furthermore, the Revised Corporation Code requires that the
removal "shall take place either at a regular or special meeting
called for the purpose," and "after previous notice to stockholders
or members of the corporation of the intention to propose such
removal at the meeting." (Roxas vs. De la Rosa, 49 Phil. 609 [1926].)
(4) Where removal done for disqualification. A director or trustee
can be removed by following the procedure in Section 27. In case of
disqualification by operation of law, there is no need to follow the
procedure. A mere declaration of such disqualification is sufficient
to remove him from office. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 6, 1994.)
(5) Where replacement elected not qualified.
It has been held
that a director removed by the stockholders who elected another
person in his place cannot be compelled to vacate his office,
where is shown that the successor is not qualified not being the
owner of any share in the corporation and because under the
bylaws of the corporation, "directors shall serve until the election
and qualification of their duly qualified successors." (Detective and
Protective Bureau, Inc. vs. Cloribel, 26 SCRA 255 [1968]; see Sec. 22.)
Under Section 27, however, the removal of a director does not
depend upon the qualification of his successors if the removal has
been duly made.

—

—

—

286

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

(6) Where authorized officer refuses, fails or neglects to call a meeting.
The SEC, in exercising its regulatory and administrative powers
to implement the Revised Corporation Code, is empowered to call
a special meeting upon petition of a stockholder or member and
upon showing good cause when there is an officer authorized to
call a meeting and that officer, despite demand, fails, refuses, fails or
neglects to call a meeting. (Bemas vs. Cinco, 761 SCRA 104 [2015];
see Sec. 49, par. 7.)

—

Power of the SEC to remove
directors or trustees.
(1) The SEC is given the power, motu proprio or upon verified
complaint, and after due notice and hearing, to order the removal
of a director or trustee elected despite the disqualification, or whose
disqualification arose or is discovered after an election.
(2) The removal of a disqualified director shall be without
prejudice to other sanctions that the SEC may impose on the board
of directors or trustees who, with knowledge of the disqualification,
failed to remove such director or trustee.
Power of the board to remove a member.
The board of directors (or trustees) has no power to remove
one (1) of its members as director (or trustee). (Bruch v. National
Guarantee Credit Corp., 116 A. 738.) Neither can it replace the
vacancy caused by removal effected by the stockholders or members
of the corporation, (see Sec. 28.)

The reason is that as officers deriving their title from the
stockholders (or members), they can be removed only by the power
that appointed them. (Ibid.) Since the law expressly confers the
authority to stockholders or members, the board cannot indirectly
usurp or disregard the same. (SEC Opinion, May 23, 1985.)
Power of court to remove directors
or trustees.
(1) General rule.
The Revised Corporation Code does not
confer expressly upon the courts the power to remove a director or
trustee or any appointed officer of a corporation on the ground of
mismanagement of its affairs, neglect, or other cause. The power of
removal is in the corporation itself. (2 Fletcher, p. 166.)

—

Sec 27

Sec. 27

I

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

287

"The reason for this rule is that if the courts were given such
power then there should be no reason why the courts should not
also be given the power to designate the one to fill the office, which
should be substituting the judgment of the court for that of the
stockholders or member." (C.G. Alvendia, op. cit., p. 307.)
(2) Appointment of receiver.
There are abundant authorities,
however, which hold that if the court has acquired jurisdiction to
appoint a receiver (see Sec. 139.) because of the mismanagement
of the directors (or trustees), these may thereafter be removed and
others appointed in their place by the court in exercising its equity
jurisdiction. (2 Fletcher, pp. 189-190.)

—

But where the properties and assets of the corporation are
amply protected by the appointment of a receiver, such removal is
unnecessary and unwarranted because of the provisions prescribing
the manner of removal of directors or trustees, (see Angeles vs.
Santos, 64 Phil. 697 [1937].)
Requisites for removal of directors or trustees.

Section 27 specifies these requisites for the removal of directors
or trustees:
(1) The removal must "take place either at a regular meeting of
the corporation or at a special meeting called for the purpose";
(2) There must be "previous notice to the stockholders
holding
or representing two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock,
or if the corporation be a nonstock corporation, by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the members entitled to vote;"
(3) The removal must be "by a vote of the stockholders
holding
or representing two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, or
by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members entitled to vote."
While a director or trustee can be removed from office as
provided in Section 27, he cannot be removed as stockholder
of
the corporation, depriving him of his ownership of shares of stock,
without due process of law.

Requirement of notice of meeting.

—

(1) For removal.
Section 27 requires that the notice of the
meeting called for the removal of any director or trustee must

288

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 27

expressly state "the intention to propose such removal." A notice
of a special meeting to consider amendments of the bylaws and
"reorganization of the board of directors" cannot be considered as a
notice contemplated under Section 28 as it couched in general terms
and, therefore, the action of the members which passed a resolution
declaring vacant all the seats in the board and nominated and elected
a new set of directors, is not proper and may be questioned by the
directors who did not attend the meeting as this is tantamount to
their unjust removal from office. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 3, 1971.)
"Previous notice... of the intention to propose such removal" is
not required where the meeting is a regular annual meeting. There is
no removal involved when a director or trustee is reelected. (Supra.)
(2) For choosing replacements. When the vacancy arises because
of removal by the stockholders or members, the election may be
held on the same day of the meeting authorizing the removal and
this fact must be so stated in the agenda and notice of the meeting.

—

(Sec. 27.)

Resignation of directors or trustees.

—

(1) Right to resign. The fact that the law requires directors or
trustees (unless removed) to continue in office until their successors
are elected and qualified (Sec. 22.) does not prevent a director
or trustee from resigning at any time. A corporation, however,
continues to exist despite the resignation of the directors or trustees.
It can be dissolved only in the manner provided for by the Revised
Corporation Code, particularly under Title XIV thereof.
(2) Liability for wrongful resignation.
By reason, however, of
the fiduciary nature of the position they occupy, a director cannot
resign, as part of fraudulent scheme to prejudice the corporation
or its stockholders and make profit to his own advantage or at an
unreasonable time if the immediate consequence would be to leave
the interest of the corporation without proper care and protection.

—

(Ballantine, p. 217.)

If a director quits under circumstances which occasioned a
deprivation of profits to the corporation, it is but right that he should
repair and make good such loss.
(3) Form and report of resignation.
In the absence of express
provision, a resignation need not be in any particular form. It may

—

Sec 27

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/ OFFICERS

289

be oral or in writing, but it must clearly and positively show an
intent to resign. (2 Fletcher, p. 140.) A mere statement, for example,
by a director that he has nothing more to do with the corporation or
he is resigning from his position, is not sufficient.
The Revised Corporation Code requires the resignation of a
director or trustee to be reported to the SEC. (Sec. 25.)
(4) Effectivity of resignation.
As a rule, unless a future date
of acceptance by the corporation is required by the bylaws, the
resignation of a corporate official becomes complete and his
office becomes vacant the moment the resignation is made to the
proper officer or body, and it is unnecessary that the resignation be
accepted, or that someone be elected to take his place, to make the
resignation effective. This is the rule, notwithstanding a provision in
the statute, charter, or bylaws that the officers shall hold office until
their successors are duly elected.
The basis of the rule is that where a director (or trustee) thus
resigns, the inaction or refusal of the board of directors should not
impose upon him a future liability or responsibility which he does
not undertake. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 23, 1963, citing 2 Fletcher, pp. 105106.)

—

Abandonment of office and failure to attend
meetings.

—

(1) Acceptance of incompatible office.
Where a director (or
trustee) in a corporation accepts a position in which his duties are
incompatible with those as such director (or trustee), it is presumed
that he has abandoned his office as director (or trustee) of the
corporation. (Mead vs McCullough, 21 Phil. 95 [1991].)
(2) Absence for an unreasonable length of time. Similarly,
where
a director absented himself from all meetings for nearly a year
and
announced his refusal to act as an officer and stockholder, there is

—

an abandonment of his position as director. (Dodge v.
Kenwood
Ice Co., 204 Fed. 577.) Abandonment by a director of all his duties
for several years must be regarded as an implied resignation of
his
office as director. (Bartholomew v. Bentley, 1 Ohio St. 37.)
(3) Mere absence or continuedfailure to attend meetings. However,
mere absence of a director from the country, or continued failure to

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

290

Sec 28

attend meetings, etc. where there has been no resignation, does not
have the effect of vacating his seat or terminating his term of office
unless there is some express provision to such effect. (2 Fletcher, p.
132.)
(4) Specified number of unjustified absences as ground for automatic
disqualification. Where the general authority to remove directors
or trustees rests with the stockholders or members, a corporation,
to protect its interests, is empowered to prescribe in the bylaws (see
Sec. 46[f].) attendance in board meetings as a qualification device,
such that a specified number of unjustified absences may be a
ground for automatic disqualification which need not be approved
again by the stockholders or members as required under Section 27.
The bylaws are written into the charter of the corporation and
the corporation, directors, trustees, officers, and stockholders/
members are bound by and must comply with them. (SEC Opinion,
May 19, 1992.)

—

Sec. 28. Vacancies in the Office of Director or Trustee;
Bmeroencv Board- — Any vacancy occurring in the board of
directors or trustees other than by removal or by expiration
of term, may be filled by the vote of at least a majority of
the remaining directors or trustees, if still constituting a
quorum; otherwise, said vacancies must be filled by the
stockholders or members in a regular or special meeting
called for that purpose.

When the vacancy Is due to term expiration, the election
shall be held no later than the day of such expiration at a
meeting called for that purpose. When the vacancy arises
as a result of removal by the stockholders or members,
the election may be held on the same day of the meeting
authorizing the removal and this fact must be so stated In
the agenda and notice of said meeting. In all other cases,
the election must be held no later than forty-five (45) days
from the time the vacancy arose. A director or trustee
elected to fill a vacancy shall be referred to as replacement
director or trustee and shall serve for the unexpired term
of the predecessor In office. (N)
However, when the vacancy prevents the remaining
directors from constituting a quorum and emergency

TITLE HI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

Sec. 28

291

action is required to prevent grave, substantial, and
irreparable loss or damage to the corporation, the vacancy
may be temporarily filled from among the officers of the
corporation by unanimous vote of the remaining directors
or trustees. The action by the designated director or
trustee shall be limited to the emergency action necessary,
and the term shall cease within a reasonable time from
the termination of the emergency or upon election of the
replacement director or trustee, whichever comes earlier.
The corporation must notify the Commission within three
(3) days from the creation of the emergency board, stating
therein the reason for its creation. (N)
Any directorship or trusteeship to be filled by reason
of an increase in the number of directors or trustees shall
be filled only by an election at a regular or at a special
meeting of stockholders or members duly called for the
purpose, or in the same meeting authorizing the increase
of directors or trustees If so stated In the notice of the
meeting.
In all elections to fill vacancies under this section, the
procedure set forth in Sections 23 and 25 of this Code
shall apply. (N)

Vacancies in the office of director

or trustee.
(1) Grounds for replacement during term. A director or
trustee
may be replaced during his term upon his resignation or removal
(see Sec. 27.) or when his position is otherwise
lawfully vacated.
Temporary absence does not result in vacancy as contemplated in
Section 28. (SEC Opinion, April 25, 1985.)
(2) Tenure of successor.
The director or trustee elected
fill a vacancy holds the office only for the unexpired term of to
his
predecessor.

—

—

(3) Prohibition against election of alternate if temporary
vacancy
In the absence of a vacancy, no one can be elected, even
as an alternate, to replace an incumbent director or trustee
who is
temporarily absent only. To allow such an alternate would be to have
two (2) directors or trustees for the same position, one (1) permanent
and the other temporary, a situation that finds no sanction in the
law
and is irregular. (Ibid.)

occurs.

—

an

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 28

The procedure in Sections 23 and 25 shall apply in all elections
to fill vacancies in the office of director or trustee.
Filling of vacancies.

—

(1) By the stockholders or members.
A vacancy in the office of
director or trustee may be filled by the stockholders or members in a
regular or special meeting called for that purpose in these cases:
(a) If the vacancy results from the removal by the
stockholders or members, the election may be held on the same
day of the meeting authorizing the removal; or if due to the
expiration of term, the election shall be held not later than the
day of such expiration;
(b) If the vacancy occurs other than by removal or by
expiration of term (see Sec. 28, par. 1.), such as death, resignation,
abandonment, or disqualification, if the remaining directors or
trustees do not constitute a quorum to fill the vacancy;
(c) If the vacancy may be filled by the remaining directors
trustees
or
(Infra.) but the board refers the matter to the
stockholders or members; or
(d) If the vacancy is created by reason of an increase in the
number of directors or trustees.

In requiring that vacancies in the board resulting from
resignation be filled up by the stockholders or members in a regular
or special meeting called for the purpose if the remaining trustees
do not constitute a quorum, the law seeks to ensure the recognition
and strict implementation of the policy that only those who have
been elected by the shareholders or members can rightfully exercise
and discharge the duties and functions of a director or trustee, and
be made fully accountable to the shareholders or members for the
same. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 01-21, Jan. 18, 2021.) As explained
by the Supreme Court in Valle Verde Country Club, Inc. vs. Africa
(G.R. No. 151969, September 4, 2009):
The board of directors is the directing and controlling body
of the corporation. It is a creation of the stockholders and de¬
rives its power to control and direct the affairs of the corporation
from them. The board of directors, in drawing to themselves the
powers of the corporation, occupies a position of trusteeship in

Sec. 28

TITLE ni. BOARD OF DIRECIORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

293

relation to the stockholders, in the sense that the board should
exercise not only care and diligence, but utmost good faith in
the management of corporate affairs.
The underlying policy of the Corporation Code is that the
business and affairs of a corporation must be governed by a
board of directors whose members have stood for election, and
who have actually been elected by the stockholders, on an an¬
nual basis. Only in that way can the directors' continued ac¬
countability to shareholders, and the legitimacy of their deci¬
sions that bind the corporation's stockholders, be assured. The
shareholder vote is critical to the theory that legitimizes the ex¬
ercise of power by the directors or officers over properties that
they do not own.
This theory of delegated power of the board of directors
similarly explains why, under Section 29 [now Section 28] of
the Corporation Code, in cases where the vacancy in the cor¬
poration's board of directors is caused not by the expiration of
a member's term, the successor "so elected to fill in a vacancy
shall be elected only for the unexpired term of his predecessor
in office." The law has authorized the remaining members of the
board to fill in a vacancy only in specified instances, so as not to
retard or impair the corporation's operations; yet, in recognition
of the stockholders' right to elect the members of the board, it
limited the period during which the successor shall serve only
to the "unexpired term of his predecessor in office."
(2) By the members of the board. If still constituting a quorum,
at least a majority of the members are empowered to fill any vacancy
occurring in the board other than by removal by the stockholders or
members or by expiration of term, (see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 4319, Sept. 19, 2019.)

—

When the vacancy prevents the remaining directors from
constituting a quorum and emergency action is required to prevent
grave, substantial, and irreparable loss or damage to the corporation,
the vacancy may be temporarily filled from among the officers of
the corporation by unanimous vote of the remaining directors or
trustees. The action by the designated director or trustee shall be
limited to the emergency action necessary, and the term shall cease
within a reasonable time from the termination of the emergency
or upon election of the replacement director or trustee, whichever
comes earlier. (Sec. 28, par. 3.)

294

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

(a) Allowing the remaining directors or trustees to fill up

vacancies avoid the expenses and inconveniences attending the
calling of stockholders' or members' meeting, especially where
there are many of them. (SEC Opinion Jan. 3, 1986.)
(b) The power of the board of directors or trustees is not
suspended by vacancies in the board unless the number is
reduced below a quorum.
(c) The board has no power to fill any directorship or
trusteeship by reason of an increase in the number of directors

or trustees. The amendment increasing the number of directors
or trustees which results in a vacancy becomes effective upon
its approval. This is deducible from the last clause of Section 28
which authorizes the filling of the vacancy "in the same meeting
authorizing the increase of directors or trustees if so stated in
the notice of meeting."
However, any amendment to the articles and bylaws requires

SEC approval.

ILLUSTRATION:
If four (4) of nine (9) directors died, the remaining five (5)
directors still constitute a quorum, and a majority of the five
(5) or three (3) may fill the four (4) vacancies.1 But if five (5) of
the directors died, the vacancies will have to be filled by the
stockholders in a regular or special meeting duly called for the
purpose.
(d) The phrase "may be filled" in Section 28 indicates that
the filling of vacancies in the board by the remaining directors
constituting a quorum is merely permissive. Corporations may
choose how vacancies in their board may be filled up, either
by the remaining directors or trustees constituting a quorum
or by all stockholders or members in a meeting called for the
purpose. However, if the bylaws prescribe the specific mode of
filling up existing vacancies, the provision of the bylaws should
be followed. It is well-settled that the bylaws are part of the
fundamental law of the corporation and its directors, officers,
and members are bound to comply with them, (see Sec. 45.)

Sea 29

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

—

(4) Where vacancy caused by resignation of a hold-over director.
The stockholders, and not the remaining members of the board, have
the power to elect a director to fill the vacancy. The hold-over period
that time from the lapse of one (1) year after a member's election
to the board and until his successor's election and qualification
is not a part of the director's original term of office, nor is it a new

—

—

term.

The vacancy referred to in Section 28 contemplates a vacancy
occurring within the director's term of office. When a vacancy is
created by the expiration of a term, there is no more unexpired
term to speak of. Hence, Section 28 declares that it shall be the
corporation's stockholders who shall possess the authority to fill a
vacancy caused by the expiration of a member's term. (Valle Verde
Country Club, Inc. vs Africa, 598 SCRA 202 [2009].)

Successor to serve for unexpired term
of predecessor.

The theory of delegated power of the board of directors
explains why, under Section 28, in cases where the vacancy in the
corporation's board of directors is caused not by the expiration of
a member's term, the successor so elected to fill a vacancy shall be
elected only for the unexpired term of his predecessor in office.
The law has authorized the remaining members of the board to
fill a vacancy only in specified instances so as not to retard or impair
the corporation's operations; yet, in recognition of the stockholders'
right to elect the members of the board, it limited the period during
which the successor shall serve only to the unexpired term of his
predecessor in office. (Ibid.)
Sec. 29. Compensation of Directors or Trustees. — In
the absence of any provision In the bylaws fixing their
compensation, the directors or trustees shall not receive
any compensation, in their capacity as such, except
for reasonable per diems: Provided, however, That the
stockholders representing at least a majority of the
outstanding capital stock or maloritv of the members mav

grant directors or trustees with compensation and approve

‘Note that the election of corporate officers other than
or trustees requires
the vote of majority of all the members of the board. (Sec. 24,directors
par. 2.) Such election may be
made after the vacancies in the board have been filled.

29S

the amount thereof at a regular or meeting. In no case'shall
the total yearly compensation of directors, exceed ten

296

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 29

percent (10%) of the net income before income tax of the

corporation during the preceding year.
Directors or trustees shall not participate in the
determination of their own per diems or compensation. (N)
Corporations vested with public interest shall submit
to their shareholders and the Commission, an annual
report of the total compensation of each of their directors
or trustees. (N)

Compensation of directors or trustees.
(1) Authorization.
Under the law, a private corporation
is authorized to provide in its bylaws for the compensation of
directors or trustees. (Sec. 46[f].) Absent any provision in the bylaws
fixing their compensation, the directors or trustees shall receive no
compensation, in their capacity as such, except for reasonable per
diems, unless authorized by a vote of the stockholders representing
at least a majority of the outstanding capital stock or a majority of
the members entitled to vote. Any per diems or compensation to
the officers of a corporation without proper authorization in the
bylaws or by the vote of the stockholders may be recovered in a
stockholder's suit.

—

—

(2) Amount.
The amount of compensation of directors or
trustees must be fixed either in the bylaws or in the resolution of
the stockholders or members; hence, the stockholders or members
cannot delegate to the board of directors or trustees the authority to
fix the amount of their own compensation.
If the corporation is vested with public interest, it shall submit
to its shareholders and the SEC an annual report of the total
compensation of each director or trustee. Here, transparency is the
objective.
ft
.
Directors without authority to grant
themselves compensation.
(1) The directors or trustees have no authority to grant
compensation or per diems to themselves.1 They are prohibited

Sec 29

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

297

from participating in the determination of their own per diems or
compensation because there is a conflict of interest involved.
(a) For usual and ordinary services as such.
As a rule,
when directors perform nothing more than the usual and
ordinary duties of their office, they are not entitled to salary
or other compensation. The reason is that directors, acting as
trustees, render services gratuitously and that the prospect of
increasing the return upon their shares adequately furnishes the
motivations for services without compensation. (SEC Opinion,
Sept. 8, 1975.) Many corporations provide incentive plans (e.g.,
stock options) to outside directors to induce them to serve.

—

—

(b) Forservicesoutsidetheirregularduties. In view of the clear
wording of Section 29, it is doubtful whether a director may be
entitled to compensation even when they render extraordinary
or unusual services, i.e., services not properly incidental to their
office and are rendered outside of their regular duties, (see SEC
Opinion, June 10, 1974.) Corporate directors presumptively
serve without compensation. While they may assign themselves
additional duties, they are without power to vote for themselves
additional duties, they are without power to vote for themselves
compensation for such additional duties. (Central Cooperative
Exchange, Inc. vs. Enciso, 162 SCRA 706 [1978].) Compensation
may be granted to them by the corporation when they serve the
corporation in another capacity.
(2) A stockholders' resolution or agreement for the payment of
compensation for such services would be valid. (SEC Opinion, Dec.
29, 1975.) But the stockholders cannot ratify a board of directors'
action fixing their own salaries. Such action being contrary to law,
cannot be ratified. The stockholders themselves, by the requisite
vote, must fix the compensation. (Supra.)

•

There is a radical difference when a stockholder is voting strictly as a stockholder
and when voting as a director. When voting as a stockholder he has the legal right to
vote with a view of his own benefits and is representing himself only; but a director

represents all the stockholders in the capacity of trustee for them and he cannot use his
office as a director for his personal benefit at the expense of the stockholders. (Haldeman
v. Halocman, 176 Ky. 635, 197 S.W. 376 [1917], cited in Sulpido Guevara, The Phil. Corp.
Law, 1967 Ed., p. 145.)
A stockholder attending a corporate meeting as such is not entitled to per diems for
such attendance; he is acting for himself as an owner of stocks of the corporation. (SEC
Opinion, September 1971.)

298

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 29

Limit to compensation.
Where compensation is granted either in the bylaws or by the
vote of stockholders, the total yearly compensation of directors,
shall in no case exceed 10% of the net income before income tax of
the corporation during the preceding year.

This limitation seeks to curb the practice particularly of close
corporation to grant excessive bonuses to their directors to reduce
the taxable income of such corporations. It is also intended for
the protection of the stockholders and the corporate creditors and
prospective investors.2
The phrase "as such directors" following the phrase "the total
yearly income of directors" in Section 30 of the old Code is deleted
on Section 29. (par. 2.)
The phrase delimits the prohibition to compensation given to
them for services performed purely in their capacity as directors or
trustees. The implication is that members of the board may receive
compensation besides reasonable per diems, when they render
services to the corporation in a capacity other than as directors or
trustees. (Western Institute of Technology vs. Salas, 278 SCRA 216
[1997].) Now, the limitation applies to compensation for services
performed by directors for the corporation "even not as such
directors."
Per diems of directors or trustees.
(1) Whether or not authorized by the bylaws or by the
stockholders, directors are entitled to receive reasonable per diems.3

The Insurance Code (RD. No. 1012, as amended by R.A. No. 0607.) does not contain
any prohibition as against the board of directors of a corporation securing insurance
policy on the life of its members and making the directors the beneficiaries instead of the
corporation. However, the premium paid thereon is analogous to a continuing bonus and
gift and thus falls within the context of additional compensation. A corporation may not
be used by its officers or stockholders as a means of diverting profits or proceeds to the
payment of premium on insurance policies to the enrichment of its beneficiaries at the
expense of, or to the detriment of, its creditors. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 8, 1987.)
Jlt is a daily allowance "given, for each day an officer or employee was away from his
home base or permanent station." (Lexal Laboratories vs. National Industries Workers'
Union-PAFLU, 25 SCRA 668 [1968].) It is limited to pay for a day's service. (32 Words
and Phrases 17.) Per diems are paid per attendance in board meetings. Other benefits and
emoluments of directors fall within the term "compensation."

Sec. 29

TITLE IH BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

299

In view of the real distinction between per diems and compensation/
the per diems granted to them should not be included in their total
yearly compensation for the 10% limitation.
(2) Section 29 does not specify what amounts shall be
considered "reasonable." If the matter shall be decided by the
directors or trustees themselves, they may easily circumvent the
10% limitation. The stockholders, however, may approve or adopt
as its own (not ratify) a board resolution fixing or increasing the per
diems of its members after inquiring into its reasonableness. What is
a reasonable per diem depends on the circumstances.
(3) Per diems received without proper authorization or found
to be unreasonably excessive may ordinarily be recoverable in a
stockholders' or members' suit
Compensation of corporate officers.

—

(1) Corporate officers who are not directors.
The reason for
the general rule that directors of a corporation are not entitled to
compensation does not apply to corporate officers who are not
directors. Such officers, not being directors and having no control
over the funds and property of the corporation, even though
they may be stockholders, do not occupy the relation of trustees
to die corporation. (Cheeney v. Lafayette, B.O.R. Co., 61 III. 570.)
Accordingly, if they are elected or appointed to perform valuable
services for the corporation under circumstances indicating an
intention and expectation of payment, there are an implied promise
by the corporation to pay a reasonable compensation for services
rendered, even absent an express contract. (5 Fletcher, p. 378.)

This principle applies as well to employee hired by the

corporation.

—

(2) Corporate officers who are directors.
Directors who are
also corporate officers are entitled, besides reasonable per diems
as directors, to compensation as such corporate officers, and the
‘It is any remuneration given for services rendered, like salary which is a

compensation paid regularly, as by the month. It does not imply an immediate payment, or
direct return, nor the payment of cash fare or its equivalent. (15 C.J.S. 652.) Compensation
*nd salary are used interchangeably. While salary connotes a fixed compensation, per
diem relates to expense reimbursement. (SEC Opinion, June 13, 1991.) Fare refers to money
paid for transportation of persons or goods.

300

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 30

amount thereof may be fixed by mere board resolution absent
provision to the contrary in the bylaws and subject to the provision
of Section 31. (Infra.) It must appear that the intention is to give them
salaries as such officers.

—

(3) Form of compensation.
Compensation may take the form
of salary and fringe benefits, such as housing, membership in clubs,
company cars, stock options, etc. Needless to say, the compensation
must not be excessive.

ILLUSTRATION:

The bylaws of the corporation are silent as to the salary
of the president. While resolutions of the incorporators and
stockholders provide salaries for the general manager, secretary,
treasurer, and other employees, there was no provision for the
presidents salary.
On the other hand, other resolutions provide for per diems
to be paid to the president and the directors for each meeting
attended. This leads to the conclusion that the president and the
board of directors were expected to serve without salary, and
that the per diems paid to them were sufficient compensation
for their services. (Lingayen Gulf Electric Power Co., Inc. vs.
Baltazar, 93 Phil. 404 [1953].)
Sec. 30. Liability of Directors, Trustees or Officers. —
Directors or trustees who willfully and knowingly vote
for or assent to patently unlawful acts of the corporation
or who are guilty of gross negligence or bad faith In
directing the affairs of the corporation or acquire any
personal or pecuniary Interest In conflict with their duty
as such directors or trustees shall be liable jointly and
severally for all damages resulting therefrom suffered by
the corporation, its stockholders or members and other
persons.

A director, trustee, or officer shall not attempt to
acquire or acquire any interest adverse to the corporation
In respect of any matter which has been reposed in them
in confidence, and upon which equity imposes a disability
upon themselves to deal in their own behalf; otherwise, the
said director, trustee or officer shall be liable as a trustee
for the corporation and must account for the profits which
otherwise would have accrued to the corporation. (A)

Sec. 30

TITLE UI. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

301

Nature of director's/trustees’ position.
The directors or trustees of the corporation shall
perform the duties enjoined on them by the law and by the
bylaws of the corporation (see Sec. 46[f].) and in accordance with
the purposes for which it was organized. (Sec. 14.) In discharging
their responsibility and exercising their powers, they are held to
high standards. They have a three-fold duty of obedience, diligence,
and loyalty in exercising their powers as the governing body of the
corporation (Sec. 22.), violation of which will render them personally
liable under Section 30 and Section 170.
(1) Agents or trustees for the corporation.
The directors of a
corporation are its agents. Their duties are often referred to as
"fiduciary duties" and they are sometimes referred to as "fiduciaries"
because they also occupy a fiduciary relation to the corporation. By
numerous authorities they have been called "trustees" with certain
powers, and subject to certain duties analogous to those of a trustee,
in the management of its property, and each stockholder a cestui
que trust according to his interest and shares. In the performance of
their official duties, they are under obligations of trust and confidence
to the corporation and its stockholders and must act in good faith and
for the interest of the corporation or its stockholders with due care
and diligence and within the scope of their authority.' (Jackson v.
Ludeling, 21 Wall. [U.S.] 616; Agdao Landless Residents Association,
Inc. vs. Maramion,’ G.R. Nos. 188642, 189425 & 188888-89, October
17, 2016.)

—

It is settled that absent malice, bad faith, or specific provision of
law, a director or officer of a corporation cannot be made personally
liable for corporate liabilities. (Lowe, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 596
SCRA 140 [2009].)

The ordinary trust relationship of directors of a corporation
and stockholders is not a matter of statutory or technical law. It
'Art. 1173... If the law or contract does not state the diligence which is to be observed
in the performance, that which is expected of a good father of a family shall be required.
Art. 1887. In the execution of the agency, the agent shall act in accordance with the
instruction of the principal.
In default thereof, he shall do all that a good father of a family would do, as required
by the nature of the business. (Civil Code)
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 292 [2013],

302

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 30

springs from the fact that directors have the control and guidance of
corporate affairs and property and, hence, of the property interest
of the stockholders. Equity recognizes that stockholders are the
proprietors of the corporate interest and are ultimately the only
beneficiaries thereof? (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979], citing Ashaman v. Miller, 101 Fed.
2d 85.)
Thus, in Gokongwei, the Supreme Court held that "the offer
and assurance of petitioner," a candidate for board membership in
San Miguel Corporation, under whose bylaws he was disqualified
for being engaged in any business which competes with or is
antagonistic to that of the corporation, "that to avoid any possibility
of his taking unfair advantage of his position as director of San
Miguel Corporation, he would absent himself from meetings at
which confidential matters would be discussed, would not detract
from the validity and reasonableness of the bylaws here involved.
Apart from the impractical results that would ensue from such
arrangement, it would be inconsistent with petitioner's primary
motive in running for board membership which is to protect his
investments in San Miguel Corporation. More important, such a
proposed norm of conduct would be against all accepted principles
underlying a director's duty of fidelity to the corporation, for the

—

The standard of fiduciary obligation of the directors of corporations has been
emphatically restated, this: "A director is fiduciary... Their powers in trust He who
is in such fiduciary position cannot serve himself first and his cestuis second... He
cannot manipulate the affairs of his corporation to their detriment and in disregard of
the standards of common decency. He cannot by the intervention of a corporate entity
violate the ancient precept against serving two masters... He cannot utilize his inside
information and strategic position for his own preferment. He cannot violate rules of fair
play by doing indirectly through the corporation what he could not do so directly. He
cannot use his power for his personal advantage and to the detriment of the stockholders
and creditors no matter how absolute in terms that power may be and no matter how
meticulous he is to satisfy technical requirement. For that power is at all times subject to
the equitable limitation that it may not be exercised for the aggrandizement, preference,
or advantage of the fiduciary to the exclusion or detriment of the cestuis." (Ibid., citing
Pepper v. Litton, 308 U.S. 309, 84 L. ed. 281, 289-291.)
“The law will not tolerate the passive attitude... without active and conscientious
participation in the managerial functions of the company. As directors, it is their duty to
control and supervise the day-to-day business activities of the company or to promulgate
definite policies and rules of guidance with vigilant eye toward seeing to it that these
policies carried out. It is only then that directors may be said to have fulfilled their duty
of fealty to the corporation." (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission,
supra, citing Olek, Modem Corp. Law, Vol. 2, Sec. 960; Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979],
citing Ashaman v. Miller, 101 Fed. 2d 85.)

Sec 30

TITLE in. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

303

policy of the law is to encourage and enforce responsible corporate
management."
(2) Agents or trustees for the stockholders or members/creditors.
So long as a purely private corporation remain solvent, its directors
are agents or trustees for the stockholders or members? They owe
no duties to others. But the moment such a corporation becomes
insolvent, its directors are trustees of all the creditors, whether
they are members of the corporation or not, and must manage its
property and assets with strict regard to their interest and if they are
themselves creditors while the insolvent corporation is under their
management, they will not be permitted to secure to themselves
by purchasing the corporate property or otherwise acquiring any
personal advantage over other creditors. (Mead vs. McCullough, 21
Phil. 952 [1911].)

—

Cases when directors/trustees or officers
liable for damages.

Corporate officers, because of the separate legal personality of a
corporation, are not personally liable for their official acts unless it
is shown that they exceeded their authority.

—

(1) Under Section 30.
Section 30 enumerates the instances
when a director or trustee may be held liable for resulting damages
and thus, the veil of corporate fiction may be pierced:
(a) He willfully and knowingly votes or assents to patently
unlawful acts of the corporation;
(b) He is guilty of gross negligence5 (not mere "want of
ordinary prudence" as held in Steinberg vs. Veloso, supra.) or
bad faith in directing the affairs of the corporation; and
(c) He acquires any personal or pecuniary interest in conflict
with his duty as such director or trustee;

Directors owe duties to the corporation as a whole rather to individual stockholders

<* to individual classes of shareholders.

’In a, case the treasurer of a corporation who was authorized to issue checks for
the corporation was held negligent for signing the confirmations letter requested
by
*«e indorsee and the payee (indorser) of four (4) crossed checks issued
by the treasurer
tor the payee for the rediscounting of the crossed checks when the treasurer was
that the checks were strictly endorsed for deposit only to the payee's account and aware
not to
oe further negotiated, and made personally liable to the resulting damage, (see Lynoil
Fishing Enterprises vs. Ariola, 634 SCRA 679 [2012].)

304

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 30

(d) He acquires, or to attempts to acquire, any interest
adverse to the corporation in respect of any matter which has
been reposed in him in confidence, and upon which equity
imposes a disability upon the director to deal in his own behalf.
In the above instances, the erring board members or officers shall
be held jointly and severally (or solidarity)6 liable for all damages
resulting therefrom suffered by the corporation, its stockholders
or members, or other persons. The complainant must clearly and
convincingly prove the unlawful acts, gross negligence, or bad faith
of the defendant which must be alleged in the complaint. (Carig
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 520 SCRA 282 [2007];
Francisco vs. Mallen, Jr., 631 SCRA 118 [2010]; Heirs of Fe Tan Uy vs.
International Exchange Bank, G.R. No. 166282, Feb. 13, 2013; Bank
of Commerce vs. Nite, 763 SCRA 620 [2015].)

Note that even where personal liability attaches, not all the
officers are made accountable but only the "responsible officers,"
i.e., those responsible or who acted in, bad faith" in committing the
unlawful acts. (Guillermo vs. Uson, 785 SCRA 5463 [2016].)

—

(2) Other cases.
Personal liability of a corporate director/
trustee or officer along (although not necessarily) with the
corporation may also validly attach, as a rule:

(a) When he consents to the issuance of watered stocks or
who, having knowledge thereof, does not forthwith file with the
corporate secretary his written objection thereto (see Sec. 64.);
(b) When he is made, by a specific provision of law, to
personally answer for his corporate action (see Sec. 144; P.D. No.
115 [Trust Receipts Law], Sec. 13.); and
(c) When he agrees to hold himself personalty and
solidarity liable with the corporation. (Tramat Mercantile, Inc.
‘Art. 1216. The creditor may proceed against anyone of the solidary debtors or some
or all of them simultaneously. The demand made against one (1) of them shall not be an
obstacle to those which may subsequently be directed against the others, so long as the
debt has not been fully collected. (Civil Code)
The liability of corporate directors and officers is not automatic. To make them jointly
and solidarity liable with their company, there must be a finding that they were remiss
in directing the affairs of that company, such as sponsoring or tolerating the conduct of
illegal activities. (Sto. Tomas vs. Salac, 685 SCRA 285 [2012].)

Sec 30

TITLE HL BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES /OFFICERS

305

vs. Court of Appeals, 238 SCRA 14 [1994]; Santos vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 20 SCRA 987 [1967]; National
Food Authority vs. Court of Appeals, 311 SCRA 700 [1999];
FCY Corporation Group, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 323 SCRA
270 [2000]; Malayang Samahan vs. Ramos, 357 SCRA 77 [2001];
Powton Conglomerate, Inc. vs. Agcolicol, 400 SCRA 523 [2003].)
Liability of directors/trustees or officers
for bad faith or gross negligence.

(1) Directors or trustee are personalty liable for any wrongful
disposition of corporate assets and for any loss or injury to the
corporation arising from their gross negligence or unauthorized
acts or violation of their duties, (see Steinberg vs. Velasco, 52 Phil.
953 [1929].)
(a) But they are not liable for business losses incurred
because of honest bad judgment not amounting to bad faith
or gross negligence, (see Ballantine, p. 160; see also Board of
Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo Kalaw, 20 SCRA 987 [1967].)
No one can guarantee the success of a business because there is
always that element of risk. The officers of a corporation are not
insurers of its success.

(b) Neither can a corporate officer be made personally liable
for the money claims of discharged corporate employees where
no malice or bad faith can be attributed to him in terminating
their employment. (Midas Touch Food Corp. vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 259 SCRA 652 [1996].) As a rule,
corporate directors and officers are solidarity liable with the
corporation for the termination of employment of employees if
the termination is done with malice or in bad faith. (Progress
Homes vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 269 SCRA
274 [1997]; Mandaue Dinghow Dimsum House Co., Inc. vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 547 SCRA 402 [2008];
SHS Perforated Materials, Inc. vs. Diaz, 633 SCRA 258 [2010].)
(2) Bad faith or negligence on the part of a corporate officer
is a question of fact. It must be alleged in the complaint and the
complainant has the onus of proving it. It has been said that "bad
faith does not simply mean bad judgment or negligence; it imparts
a dishonest purpose or some moral obliquity and conscious doing
of wrong. It means breach of a known duty through some motive

306

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 31

or interest or ill-will; it partakes of the nature of fraud." (Ibid.) It
for reasons of negligence by the director, trustee of officer in the
conduct of the transactions of the corporation, such negligence must
be gross. (Magalang vs. Ong, 562 SCRA 152 [2008]; Reyes vs. Ng
Wee, 860 SCRA 50 [2018].)
Liability of directors/trustees or officers
for secret profits.

In the case mentioned in the second paragraph, the director/
trustee or officer guilty of violation of duty shall be held accountable
for the profits which otherwise would have accrued to the
corporation. Private or secret profits obtained must be accounted for,
even though the transaction on which they are made is advantageous
or is not harmful to the corporation, or even though the director/
trustee or officer acted without intent to injure the corporation. That
the agreement whereby a person is to receive a secret profit is made
before he becomes an officer does not change the rule. And the fact
that the profits were derived from transaction ultra vires (see Sec.
44.) does not relieve the director/ trustee or officer from liability. (19
Am. 2d 688-689.)

Similarly, a director guilty of disloyal act against the corporation
is required by Section 33 to account for and refund to the corporation
for the profits obtained by him from a business opportunity which
should belong to the corporation.

Sec 31

TITLE HL BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

307

(d) In case of corporations vested with public interest,
material contracts are approved by at least two-thirds
(2/3) of the entire membership of the board, with at least
a majority of the independent directors voting to approve
the material contract; (N) and
(e) In case of an officer, the contract has been
previously authorized by the board of directors.

Where any of the first three (3) conditions set forth in
the preceding paragraph is absent, in the case of a contract
with a director or trustee, such contract may be ratified
by the vote of the stockholders representing at least twothirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock or of at least
two-thirds (2/3) of the members in a meeting called for
the purpose: Provided, That full disclosure of the adverse
interest of the directors or trustees involved is made at
such meeting and the contract is fair and reasonable

under the circumstances.

Self-dealing directors/trustees
or officers.
(1) Contract void. Section 31 renders voidable at the option of
the corporation a contract of such corporation with one (1) or more
of its directors/trustees or officers, or their spouses and relatives
within the fourth civil degree of consanguinity or affinity. It can be

—

(a) The presence of such director or trustee in the
board meeting In which the contract was approved was
not necessary to constitute a quorum for such meeting;

interpreted as allowing self-dealing of directors/trustees provided
the stated conditions are met.
Being its agents and entrusted with the management of its affairs,
the directors or trustees and other officers of a corporation occupy a
fiduciary relation towards it, and cannot be allowed to contract with
the corporation, directly or indirectly, or to sell property to it, or
purchase property from it, where they act both for the corporation
and for themselves. (3 Fletcher, p. 387.) (Agdao Landless Residents
Association, Inc. vs. Maramion,' G.R. Nos. 188642, 189425 & 18888889, October 17, 2016.)

(b) The vote of such director or trustee was not
necessary for the approval of the contract;

damage as a result of the contract.

Sec. 31. Dealings of Directors, Trustees or Officers with the
Corporation. A contract of the corporation with one (1) or
more of its directors, trustees, officers or their spouses

—

and relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity
or affinity is voidable, at the option of such corporation,
unless all the following conditions are present:

(c) The contract Is fair and reasonable under the
circumstances; and

Section 31 does not require that the corporation suffers injury or

‘Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 297 [2013].

308

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 32

—

(2) Exceptions. In any of the following cases, the contract shall
be valid and cannot be set aside merely because of the relationship

of the parties:

(a) All the conditions enumerated in Section 31 (subsections
a to e) are present;
(b) Not all the conditions set forth are present but the

corporation (through the board) elects not to question the
validity of the contract without prejudice to the liability of the
consenting directors or trustees for damages under Section 30.
In such case, a dissenting stockholder or member may file a
derivative suit in behalf of the corporation; or
(c) In the case of a contract with a director or trustee, where
any of the first three (3) conditions is absent, such contract may
be ratified by the required vote of the stockholders or members
in a meeting called for the purpose, provided that full disclosure
of the adverse interest of the directors or trustees involved is
made at such meeting. If the contract is with an officer of the
corporation, it must have been authorized by the board, i.e.,
there is a prior board resolution authorizing the contract.
Section 31 fails to specify whether the vote of the self-dealing
director or trustee shall be counted in the stockholders' meeting for
the ratification of the contract.
(3) Ratification by stockholders or members. Even if the board
does not act on conflicts of interest issue, the same can still be settled
favorably by the required vote of the stockholders or members in
a meeting called specifically to decide such issue, as long as there
is full disclosure of the adverse interest of the directors or trustees,
and the contract is fair and reasonable under the circumstances, (last

—

par.)

TITLE in. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

-

309

provisions of the preceding section insofar as the latter
corporation or corporations are concerned.
Stockholdings exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the
outstanding capital stock shall be considered substantial
for purposes of interlocking directors.
Contracts between corporation with
interlocking directors.
(1) Validity. Section 32 recognizes as valid a contract between
two or more corporations which have interlocking directors (i.e., one,
some, or all of the directors in one corporation is /are also director/
directors in another corporation) as long as there is no fraud and
the contract is fair and reasonable under the circumstances, (see
Sec. 43.) However, if the interest of the interlocking director in one
corporation is substantial, i.e., his stockholdings exceed 20% of the
outstanding capital stock and in the other merely nominal, i.e., his
stockholdings do not exceed 20%, the provision of Section 31 shall
apply to the contract insofar as the latter corporation or corporations
are concerned. (Sec. 33.)

—

—

(2) Application.
Section 32 pertains to transactions between
corporations with interlocking directors resulting in the prejudice to
one corporation. It does not apply where the corporation allegedly
prejudiced is a third party, not one of the corporations with
interlocking directors. (Development Bank of the Phils, vs. Court of
Appeals, 363 SCRA 307 (2001].)

ILLUSTRATION:
X Corporation sold a parcel of land worth P500,000.00 to
Y Corporation for only P50,000.00. Z is board member of both
corporations.

Sec. 32. Contracts Between Corporations with Interlocking
Except in cases of fraud, and provided the
contract is fair and reasonable under the circumstances,
a contract between two (2) or more corporations having
Interlocking directors shall not be invalidated on that
ground alone: Provided, That If the interest of the
interlocking director in one (1) corporation is substantial
and the Interest In the other corporation or corporations
Is merely nominal, the contract shall be subject to the

Directors.

Sec. 32

If the purchase price is not arms-length the contract is
not fair and reasonable and is therefore, voidable. But if the
contract is fair and reasonable under the circumstances (e.g.,
land is subject to liens and encumbrances) and Z's interest
in X Corporation is merely nominal and in Y corporation
substantial, the conditions in Section 31 must be present insofar
as X Corporation is concerned, on the theory that the contract
of X Corporation is with Z.

310

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 32

TITLE m. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

311

—

However, if Z's interest in both corporations is nominal or
substantial,
the provision of Section 31 does not apply but the
is
contract shall be valid only if there is no fraud and the contract
is fair and reasonable under the circumstances. The corporation
which seeks to uphold the contract has the burden to show that
'"
it is fair and reasonable.

Evils of interlocking directorates.
(1) Validity of bylaws prohibiting interlocking directorates.
Bylaws which prohibit a director of a corporation from serving at
the same time as a director of a corporation from serving at the same
time as a director of a competing corporation, have been upheld as
valid and reasonable. (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].) The reason has been aptly

—

explained,1 thus:
"The argument for prohibiting competing corporations
from sharing even one director is that the interlock permits the
coordination of policies between nominally independent firms
to an extent that competition between them may be completely
eliminated. Indeed, if a director, for example, is to be faithful to
both corporations, some accommodation may result. Suppose
X is a director of both Corporation A and Corporation B. X
could hardly vote for a policy by A that would injure B without
violating his duty of loyalty to B; at the same time, he could
hardly abstain from voting without depriving A of his best
judgment. If the firms really do compete in the sense of vying
from economic advantage at the expense of the other there
can hardly be any reason for an interlock between competitors
other than the suppression of competition." (Ibid., citing Travers,
Interlock in Corporate Management and the Anti-Trust Law, 46
L. Rev., 819, 840 [1968].)

—

Sec 33

—

(2) No absolute prohibition of interlocking directorates.
Under
Section 32, contracts between corporations having interlocking
directors are not rendered void or voidable on that ground alone.2
An individual may be a stockholder in different corporations
and it is not unusual to find a director or corporate officer occupying
Hie same position in another corporation not only because he has
investment therein but also because his services may have been
proven to be valuable. However, while such situation is allowable,
dealing of interlocking directors are subject to Sections 31, 32, and
33. (SEC Opinion, May 4, 1994.)

—

Sec. 33. Disloyalty of a Director.
Where a director,
by virtue of such office, acquires a business opportunity
which should belong to the corporation, thereby obtaining
profits to the prejudice of such corporation, the director
must account for and refund to the latter all such
profits, unless the act has been ratified by a vote of the
stockholders owning or representing at least two-thirds
(2/3) of the outstanding capital stock. This provision shall
be applicable, notwithstanding the fact that the director
risked one’s own funds In the venture.

Doctrine of “corporate opportunity.”
Under this doctrine, a director who, by virtue of his office,
acquires for himself a business opportunity which should belong
These transactions usually occur in a parent-subsidiary relationship between

corporations. Hence, in some cases, the contract between two (2) corporations
may
require representatives of one (1) corporation to sit in the board of the other.
To prohibit
business transactions of one corporation with another corporation controlled by the

former would discourage formation of business subsidiaries

'According to the Report of the House Judiciary Committee of the US. Congress
on Section 9 of the Clayton Act, it was established that "By means of the interlocking
directorates one man or group of men have been able to dominate and control a
great number of corporations ... to the detriment of the small ones depended upon
them and to the injury of the public." (Ibid., citing 51 Cong. Rec. 9091.) Where two (2)
competing firms control a substantial segment of the market, this could lead to collusion
and combination in restraint of trade. Reason and experience show that the inherent
tendency of interlocking directorates between companies that are related to each other as
competitors is to blunt the edge of rivalry between the corporations, to seek out ways of
compromising opposing interests, and thus, eliminate competition. (Ibid.)

and investments and thus,
hamper capital market formation in the country. (SEC Opinion,
Dec. 21, 1992.)

The law recognizes that interlocking directorates are very common

in today's
business world and to absolutely prohibit such contracts would be impractical
and

unwise. But transactions between such corporations should be "subjected to
close judicial
scrutiny to determine the absence or presence of fraud or unfairness." For
example,
where the circumstances show that the transaction would be of great advantage
<** corporation at the expense of the other, especially where, in addition to this, to
the
personal interests of the
directors or any of them would be enhanced at the expense of
the stockholders, the transaction is voidable by the stockholders
within a reasonable time
*her discovery of the fraud. (19 Am.
Jur. 2d 714.)

312

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 33

to the corporation, thereby obtaining profits to the prejudice of such
corporation, is guilty of disloyalty and should, therefore, account
for and refund to the latter for all such profits, notwithstanding that
he risked his funds in the venture.'
(1) Where the directors of a corporation cancelled a contract
of the corporation for exclusive sale of a foreign firm's products
and after establishing a rival business the directors signed a new
contract themselves with the foreign firm for exclusive sale of its
products, the court held that equity would regard the new contract
as an offshoot of the old contract and, therefore, for the benefit of the
corporation, as a "faultless fiduciary may not reap the fruits of his
misconduct, to the exclusion of his principal." (Gokongwei, Jr. vs.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 (1979], citing
Silakot Importing Corp. v. Berlin, 68 N.E. 2d 501, 503.)
(2) An amendment to the bylaws of a corporation requiring
that a director shall not be an officer, manager or controlling person
of, or the owner (either of record or beneficially) of 10% or more of
any outstanding class of shares, of any other corporation or entity
engaged in any line of business competitive or antagonistic to that of
the former, was sustained as valid and reasonable, as "it is obviously
to prevent the creation of an opportunity for an officer or director
of San Miguel Corporation, who is also the officer or owner of a
competing corporation, from taking advantage of the information
which he acquires as director to promote his individual or corporate
interests to the prejudice of San Miguel Corporation and its
stockholders. Certainly, where two (2) corporations are competitive
in substantial sense, it would seem improvable, if not impossible,
for the director, if he were to effectively discharge his duty, to satisfy
his loyalty to both corporations and place the performance of his
corporation duties above his personal concerns." (Gokongwei, Jr.
vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, supra.)

doctrine rests fundamentally on the unfairness, in particular circumstances,
of an officer or director taking advantage of an opportunity for his own personal profit
when the interest of the corporation justly calls for protection. (Paulman v. Kritzer, 291
N.E. 2d 541.) And if in such circumstances, the interests of the corporation are betrayed,
the corporation may elect to claim all of the benefits of the transaction lor itself and the
law will impress a trust in favor of the corporation upon the property interest and profits
acquired. (Guth v. Loft, Inc., 23 Del. Ch. 255; Ontjes v. MacNilan, 5 N.W. 2d 860.)

Sec. 33

TITLE ID. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/ OFFICERS

313

Section 33 applies to directors. If the disloyalty is committed by
an officer, he is liable under the second paragraph of Section 30.

When doctrine not applicable.
A "corporate opportunity" of which corporate directors cannot
take advantage for their personal benefit is a business opportunity
which has an inherent aptitude of being integrated into the existing
business of the corporation.
(1) Enterprise engaged in, distinct form corporation business. The
doctrine which is but one phase of the rule of undivided loyalty
on the part of corporate fiduciaries does not preclude a director
from engaging in a distinct enterprise of the same general class of
business as that which his corporation is engaged in, so long as he
acts in good faith.

—

—

(2) Opportunity notinconflictwithcorporation'sbusiness. Neither
is the doctrine applicable where the opportunity is not essential to
the corporation's business, or where the director or officer does not

exploit opportunity by employment of company's resources, or
where the director or officer embracing opportunity personally is
not brought into direct competition with file corporation, (see 9-A
Words and Phrases 393-394.) Under Section 33, the profits must have
been obtained by the director to the prejudice of the corporation.
(3) Opportunity ceases to be a "corporate opportunity."
The
doctrine is pursuant to jurisprudence which rules that one who
occupies a fiduciary relationship to a corporation may not acquire,
in opposition to the corporation, property in which the
corporation
has an interest or tangible expectancy or which is essential to its
existence. (SEC Opinion, March 4, 1982, citing 11 Fletcher, Cy.
Corp. 227.) However, this property or business opportunity ceases
to be a "corporate opportunity" and transforms into a "personal
opportunity" where the corporation is definitely no longer able
to avail itself of the opportunity, which may "arise from
financial
insolvency, or from legal restrictions, or from any other factor which
prevents it from acting upon the opportunity for its own
advantage."
(Ibid., citing 11 Fletcher, p. 241.)

—

Section 33 applies only where a business opportunity
to the corporation and the director takes advantage of that belongs
business
opportunity for his own profit, (see ibid., citing Proceedings of the
Batasang
Pambansa on the proposed Corporation Code, Dec. 11,
Inin
\

314

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 34

Ratification by stockholders of disloyal act

Under Section 33, the guilty director will be exempt only from
liability to the corporation to account for the profits he realized if
his disloyal act is ratified by the vote of the stockholders owning or
representing at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock. There is no
similar provision in Section 30.
Section 33 is silent on whether the disloyal director shall be
allowed to vote his shares in the ratification of his act.
Sec, 34- Executive, Management and Other Special
Committees, — If the bylaws so provide, the board may
create an executive committee, composed of at least three
(3) directors- Said committee may act, by majority vote
of all its members, on such specific matters within the
competence of the board, as may be delegated to it in the

bylaws or by majority vote of the board, except with respect
to the: (a) approval of any action for which shareholders'
approval is also required; (b) filing of vacancies in the
board; (c) amendment or repeal of bylaws or the adoption
of new bylaws; (d) amendment or repeal of any resolution
of the board which by its express terms is not amendable
or repealable; and (e) a distribution of cash dividends to
the shareholders.

The board of directors may create special committees
of temporary or permanent nature and determine the
members' term, composition, compensation, powers, and
responsibilities. (N)

Executive, management, and other
special committees.

—

Section 34
(1) Need for an executive or management committee
Philippines
the
in
corporate
existing
practice
an
already
recognizes
(dictated by necessity owing to the growing complexities of modem
business), whereby the board of directors delegates to an executive
committee composed of some members of the board corporate
powers to assure prompt and speedy action and solution to
important matters without the need for a board meeting, especially

where such meetings cannot readily be held.

Sec 34

TITLE m. BOARD OF DIRECTORS/TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

315

Thus, the committee directly manages the operations of the
corporation between meetings of the board, thereby reducing the
work load of the latter.
(2) Express provision in the bylaws.
Under Section 34, the
executive committee composed of at least three (3) directors,
must be provided for in the bylaws. Where the bylaws contain an
express provision creating an executive committee, the same may
be properly vested by resolution of the board of directors. (SEC
Opinion, Aug. 19, 1980.)
(3) Absence of bylaws provision.
The executive committee is
as powerful as the board, as it actually performs certain duties of
the board, and, in effect, it is acting for the board itself. (Filipinas
Port Services, Inc. vs. Go,1 518 SCRA 453 [2007].) Because of the
nature of the function of the executive committee, the authority to
appoint such body should be expressly provided in the bylaws, and
a provision in the bylaws which states that "authorizing the board
to create such committees as the board may deem necessary," is not
a sufficient reason for its creation and appointment. (SEC Opinion,
Sept. 27, 1993.)
The board cannot create or appoint an "executive committee"
to perform some of its functions absent authority in the bylaws. In
such case, the principle on de facto officers may be applied insofar
as third persons are concerned. However, insofar as the corporation
is concerned, the unauthorized act of appointment of an executive
committee may be subject to Section 170, which provides for
penalties in case of violation of the provisions of the Revised
Corporation Code. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 21, 1993.)
(4) Matters excepted from delegation by board.
The committee
may act on specific matters within the competence of the board, as
may be delegated to it by the board or in the bylaws, including those
involving the exercise of judgment and discretion, except those
matters enumerated (a to e) with respect to which only the board
duly called and assembled as such can act upon.
Thus, an executive committee can function as the board itself in
all matters delegated to it other than the excepted matters. However,
the board cannot validly delegate to the executive committee blanket

—

—

—

r__'C*tin8 De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp.
r 310-311

12002].

316

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 34

or general authority to act for the board if the delegation constitutes
in effect an abdication of the corporate powers and duties vested in
it by law. The board cannot delegate entire supervision and control
of the corporation to an executive committee for this will violate
Section 22.
(5) Enlargement by board of restrictions. The restrictions on the
power of the executive committee as provided in Section 34 may be
enlarged by the board to cover other matters.
Note that under (d), the executive committee may amend or
repeal any resolution of the board unless "by its express terms is not
amendable or repealable."
As a matter of
(6) Authority to function as the board itself.
in many
committee
executive
of
an
business practice, the use
than
a
more
little
supervising
to
the
directors
reduce
companies may
and ratifying body. (SEC Opinion, July 29, 1985, citing Ballantine,
p. 135.) Subject to the statutory limitations, a properly constituted
committee composed of directors has all the authority of the board
to the extent provided in the resolution of the board or bylaws. (SEC
Opinion, Sept. 16, 1986.)
(7) Membership. Non-members of the board may be appointed
as members of the executive committee provided that there are
at least three (3) members of the board who are members of the

—

—

—

committee.2 (Ibid.)

An "Executive Committee" is a "governing body" which
functions as the board itself. Thus, membership shall be governed by
the same law /rules applicable to the board of directors as provided
in Section 34. (SEC Opinion, June 3, 1998.)

—

Where the committee
(8) Ultimate control by the board.
comprises, or includes persons who are not directors, such committee
shall be subject to the normal restrictions and requirement relating
to undue abdication of authority by the board. Thus, while the
executive committee may manage the day to day operation of the
business of the corporation, the business affairs thereof shall be
’An earlier opinion of the SEC states that aU members of an executive committee

must be directors of the corporation. However, if all the acts of the committee will be
merely recommendatory in nature and shall not be carried out without the formal

approval of the board of directors acting through a majority of the quorum, alternate
representation may be allowed In the committee such that some members thereof may
not be directors of the corporations. (SEC Opinion, July 5, 1974.)

Sec 34

TITLE III. BOARD OF DIRECTORS /TRUSTEES/OFFICERS

317

controlled and all corporate powers shall be exercised under the

ultimate discretion of the board as provided in Section 22. (SEC
Opinion, Aug. 29, 1988.)
The management of its affairs is left to the discretion and
judgment of the board of directors subject to the specific limitations

provided in Section 34.
(9) Quorum and voting.
The general rule for quorum
requirements is the same as that for board of directors. A majority
of the committee members (regardless of the classification of
membership into directors/ members or non-directors /members)

—

constitutes a quorum.

To bind the corporation, it is essential that the executive
committee acts "by a majority vote of all its members." From this,
it can be inferred that the committee cannot delegate its authority
even to one of its number, (see 18 Am. Jur. 2d 588.)
(10) Membership of a foreigner.
While "foreigners" are
disqualified from being elected /appointed as "corporate officers"
in wholly or partially nationalized business activities, they are
allowed representation in the "board of directors" or "governing
body" of said entities in proportion to their shareholdings. (Sec. 2-A,
Anti-Dummy Law; Sec. 11, Art. XU, Constitution.)

—

The reason for the exception is that the board of directors/
governing body performs specific duties as a "body." Unlike
corporate officers, each member of the board of directors / governing
body has no individual power or authority to perform management
function. The powers delegated to the board of directors /governing
body can only be exercised by it acting as a body when a quorum
is present. Hence, there can be no intervention in the management,
operation, administration, and control of the corporation by the
members thereof in their individual capacity.
(11) Special committees.
The executive or management
committee referred to in Section 34 should be distinguished from
other committees which are within the competence of the board
to create at any time and whose actions require confirmation
by the board itself. The board may create special committees of
temporary or permanent nature and determine the members' term,
composition, process, and responsibilities.

—

— oOo —

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

319

scientific, civic, or similar purposes: Provided, That no
foreign corporation, shall give donations in aid of any

Title IV

political party or candidate or for purposes of partisan
political activity;

POWERS OF CORPORATION

(j) To establish pension, retirement, and other plans
for the benefit of its directors, trustees, officers and
employees; and

Sec. 35. Corporate Powers and Capacity. — Every
corporation incorporated under this Code has the power
and capacity:
(a) To sue and be sued In its corporate name;

(k) To exercise such other powers as may be essential
or necessary to carry out its purpose or purposes as stated
in the articles of incorporation.

(b) To have perpetual existence unless the certificate
of incorporation provides otherwise; (N)

(c) To adopt and use a corporate seal;
(d) To amend its articles of incorporation in accordance
with the provisions of this Code;
(e) To adopt bylaws, not contrary to law, morals,
or public policy, and to amend or repeal the same in

accordance with this Code;
(f) in case of stock corporations, to Issue or sell stocks
to subscribers and to sell treasury stocks in accordance
with the provisions of this Code; and to admit members to
the corporation if It be a nonstock corporation;

(g) To purchase, receive, take or grant, hold, convey,
sell, lease, pledge, mortgage and otherwise deal with
such real and personal property, including securities and
bonds of other corporations, as the transaction of the
lawful business of the corporation may reasonably and
necessarily require, subject to the limitations prescribed
by law and the Constitution;

(h) To enter into a partnership, joint venture, merger,
or consolidation or any other commercial agreement with
natural and juridical persons; (N)
(I) To make reasonable donations, including those
public welfare or for hospital, charitable, cultural,
the
for
318

Meaning of powers of a corporation.

The term potvers of a corporation has reference to the corporation's
capacity or right under its charter and laws to do certain things. (6
Fletcher, p. 230.)
Distinguished from its franchise
and objects.
(1) The powers of a corporation must be distinguished from
its primary franchise, which is its right to exist as an entity for the
purpose of doing the things embraced within its powers and from
its secondary franchise, which is the right granted to an existing
corporation to use public property for a public use, but with private
profit. (6-A Fletcher, p. 431.)

(2) Neither must its powers be confused with its objects or
business. A corporation exercises its powers for the purpose of
attaining its objects. Thus, for example, the power to issue promissory
notes, being obviously consistent with the reasonably conducive to
the furtherance of the objects of the corporation, is a mere power
and not an object or business of the corporation. (6 Fletcher, p. 231.)

Relative powers of natural persons/partnerships
and corporations.

—

(1) Any act not prohibited.
An individual has absolute right
to fully use, enjoy and dispose of his properties, to perform all acts
and to make all contracts without any control except when they are
forbidden by the law. The same is true of an ordinary partnership.

320

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

Since a natural person and an ordinary partnership do not owe their
existence to the State, they can perform any act not prohibited by
law.
On the other hand, the civil rights
(2) Only powers granted.
of a corporation are different. Under the doctrine of limited capacity
adopted by our corporation law, a corporation has only such powers
as are expressly granted on it by law and those that are necessarily
implied from those expressly granted or those which are incidental
to its existence. (Sec. 2.) It is, therefore, not correct to say that a
corporation has the power to do all acts not expressly or impliedly

—

prohibited.
In other words, theenumeration of corporate powers implies the
exclusion of all other powers unless they are incidental or implied
in conformity with the generally accepted principle of statutory
construction "expressio unius est exclusion alterius." The reason for
the doctrine is that a corporation owes its existence to the State and,
therefore, it has only such powers as are expressly and impliedly
granted by law.

Classification of corporate powers.
A corporation exercises its power through its board of directors
(or trustees) and through its officers and agents when duly
authorized by a board resolution or its bylaws.
The three (3) classes of power of a corporation are:
(1) Those expressly granted or authorized by law (Sec. 2.), i.e.,
those conferred by the Revised Corporation Code and its articles of
incorporation;
(2) Those that are necessary to exercise the express or incidental
powers; and
(3) Those incidental to its existence. (Sec. 2.)
The powers of a corporation, however, frequently cut across
lines of the above classification.'
'Physical acts, like the signing of documents, can be performed by only by natural
persons duty authorized for the purpose by corporate bylaws or by a specific act of the
board of directors. The certificate of non-forum shopping may be signed for and on behalf
of a corporation by a lawyer who must be "specifically authorized" by the board of
directors in order is validly sign the certification. (BA Savings Bank vs. Sia, 336 SCRA

Sec 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

321

Note that Section 36 speaks of "every corporation incorporated
under this Code." Nets or contracts of a corporation outside the scope
of its express, implied, and incidental powers are ultra vires, (see
Sec. 44.) An ordinary association cannot exercise the powers, rights,
and privileges granted by the Corporation Code to organizations
registered with the SEC.
Determining whether an act or contract within
scope of corporate powers.

—

(1) Source of powers.
In determining whether a corporation
has power to do an act, it is necessary to:
(a) first, refer to its special charter or its articles of
incorporation to see whether it is within the express, implied, or
incidental powers conferred;
(b) then, to examine the statutes relating to corporations to
see if the act is allowed or prohibited; and

(c) then, in some cases, to consult the general statutes to see
if the act is illegal even in case of natural persons, (see 6 Fletcher,
pp. 233-246; also Clark on Corporations, p. 412.)

—

(2) Express or implied grant of powers.
Unless the power to
carry on a particular business is expressly or impliedly conferred, it
does not exist. It is illegal for a corporation to apply either its capital
or profits to business for purposes not contemplated by its charter.
(SEC Opinion, Jan. 13 and 25, 1988.) Thus, it is important
that the
corporation's intended purposes are stated with sufficient clarity in
the articles of incorporation so as to define with certainty the scope

of its business.

(3) Essent ial or necessary powers. Under Section 35, the corporation
can exercise such powers as may be essential or necessary to carry
out its purposes or purposes as stated in the articles of incorporation.
The test to be applied is whether the act of the corporation is in direct
484 [2000]; Shipside Incorporated vs. Court of Appeals, 352 SCRA 334 [2001];
BPI Leasing
Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 416 SCRA 4 [2003]; Athena Computers, Inc. vs. Reyes,
532
SCRA 343 [2007]; Salenga vs. Court of Appeals, 664 SCRA 635 [2012].) The requirement
or signing the certificate applies even to corporation. The
mandatory directions of the
Rules of Court make no distinction between natural and juridical persons. (Zulueta
vs.
Asia Brewery, Inc, 354 SCRA 100 [2001].)

322

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

Sec 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

323

and immediate furtherance of its business, fairly incidental to the
express powers and reasonably necessary to their exercise. If so, the
corporation has the power to do it; otherwise, not. (6 Fletcher, pp.
198-199; Montelibano vs. Bacolod-Murcia Milling Co., Inc., 5 SCRA
36 [1962].)

(2) Powers merely convenient or useful (e.g., giving of interestfree loans) are not implied if they are not essential, having in view
the purposes or objects of the corporation.

Express powers explained.

(3) The purpose or purposes for which the corporation was
created, as stated in its articles of incorporation, by defining the

Express powers are the powers expressly conferred upon the
corporation by law.
(1) These powers can be ascertained from the special law
creating the corporation, or if the corporation is formed under the
general incorporation law, from such law, the general laws of the
land applicable to corporations, and its articles of incorporation.
(2) Section 35 contains an enumeration of powers expressly
given to corporations created under the general incorporation law.

The express powers may be exercised by the corporation whether
or not any such powers are stated in the articles of incorporation or
bylaws, for they are deemed vested in any corporation organized
under the Revised Corporation Code, (see SEC-OGC Opinion No.
33-11,2 July 29,2011.)
(3) Unless otherwise provided by the Revised Corporation
Code, the general powers conferred by Section 35 are to be exercised
by the board of directors or trustees, (see Sec. 22.)
(4) Other express powers of the corporation are specifically
provided in Sections 36 to 43, which also lay down the conditions
under which these powers are to be exercised.
The express powers mentioned in Nos. (b), (d), (e), (f), and (h) of
Section 35 are discussed under Sections 11 and 36, 15, 45-47, 61, and
75-79, respectively.

Implied powers explained.

Implied powers are those powers reasonably necessary to execute
the express powers and to accomplish or carry out the purposes for
which the corporation was formed.
’Citing De Leon. The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 267 [1993)-

'»

(1) These implied powers are recognized by Section 35(k).

scope of corporate business or enterprise, in effect, delimit its
implied powers.

Implied powers classified.

Sometimes it is difficult to determine whether a certain activity
is an implied power. However, this rough classification embraces
most of die implied powers:

—

(1) Acts in the usual course of business.
This includes such
acts as borrowing money; making ordinary contracts; executing
promissory notes, checks or bills of exchange; taking notes or other
securities; acquiring personal property for use in connection with
the business; acquiring lands and buildings to be used as places of
business or in connection therewith; and selling, leasing, mortgaging
or other transfers of property of the corporation in connection with
the running of the business.
It is evident that all of such acts, under ordinary circumstances,
are necessary to run the business;
(2) Acts to protect debts owing to a corporation. If a corporation
is a creditor, it may do such acts as may be necessary to protect its
right as such creditor. Thus, a corporation may purchase property,
act as a guarantor or sometimes even run a business temporarily to
collect a debt, where otherwise it would have no power to do so;
(3) Embarking in different business.
A corporation may not
engage in a business different from that for which it was created
as a regular and a permanent part of its business, (see, however,
Sec. 41.) This is especially true with respect to those particular kinds
of corporate activities which are governed by special laws, (see
comments under Sec. 13[b].) Thus, a corporation not organized for
that purpose cannot go into the banking or insurance business but it
may do any isolated act of banking or insurance in connection with

—

—

some express power.

324

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

A corporation may, however, temporarily conduct an outside
business to collect a debt out of its profits;’
(4) Acts in part or wholly to protect or aid employees.
While the
cases are divided, the better view favors such acts as building homes,
places of amusement, hospitals, etc. for employees, as within the

—

corporate powers.*4 (see Sec. 35[j].)
(5) Acts to increase business. Thus, a corporation may conduct
contests or sponsor radio or television programs, or promote fairs
and other gatherings to advertise and increase its business, (see 6
Fletcher, pp. 276-277.)
No fixed rules, however, can be laid down which could be
applied mechanically in determining cases of implied powers. The
question must necessarily depend upon the facts and circumstances
of each case.
Incidental or Inherent powers explained.
Incidental or inherent powers are powers a corporation can exercise
by the mere fact of its being a corporation or powers necessary to
corporate existence and are, therefore, impliedly granted. (Sec.

—

35[a].)
(1) As powers inherent in the corporation as a legal entity,
they exist independently of the express powers, (see Sec. 44.) These
incidental powers are recognized by Sections 2 and 44.
(2) Some powers enumerated in Section 35 are incidental
powers which can be exercised by a corporation even absent an
express grant.
’Under Sec. 35(a), a corporation, when necessary in the pursuit of its business,
may borrow money. In corporations other that those formed to engage in the business of
loaning money, this activity is but incidental, and cannot be extended to purposes foreign
to the business and objects for which the corporation was related. However, they may
temporarily loan corporate funds provided certain conditions are complied with. (SEC
Opinion, Jan. 22, 1991; see note 2 under Sec. 42.)
4In a case where the opening of a post office branch of the Bureau of Posts at a
mining camp of a corporation was undertaken at the request of the corporation to
promote the convenience and benefit of its employees and their families who have settled
at the mining camp, and after a resolution of the board of directors was passed wherein
the corporation assumed full responsibility for all cash received by the Postmaster, it
was held that the resolution adopted by the board is not an ultra vires act (see Sec. 45.),
although it is outside the object for which the corporation was created since the resolution
covers a subject which concerns the benefit, convenience, and welfare of the corporation's
employees and their families. (Republic vs. Acoje Mining Co., Inc., 7 SCRA 361 [1963].)

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

325

Construction of powers granted.
An act is presumed to be within corporate powers and, therefore,
valid, unless clearly shown to be otherwise.
(1) In construing charters to determine the powers of
corporations, it is well-settled, as in other cases of legislative grants,
that they are to be construed strictly; any ambiguity in the corporate
charter must operate against the corporation and in favor of the
public.
(2) In determining what powers have been conferred, the whole
instrument is to be taken together, including provisos as expressing the
final intention and purposes of the parties.
(3) On the other hand, since grants of corporate franchises are
intended not only for private gain but also to subserve public interest,
they should be so construed as not to defeat the purpose of their creation.
The intention of the legislature should always control, it being the
general rule that a thing within the intention of the legislature is as
much within the statute as if it were within the letter.
(4) Charters are also to be construed in view of the circumstances,
usages, and practices existing at the time they were granted and it is not
the province of the course to enlarge the powers of a corporation
beyond its charter limitations because circumstances have changed.
(5) If the charter is susceptible of two meanings, the one
restricting and the other extending the powers of the corporation,
that construction is to be adopted which works the least harm to the State.
(6) A general incorporation law may apply to corporations
operating under special statutes with respect to the conduct or
government of such corporations as to which no specific provision
has been made. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 433-434.)

Application of rules.
(1) A corporation incorporated as a railroad corporation has the
incidental power to build railroads because such power is necessary
for the accomplishment of the purpose for which the corporation is
created.

(2) A corporation expressly authorized to engage in agriculture

has implied authority to buy agricultural lands because such
authority is reasonably appropriate to carry out its express authority.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

326

Sec. 35

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

327

(3) A corporation engaged in the manufacture of cement could
operate and maintain an electric plant for the purpose exclusively
of supplying electricity to its cement factory and to its employees
living within its factory compound where it appears that the
operation of such plant is necessarily connected with the business
of manufacturing cement. (Teresa Electric and Power Co., Inc. vs.
Public Service Commission, 21 SCRA 252 [1967].)

under the law has the implied or incidental power to establish
branch offices in the Philippines or elsewhere as the needs and
exigencies of the business of the corporation may require. Thus, the
board of directors of a corporation may, even absent a provision in
its articles of incorporation or bylaws, establish branch offices if it
is necessary or convenient for the proper accomplishment of the
purpose for which the corporation has been created. (SEC Opinion,

(4) Neither may a corporation authorized under its articles
of incorporation to operate and otherwise deal in automobiles
and automobile accessories and to engage in the transportation
of persons by water, engage in the business of land transportation
(e.g., operation of a taxicab service) because such would have no
necessary connection with the corporation's legitimate business.
(Luneta Motor Co. vs. A.D. Santos, Inc., 5 SCRA 809 [1969].)

March 2, 1970.)

(5) Investment by a transportation company in an insurance

corporation with transportation operators as stockholders,
designed to reduce insurance costs, may be interpreted as an act
reasonably requisite and necessary to carry out the business of land
transportation, because insurance costs form part of the legitimate
expenses of a transportation operator. (SEC Opinion, June 13, 1961.)
(6) A corporation engaged, among others, in manufacturing
rubber shoes, slippers, sandals, and other allied products may
be permitted to buy worn-out or used shoes and slippers to
be reprocessed or reclaimed into raw materials to be used in
manufacturing its products, and to manufacture rubber cement, it
appearing that the main ingredient in manufacturing the same is
rubber, and rubber cement is a rubber product. (SEC Opinion, Dec.
15, 1967.)

(7) But a corporation engaged primarily in fishing, and to pursue
this, it is empowered by its articles of incorporation "to operate cold
storage plants xxx as may be necessary for the carrying on of the
said primary objective of all the corporation" cannot operate a cold
storage plant or an ice plant as a public service operator since it can
operate such plant only insofar as it may serve its primary purpose.
(SEC Opinion, Feb. 17, 1969.)
(8) The power to create or establish branch offices is generally
provided for in the articles of incorporation or in the bylaws. In the
absence, however, of such a provision, every corporation formed

(9) The Land Bank of the Philippines, being a commercial bank
clothed with authority to exercise all the general powers mentioned
in the Corporation Code and the General Banking Act, as provided
in its charter, among which is the power to write-off loans and
advances, has been held to also have the lesser power to charge
off or condone interests and penalties. (Land Bank of the Phils, vs.
Commission on Audit, 190 SCRA 154 [1990].)
(10) An educational institution is limited to developing human
capital through formal instruction. Hiring professors, instructors,
and personal acquiring equipment and real estate, establishing
housing facilities for personnel and students, hiring a concessionaire,
and other activities that can be directly connected to the operations
and conduct of the education business may be considered the
necessary and incidental acts of an educational institution. Securing
third party loans by mortgaging its properties does not appear to
have the remotest connection to the operations of the educational
institution's conduct of business. (University of Mindanao, Inc. vs.
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 778 SCRA 458 [2016].)
(11) If "fund raising activity" is not embodied among the
corporation's authorized purposes in its articles of incorporation or
is neither necessary nor incidental in the furtherance of its corporate
objectives, the same cannot legally be undertaken by the corporation.
(SEC Opinion, Jan. 17, 1995.)

Ratification of corporate acts.
(1) By stockholders (or members). They may ratify and render
valid acts done or authorized by the board of directors (or trustees)
but which were beyond the powers of the directors, or acts done or
authorized by the directors, provided the acts done are such as may
be done or authorized by the stockholders. (2 Fletcher, p. 1103.)

—

328

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

—

(2) By board of directors (or trustees). Similarly, a transaction,
if within the powers of a corporation, may be consented to, ratified,
or acquiesced in by the board of directors (or trustees) if it could
be authorized by them. If it is consented to or ratified with full
knowledge of the facts, it is finally and absolutely binding, and
neither the corporation nor individual stockholders (or members)
nor strangers can afterwards sue to set it aside or otherwise attack
its validity. (3 Fletcher, p. 361.)
Effect of ratification retroactive.

Except as to intervening rights of strangers, ratification by
a corporation of an unauthorized act or contract by its officers or
others relates back to the time of the act or contract ratified, and
is equivalent to original authority. Omnis ratihabitio retrotrahitur. (2
Fletcher, pp. 1185-1188.)
Thus, if a corporation has been empowered, as a secondary
purpose, to purchase stocks in other corporations by its articles of
incorporation, although the investment was made sans the prior
consent and imprimatur of the stockholders under Section 41 of
the Revised Corporation Code, this legal infirmity is cured by the
subsequent ratification of the required vote of the board of directors
and stockholders. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 5, 1963.)
Mode of exercising powers.

—

(1) No particular mode prescribed by charter.
If the charter of a
corporation prescribes no particular mode for exercising its powers,
they may be exercised in any mode, provided it is not contrary to
law, which the stockholders or officers may deem best. So, it has
been well said that corporations "may exercise all the powers within
the fair intent and purpose of their creation, which are reasonably
proper to give effect to powers expressly granted. In doing this,
they must have a choice of means adapted to ends, and are not be
confined to any one mode of operation."
(2) Particular mode prescribed by charter. If the charter requires
its powers to be exercised in any particular way by officers or agents,
they cannot be properly exercised in any other way, for the powers
of a corporation are measured by its charter, not only as to the things
which it may lawfully do, but also as to the mode of doing them.
However, as noticed in treating of the effect of ultra vires transactions

—

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Sec. 35

329

(see Sec. 44.), the fact that a corporation exercises a power in a mode
different from that prescribed by its charter will not necessarily
prevent it from acquiring rights or incurring liabilities by reason
thereof, (see 6 Fletcher, pp. 284-286.)

—

(3) Corporation organized under a special law.
Where a
corporation is organized under a special law, the rules governing
corporations organized under the general law have no application

where the special statutes provide methods for the regulation and
control of the corporation. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 439.)

Power to sue and be sued.
This power (Sec. 35[a].) is an incidental to corporate existence.
As a rule, suits are to be brought by or against the corporation in its
own name.’
(1) Dissolved corporation. Corporations de facto (Sec. 19.) may
sue or be sued but a corporation dissolved after the expiration of the
three-year winding-up period (Sec. 139.) ceases to exist de jure or de
facto.
(2) Unregistered corporation. A corporation not duly registered
in accordance with law has no legal capacity to sue. Foreign
corporation.
Neither can a foreign corporation which transacts
business in the Philippines without the necessary license from the
SEC sue in Philippine courts. (Sec. 150.)
(3) Right to claim moral damages.
An artificial person like
a corporation cannot experience physical suffering, mental
anguish, besmirched reputation, wounded feelings, moral shock,
social humiliation and similar injury, (see Art. 2217, Civil Code.)
Nevertheless, a corporation may have a good reputation or business
standing which, if besmirched or debased, may be a ground for
the award of moral damages (Mambulao vs. Phil. National Bank,
22 SCRA 359 [1968].) under the Civil Code. (Art. 2217 thereof.) But
in such case, it is imperative for the claimant to present proof to

—

—

—

—

'Lack of capacity to sue refers to a plaintiffs general disability to sue, such as on ac-

count of minority, insanity, incompetence, lack of juridical personality or any other gen¬

eral disqualification of a party. A dissolved corporation no longer possesses juridical per¬
sonality, and, therefore, it has no legal capacity to sue because of lack of personality to sue.
(Alabang Development Corporation vs. Alabang Hills Village Association, 724 SCRA 321

12014).)

330

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

justify the award by showing the existence of the factual basis of the
damage and its causal relation to the defendant*s acts. (Development
Bank of the Phils, vs. Court of Appeals, 403 SCRA 460 [2005]; Manila
Electric Co. vs. TEAM Electronics Corp., 540 SCRA 62 [2007].)

—

(5) Real party-in-interest.
As a rule, the right and power of
a corporation to sue in any court must be brought by the board of
directors or trustees that exercises its corporate powers (Sec. 23.) on
behalf of the corporation or by any of its duly authorized officer or
agent.4 (see Premium Marble Resources, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
264 SCRA 11 [1996]; Shipside Incorporated vs. Court of Appeals,
352 SCRA 334 [2001]; Philippine Rabbit Bus Lines, Inc. vs. Aladdin
Transit Corp., 493 SCRA 358 [2006]; Mufioz vs. People, 548 SCRA
473 [2008].)
(a) Under Section 35(a), read in relation to Section 22, where
a corporation is the injured party, its power to sue is lodged with
its board of directors or trustees. A minority stockholder and
member of the board of directors has no such power or authority
to sue on the corporation's behalf. (Tana Wing Tak vs. Makasiar,
350 SCRA 475 [2001]; see Mediserv, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
617 SCRA 284 [2010].)

(b) Under Section 3, Rule 46 of the Rules of Court, a

petitioner before the Court of Appeals must submit with the
petition, a sworn certification of non-forum shopping and
failure to comply with the requirement is sufficient ground
for dismissal of the petition. The requirement applies even to
corporations, the Rules of Court making no distinction between
natural and juridical persons. A certification not signed by a
person not duly authorized by board resolution renders the
petition subject to dismissal. (Gonzales vs. Climax Mining Ltd.,
452 SCRA 607 [2005]; MC Engineering, Inc. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 360 SCRA 183 [2001]; see Mediserv, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 617 SCRA 284 [2012]; Cosco Philippines
Shipping, Inc. vs. Kemper Insurance Co., 670 SCRA 343 [2012].)
‘In a case, the corporate officer initially failed to show that she had the capacity to
sign the verification and institute the ejectment case on behalf of the lessor company. It
was held that "her act of immediately presenting the Secretary's Certificate confirming
her authority to represent the company may be considered as substantial compliance
and call for the relaxation of the rules of procedure in the interest of justice. (Parichia vs.
Don Luis Dison Realty, Inc., 548 SCRA 273 [2008]; see Asean Pacific Planners vs. City of
Urdaneta, 566 SCRA 219 [2008].)

Sec 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

331

(c) Since the signing of verifications and certifications
against forum shopping is not integral to the act of filing cases
in behalf of a corporation, the signing may not be deemed as
necessarily included in an authorization to sign the verification
and certification in behalf of the corporation. (Metropolitan
Cebu Water District vs. Adala, 562 SCRA 465 [2007].)
(d) The Supreme Court, however, has held that these officials
or employees of the company can sign the verification and
certification without need of a board resolution: 1) Chairperson
of the board of directors; 2) President of the Corporation; 3)
General Manager or Acting General Manager; 4) Personnel
Officer; and 5) an Employment Specialist in a labor case.
The above cases do not provide a complete listing, the
determination of the sufficiency of the authority being on the
case-to-case basis. The rationale for justifying the authority
of the above corporate officers or representatives to sign the
verification or certificate against forum shopping is that they
are "in a position to verify the truthfulness and correctness of
the allegations in the petition." (Cagayan Valley Drug Corp. vs.
Comm, of Internal Revenue, 545 SCRA 10 [2008]; South Cotabato
Corp. vs. Sto. Tomas, 638 SCRA 566 [2010].)
(e) A government-owned or controlled corporation can
act only through its duly authorized representatives. In a
case in view of the absence of a board resolution authorizing
petitioner's officer-in-charge to represent it in the petition for
review, the Supreme Court ruled the verification of non-forum
shopping executed by the officer failed to satisfy the Rules of
Court. (Public Estates Authority vs. Uy, 372 SCRA 180 [2001].)
(f) Where the corporate officer's power as an agent of the
corporation did not derive from a board resolution, it would
nonetheless be necessary to show a clear source of authority
from the charter, the bylaws, or the implied acts of the governing
body. (Premium Marble Resources vs. Court of Appeals, supra;
Social Security System vs. Commission on Audit, 384 SCRA 548

[2002].)

(g) Applying the rule that every action must be brought
or defended in the name of the real party-in-interest (Rules
of Court, Rule 3, Sec. 2.), where a voting trust agreement was
executed by certain stockholders of a corporation which was not

332

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

a signatory thereto, the corporation is not real party-in-interest
in the suit to enforce the agreement. The action should be filed
by the stockholders. (National Investment & Development
Corporation vs. Aquino, 163 SCRA 153 [1988].)
(h) In a derivative suit, however, the minority stockholder
or stockholders may sue erring corporate officers in the name
of the corporation with the corporation as the real party-in¬
interest. (see comments under Sec. 63.)

(i) Although a criminal case can only be filed against
officers of a corporation and not against the corporation itself, it
does not follow from this, however, that the corporation cannot
be a real party-in-interest for the purpose of bringing a civil
action for malicious prosecution. (Comet vs. Court of Appeals,
301 SCRA 459 [1999].)

(j) While the power to sue and be sued is lodged with the
board of directors, the physical acts of the corporation like the
signing of documents can be performed only by natural persons
duly authorized for the purpose by corporate bylaws or by
a specific act of the board of directors. Absent the said board
resolution, a petition may not be given due course. (Shipside
Incorporated vs. Court of Appeals, supra; United Paragon
Mining Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 497 SCRA 638 [2006];
Republic vs. Coalbrine International Phils., Inc., 617 SCRA 491
[2010]; Esguerra vs. Holcim Philippines, Inc., 704 SCRA 490
[2013].)
(k) A resolution of the board of directors may authorize
a particular officer to represent the corporation in all suits
brought for or against it. (Grand Boulevard Hotel vs. Genuine
Labor Organizations, 406 SCRA 688 [2003].) The Supreme Court
has ruled that the subsequent submission of proof of authority
to act on behalf a corporation justifies the relaxation of the rules
to allow its petition for review on certiorari to be given due
course. (Pascual and Santos, Inc. vs. Members of Tramo Wakas
Neighborhood Assoc., Inc., 442 SCRA 438 [2004]; see Republic
vs. Coalbrine International Phils., Inc., 617 SCRA 491 [2010].)
(1) Where piercing the veil of corporate entity is justified,
a stockholder or corporate officer may be sued along with the
corporation, (see comments under Sec. 2.)

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

333

—

(6) Right of stockholders to intervene.
Stockholders are, in no
legal sense, the owners of corporate property which is owned by the
corporation as a distinct legal person, their interest being inchoate or
beneficial in nature, not direct and immediate in character (see Rules
of Court, Rule 12, Sec. 2.); hence, they have no right to intervene in
an action for or against a corporation. (Saw vs. Court of Appeals,
195 SCRA 740 [1991].)
In a case, however, a stockholder who was one of the largest
individual stockholders of the corporation and was, until it was
placed under receivership, exercising control of the company, and
was the one who asked for the appointment of the receiver and
pledged his own property to the extent of P4,000,000 (in 1927)
to assist in the rehabilitation of the corporation was allowed to
intervene in an action by a creditor to foreclose the mortgage executed
by its officers, for "he is injuriously affected by the mortgage" and
"is more virtually interested in the outcome of this case that [the
corporation]." (Phil. National Bank vs. Phil. Vegetable Oil Co., 49
Phil. 857 [1927].)

—

(7) Service of summons. The rationale of all rules with respect
to service of summons on a corporation is that such service must be
to an agent or a representative, in contemplation of Rule 14, Rules of
Court, so integrated with the corporation sued as to make it, a priori
supposable that he will realize his responsibilities and know what he
should do with any legal papers served on him; one who performs
vital functions in the corporation that it would be reasonable to
presume that he would be able to discuss the importance of paper
delivered to him, and be responsible enough to transmit the same
to the corporation. (Villa Rey Transit, Inc. vs. Rapacon, 81 SCRA 298
[1978]; Vlason Enterprise Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 310 SCRA 26

[1999].)

(a) The rules on service of process make service on an "agent"
sufficient whether the agent be general or special. As such, it
does not necessarily connote an officer of the corporation and
may include employees but not those whose duties are not so
integrated to the business that their absence or presence will not
toll the entire operation of the business. The job of a bookkeeper
is so integrated with the corporation that his regular recording
of the corporation's "business accounts" and "essential facts
about the transaction of a business or enterprise" safeguards the

334

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 35

corporation from possible fraud being committed adverse to
its own corporate interest. Thus, service of summons was held
properly made to a corporation through a bookkeeper or a clerk
who was not even authorized to receive the same on behalf of the
corporation, since what is of paramount importance is that the
purpose of the rule on summons has been attained thereby, the
interest of speedy justice has been served. (Pabon vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 296 SCRA 7 [1998].)

.

(b) Similarly, summons was held properly served on a
corporation through a claim employee who does not belong to
the managerial staff, but whose role in the corporation is that of
a representative in relation to cases involving it, i.e., regularly
indorsing summons and complaints against the corporation,
following-up, and attending cases filed and against it. (Weena
Express, Inc. vs. Rapacon, 534 SCRA 288 [2007].)

(c) Although the corporation's principal office and a
director's residence are housed in the same building, the latter's
housekeeper cannot be considered as a person-in-charge of
the corporation's office authorized to receive a copy of a court
decision on behalf of the corporation and neither can the
housekeeper's receipt suffice as service to the director absent
a showing that such housekeeper had been authorized by the
corporation to accept service. (Camper Realty Corp. vs. Najo
Reyes, 632 SCRA 491 [2010].)

—

(8) Failure to implead corporation.
The filing of a complaint
against a stockholder is not ipso facto a complaint against the
corporation. The failure to properly implead the corporation as a

defendant violates the fundamental principle that a corporation
has a legal personality separate and distinct from its stockholders.
Merely annexing a list of corporations to the complaint is a violation
of their right to due process for it in effect be disregarding their
distinct and separate personality without a hearing.

Power to adopt and use a corporate seal.
A seal is a device (as an emblem, symbol, or word) used to
identify or replace the signature of an individual or organization and
to authenticate (as under common law) written matter purportedly
emanating from such individual or organization. It may refer also

Sea 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

335

to the impression of such a device on documents like certificates of

stocks.7 (see Webster's 3rd New Int. Diet., p. 2046.)
(1) Any seal adopted and used by the corporation (Sec. 35[c].)
may be altered by it at pleasure. Where a corporation adopts a seal
for a special occasion, different from its corporate seal, the seal
adopted is the corporate seal only for that time and occasion. (9-A
Words and Phrases 407.)
(2) A seal is not required for the validity of any corporate act.
Under Section 62, certificates of stock issued by corporations are
required to be sealed with the seal of the corporation. But the use
of a corporate seal in certificates of stock must be deemed merely
directory rather than mandatory. A corporation may exist even
without a seal.
(3) At common law, the rule prevailed for some time that a
corporation could not make a parol contract and could speak and
act only by its common seal. This technical rule of the common law
soon gave way, however, and today in the transaction of its business,
a seal is no more necessary to render valid the acts and contracts of a
purely business corporation.
But although it may not be necessary, the reason it is desirable
to attest all contracts and other acts of the corporation with its seal,
when this is possible, is that the presence of such seal establishes,
prima facie, that the instrument to which it is affixed is the act of the
corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 689-698.)
Power to acquire and convey property.

—

(1) As an incident to every corporation. This power which is also
conferred under the law has always been regarded as an incidental

power of every corporation. A corporation needs properties or

assets to carry on its business.’
’A "corporate seal" is not the same thing as a signature nor is it equivalent to a
signature, but the seal forms a part of the formality of execution, and where an affidavit is
filed on behalf of a corporation denying its signature on a note, under seal the execution
of the note is not admitted and the plaintiff is put to formal proof of execution. (9-A
Words and Phrases 407.)
*It has been held by the Supreme Court: "The owning of a business lot upon which
to construct and maintain its offices is reasonably necessary to a corporation which
has developed to such an extent that its prospects of the future are such as to justify
its directors in making such acquisition. A different rule would compel important

336

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 35

While a corporation may appoint agents to negotiate for the
purchase of real property needed by the corporation, the final say
will have to be with the board of directors whose approval will
finalize the transaction. (Firme vs. Bukal Enterprises & Dev. Corp.,

414 SCRA 190 [2003].)
(2) As necessary to the transaction of its lawful business.
The
power under Section 35(g) is qualified by the phrase "as the
transaction of the lawful business of the corporation may reasonably
and necessarily require."
(a) Property obtained by a corporation which is foreign to the
purposes for which it was organized is an unlawful acquisition.
For example, it is not within the power of a corporation engaged
in general shipping business to buy a provincial parcel of land
purposely for redistribution to its stockholders, as the acquisition
is neither necessary nor incidental to further its business. (SEC
Opinion, Aug. 1, 1989.)

—

(b) A corporation may not validly purchase, sell, mortgage,
etc., assets if it is not in the legitimate furtherance of its purposes.
Accordingly, the exercise of such power cannot be validated thru
the inclusion of such purpose in the articles of incorporation has
no interest whatsoever in the subject transaction. (SEC Opinion,
Sept. 25, 1991.)
(c) The transfer or sale of shares owned by a corporation in

another corporation requires approval by the board of directors
of the seller corporation (Sec. 22.) and while a corporation is
empowered by Section 35(g) to dispose corporate assets, such
power is subject to Section 39. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 21, 1995.)
(d) In the ordinary course of business, a corporation can
borrow funds or dispose of assets of the corporation only on
authority of the board of directors which normally designates
one (1) or more corporate officers to sign loan documents or
enterprises to conduct their business exclusively in leased offices - a result which
would retard industrial growth and be inimical to the best interests of society. Thus,
a corporation whose business may properly be conducted in a populous center may
acquire an appropriate lot and construct thereon an edifice with facilities in excess of its
own immediate requirement. If it has the power to acquire such lot, construct an edifice
and hold it beneficially, the beneficial administration by it of such parts of the building as
are let to other must necessarily be lawful." (Government vs. El Hogar Filipino, 50 Phil399 (1927J.)

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

337

deeds of assignment for the corporation. (Great Asian Sales
Center Corporation vs. Court of Appeals, 381 SCRA 557 [2002].)
(e) To enable to a corporation to engage in any its secondary
purposes, Section 41 must be complied with. Similarly, if the
act has the effect of incurring, creating, or increasing bonded
indebtedness under Section 37, or involves the selling or
disposition of all or substantially all the property and assets of
the corporation under Section 39, the corporation must comply
with the requirements prescribed.

—

(3) As subject to limitations or restrictions.
The right or power
of private corporations to deal in real and personal property is also
subject to limitations or restrictions prescribed by special laws and
the Constitution. Thus:
(a) Under the Constitution, no private corporation or
association may hold alienable lands of the public domain
except by lease for a period not exceeding 25 years, renewable
for not more than 25 years, and not to exceed 1,000 hectares in
area, (see Art. XII, Sec. 3 thereof.) Natural resources such as coal,
petroleum and other mineral oils belong to the State and cannot

be alienated. Their exploration, development and utilization
shall be under the full control and supervision of the State. (Ibid.,
Sec. 2 thereof.)
(b) Under the General Banking Law of 2000, any real
property acquired by a bank by way of satisfaction of claims
under the circumstances enumerated in the law shall be
disposed of by it within a period of five (5) years or as may be
prescribed by the Monetary Board. The bank may, after said
period, continue to hold the property for its own use, subject
to limitations with respect to ceiling on investments in certain
assets, (see Secs. 51, 52, R.A. No. 8791.)

Power to acquire shares or securities.
(1) Shares of other corporations.
Section 35(g) authorizes
a private corporation to acquire shares or securities of other

—

corporations.

(a) Such an act does not need the approval of the
stockholders if done in pursuance of the purpose or purposes
of the corporation as stated in its articles of incorporation but

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

338

Sec 35

when the purpose is done solely for investment, the approval
of the stockholders as required by Section 41 is necessary. (De la
Rama vs. Ma-ao Sugar Central Co., Inc., 27 SCRA 247 [1969].)
The prevailing view is that a corporation has no power to
purchase or hold stock in another corporation unless it is one
activity permitted by its articles of incorporation. (7 R.C.L.

Corp., par. 535; see SEC Opinion, Nov. 20, 1961.)

(b) The power to acquire shares in other corporations
is subject to specific limitations established by the Revised
Corporation Code, special laws, and the Constitution. The

exercise of the power is also subject to the provisions of Section

176.
(c) A corporation can be an incorporator and can be among
the initial subscribers to the shares of a yet-to-be-incorporated
corporation. (Sec. 10.)
(2) Shares of the acquiring corporation. The Revised Corporation
Code authorizes a corporation subject to limitations stated therein
to acquire its own stocks, (see Secs. 40, 67, last par., 76, 80, 104.) A
corporation may purchase its own stock, however, only when it has
"unrestricted retained earnings" to cover the shares to be purchased
or acquired, (see Sec. 40.)

—

Corporation as stockholder or member.

The old Corporation Law contains no express provision
prohibiting the organization of a corporation composed of other
corporations. A corporation may organize a corporation with other
corporations. (Sec. 10.) The decided weight of authority in the
United States supports the view that a corporation may become a
member of another corporation. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 12, 1970.)
(1) A private corporation may, either by original subscription
or by purchase, become a stockholder and member of another
corporation with all the rights and liabilities attaching to such
relation, either when it is expressly authorized by statute or its
charter to do so, or when such subscription or purchase is within
its implied powers as a necessary or proper means of exercising the
other powers conferred on it. (Ibid., citing 18 C.J.S., Sec. 34.) It may
enter into a partnership, joint venture, merger, consolidation or any
other commercial agreement with natural and juridical persons.

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

339

(2) Under the older statutes, corporations were composed
entirely of persons, but it is true now in most states that a
corporation need not be composed entirely of natural persons,
but other corporations may be incorporators (in practical effect) or
stockholders. The most notable examples are the great universities of
Oxford and Cambridge which are themselves distinct and separate
corporations. (Ibid., citing Oleck, Modem Corporation Law, Sec.
226.)
Power to contribute to charity.

—

(1) Existence of power formerly unsettled.
Section 35(i) vests
in business corporations the authority to contribute for purely
charitable purposes.’ Before, the existence of such authority was not

settled.”

—

(2) Basis of power naw expressly granted. Section 35(i) recognizes
the growing tendency to regard charitable gifts as within the scope
’While donations to charities by business corporations have been sustained by
various courts in the United States, they were justified by the presence of some benefit
or advantage accruing to the corporations. The reason for this judicial attitude against
such power is most strongly expressed in a case as follows: "A business corporation
is organized and carried on primarily for the profit of stockholders. The powers of the
directors are to be employed for that end. The discretion of directors is to be exercised in
the choice of means to attain that end and does not extend to a change in the end itself,
to the reduction of or to the non-distribution of profits among stockholders in order to
devote them to other purposes." (Dodge v. Ford Motor Co., 204 Mich. 459, 507, cited by
Emiliano R. Navarro, "Corporate authority to contribute to charity," 26 PhiL Law Journal
188-189 [Oct. 1951].)
"The uncertainty resulted from the absence of any provision in the former
Corporation Law vesting the power, although such authority was impliedly recognized
by the National Internal Revenue Code of 1939 (C.A. No. 466, as amended.) in Sec. 30(h),
thereof which provision is also found in the National Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(P.D. No. 1158, as amended.) Said Sec. 30(h) allows deduction of: “Charitable and other
contributions. - Contributions or gifts actually paid or made within the taxable year to or
for the use of the Government of the Philippines or any political subdivision thereof for
exclusively public purposes, or to domestic corporations or associations organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, athletic, cultural, or educational
purposes or for the rehabilitation of veterans, or to societies for the prevention of cruelty
to children or animals, no part of the net income of which insures to the benefit of any
private stockholder or individual to an amount not in excess of six per centum in the
esse of an individual and three per centum in the case of a corporation, of the taxpayer's
taxable income as computed without the benefit of this paragraph...."
Still, it was not clear whether purely charitable gifts, unconnected with the
corporation's business, could be considered valid as constituting a proper use of
corporate funds if made without stockholders' authorization. Sec. 30(h) is now Sec 34(H)
of the National Internal Revenue Code 1997. (R.A. No. 8424.)

340

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec, 35

of corporate authority. It is based on the modem view that business
corporations are not organized solely as profit-making enterprises
but also as economic and social institutions with corresponding
public responsibility to aid in bettering economic and social
conditions in the community in which such corporations are doing
business."
(3) Limitations on power.
Under the Revised Corporation
Code, the only limitations imposed on the authority of a corporation
to make donations are: (a) the amount thereof must be reasonable;
and (b) the donations by a foreign corporation must not be in aid
of any political party or candidate or for purposes of partisan
political activity, (see Sec. 95, B.P. Big. 881 [Omnibus Election
Code].) Only foreign corporations are expressly prohibited from
giving such donations. Under the Corporation Code, there is an
absolute prohibition for corporations, both foreign and domestic,
from donating to any political party, candidate or for any partisan
political activity. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 08-15, July 27, 2015.)
It is not required by law that the donation should inure to the
direct financial benefit of the corporation if it is "reasonable" under
the circumstances, considering the corporation's financial condition.
The limitation that the donations must be "reasonable" provides
a check against scheming directors and officers who may use the
authority as a screen to appropriate corporate funds for personal
ends.

—

"SEC-OGC Opinion No. 35-14, November 27, 2014, citing De Leon, The Corporation
Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 332 [2002]. As has been better stated:
"Many business have advocated social responsibility of business corporations. This
is important if business corporations and capitalistic society are to survive.... The inability
of business corporations to contribute to purely charitable purposes may not only impair
their public patronage, but may create an unfavorable reaction against private enterprise.
In the last analysis, corporate donations, unless amounting to piracy of the corporate
treasury, redound to the benefit of the corporation, the shareholder, the creditors, and the
public" (E.R. Navarro, op. cit., supra, pp. 191-192.)
"As business is chiefly conducted through the medium of corporations, it is the
corporation, its shareholders, directors, and officers, who are being made to realize their
social obligations to employees and customers. Consistent with this development is the
changing attitude towaid corporate contributions to charities. . . In times when so much
wealth is concentrated in the hands of incorporated associations, it is clearly in the public
interest to permit such associations to make contributions to charity." (Ibid., p. 191, citing
Stevens on Corporations [1949], p. 252.)

Sec. 35

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

341

Power to establish pension, retirement,
and other plans.
(1) Corporate purpose or purposes.
The authority granted to
every corporation by Section 35(j) to establish pension, retirement,
and other plans for the benefit of its officers and employees is
a statutory recognition that disbursement of corporate funds in
pursuance of such plans promotes the purpose or purposes for
which the corporation was formed. Courts have been liberal in
finding as a business responsible for the comfort, health, and well¬
being of its employees.
Thus, it has been repeatedly held that granting bonus, gratuity,
and incentive compensation to employees as a reward for work is
within the implied powers of a corporations. It is a well-established
practice of corporations. The implied power to build houses, schools,
churches, and libraries for employees has also been sustained, (see
Wyatt & Wyatt, Business Law: Principles and Cases [1963], p. 708;
Lopez Realty, Inc. vs. Fontecha, 247 SCRA 183 [1995].)
(2) Better relations with corporate employees.
A corporation,
like an individual employer, is not limited to payment of wages
to its employees. It may extend to them other benefits, such as
paid vacations, sick benefits and medical treatment, and pensions,
which are not necessarily charitable acts but actually part of the
employment contract.
Contributions by a corporation to programs directly benefiting
employees apart from the benefits granted under the Social Security
Act (R.A. No. 1161, as amended.) are permitted by the Revised
Corporation Code on the theory that such activities promote better
relations between the corporation and its employees. (19 Am. Jur.
2d 508-509.)

—

—

Power to act as guarantor.
(1) Power generally withheld. The Revised Corporation Code
contains no provision authorizing a corporation to guarantee the
debt of another. The rule is that no corporation has the power, by
any form of contract or endorsement, to become a guarantor or
surety or otherwise lend its credit to another person or corporation.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 11-08,11 April 16, 2008.)

—

"Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 334 [2002].

342

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 36

—

(2) Inclusion in the articles of incorporation. If there is nothing in
its articles of incorporation which confers a corporation the power
to enter into a contract of guarantee or suretyship, it is deemed that
the corporation is not authorized to do so especially since such act
could prove to be disadvantageous to the corporation. Entering into
such contracts would be ultra vires which, according to the strict
construction of the term, is an act not within the express, implied,
and incidental powers of the corporation conferred by the Revised
Corporation Code or the articles of incorporation. It is an act not
positively forbidden, but impliedly forbidden for lack of express
or implied authority. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 08-11, April 16,
2008;” SEC-OGC Opinion No. 16-14, July 7, 2014.) If the articles of
corporation do not provide the power to guaranty, the corporation
does not have the power to guaranty even if it is provided in
the bylaws. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 08-11, April 16, 2008.) The
corporation must amend its articles of incorporation. (SEC Opinion,
March 24, 1982.)
A corporation may guarantee if it is one of its secondary
purposes. (SEC Opinion, July 30, 1987.)“

Sec. 36. Power to Extend or Shorten Corporate Term. —
A private corporation may extend or shorten its term as
stated in the articles of incorporation when approved by
a majority vote of the board of directors or trustees and
ratified at a meeting by the stockholders or members
representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding
capital stock or of Its members. Written notice of the
proposed action and the time and place of the meeting
(2002).
“Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 432
“The SEC has allowed mortgage of corporate assets to secure obligations of another
corporation: (a) when the mortgage is in furtherance of the interest of the corporation,
debt
and in the usual and regular course of business, or (b) when it is made to secure the
does
mortgage
party
of a subsidiary. (SEC Opinion, April 15, 1987.) Even if the third
in
not fall under either of the two (2) instances, to wit: (a) there is no express restriction
illegal;
not
is
mortgage
(b)
the
of
the
or
purpose
bylaws;
the articles of incorporation
the
(c) the consent of all corporate creditors and stockholders has been secured; (d)
or result
transaction is not used as a scheme to defraud or prejudice corporate creditors
the
in the infringement of the Trust Fund Doctrine; (e) the mortgage will not hamper
party
third
continuous business operations of the corporation; and (f) the accumulated
mortgagee/
involved in the mortgage is financially solvent and capable of paying the
1991.)
10,
(SEC
Opinion, Dec
^editor.

Sec. 36

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

343

shall be sent to stockholders or members at their
respective place of residence as shown in the books of
the corporation and must be deposited to the addressee
In the post office with postage prepaid, served personally,
or when allowed in the bylaws or done with the consent
of the stockholder, sent electronically in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Commission on the use of
electronic data message. In case of extension of corporate
term, a dissenting stockholder may exercise the right of
appraisal under the conditions provided in this Code.
Power to extend or shorten corporate
term.

The corporate term of a private corporation created for a specific
period may be extended or shortened by an amendment of the
articles of incorporation approved by the majority vote of the board
of directors or trustees and ratified at a meeting of the stockholders
or members representing at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital
stock or of its members in case of nonstock corporations.
(1) Unlike in Section 15 which governs the amendment
of
articles of incorporation, the amendment under Section 36 must be
taken at a meeting of the stockholders or members and upon a vote,
(see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 25-14,' Sept. 4, 2014.) "Mere
written
assent" would not be sufficient. However, the formal requirements
in the second paragraph of Section 16 must be complied with.
(2) The provision on the taking effect of the amendment in the
third paragraph of Section 15 upon its approval by the SEC is not
applicable because the date of approval by the SEC may be before
the effectivity date of the extension or reduction of the corporate
term. The effectivity of the amendment relates back to the date of its
filing with the SEC if the latter fails to act within six (6) months from
such date for a cause not attributable to the corporation.
(3) A voluntary dissolution of a corporation may be affected
by amending the articles of incorporation to shorten the corporate
term. (Sec. 136.)
'Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 171 (2006).

f

344

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 37

(4) The extension of the corporate term as originally stated in
of incorporation is subject to the limitations or conditions
articles
the
in
provided Section 11.

Appraisal right of dissenting stockholders.

Section 36 grants appraisal right to a dissenting stockholder
(right of stockholder in the cases provided by law to demand
payment of the fair value of his shares) "in case of extension of
corporate term." Such right should also be available to a dissenting
stockholder if the corporate term is shortened as it is recognized in
Section 80(a).
Note that the appraisal right applies only to a stockholder of a
stock corporation.
Sac. 37. Power to Increase or Decrease Capital Stock;
Incur, Create or Increase Bonded Indebtedness. — No
corporation shall increase or decrease its capital stock or
incur, create or increase any bonded indebtedness unless
approved by a majority vote of the board of directors
and by two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock.
Written notice of the time and place of the stockholders'
meeting and the purpose said meeting must be sent to
the stockholders at their places of residence as shown
In the books of the corporation and served personally, or
through electronic means recognized in the corporation’s
bylaws and/or the Commission’s rules as a valid mode for
service or notice. (SA)
A certificate must be signed by a majority of the
directors of the corporation and countersigned by the
chairperson and the secretary of the stockholders’
meeting, setting forth:

(a) That the requirements of this section have been
complied with;
(b) The amount of the Increase or decrease of the
capital stock;

(c) In case of an increase of the capital stock, the
amount of capital stock or number of shares of no-par
stock thereof actually subscribed, the names, nationalities
and addresses of the persons subscribing, the amount

Sec. 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

of capital stock or number of no-par stock subscribed by
each, and the amount paid by each on the subscription in
cash or property, or the amount of capital stock or number
of shares of no-par stock allotted to each stockholder if
such increase is for the purpose of making effective stock
dividend therefor authorized;
(d) Any bonded indebtedness to be incurred, created
or increased;

(e) The amount of stock represented at the meeting;
and
(f) The vote authorizing the increase or decrease of
the capital stock, or the incurring, creating or increasing
of any bonded indebtedness.

Any increase or decrease in the capital stock or the In¬
curring, creating or increasing of any bonded indebtedness
shall require prior approval of the Commission and where
appropriate, of the Philippine Competition Commission,

The application with the Commission shall be made within
six (6) months from the date of approval of the board of

directors and stockholders, which period mav be extended
for justifiable reasons.
Cootes of the certificate shall be kept on file in the
office of the corporation and filed with the Commission

and attached to the original articles of incorporation.
After approval by the Commission and the issuance
by the Commission of its certificate of filing, the capital
stock shall be deemed increase[d] or decreased and
the Incurring, creating or increasing of any bonded

indebtedness authorized, as the certificate of filing may

declare: Provided, That the Commission shall not accept

for filing any certificate of increase of capital stock unless
accompanied by a sworn statement of the treasurer of the
corporation lawfully holding office at the time of the filing
of the certificate, showing that at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the increase in capital stock has been subscribed
and that at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount
subscribed has been paid in actual cash to the corporation
or that property the valuation of which Is equal to twentyfive percent (25%) of the subscription, has been transferred
to the corporation: Provided, further, That no decrease in

345

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

346

Sec. 37

capita! stock shall be approved by the Commission if its
effect shall prejudice the rights of corporate creditors. (A)
Nonstock corporations may incur, create or Increase
bonded indebtedness, when approved by a majority of
the board of trustees and of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
members in a meeting duly called for the purpose. (A)

Bonds issued by a corporation shall be registered
with the Commission which shall have the authority to
determine the sufficiency of the terms thereof.

Power to increase or decrease capital stock.
(1) An increase or reduction in the capital stock of the corporation
is a fundamental change in the corporation. The authority of the
corporation to take such action is not to be implied but exists only
when expressly conferred. (Peck v. Elliot, 79 F. 10; 38 L.R.A. 616; 44
A.L.R. 1315.) The power is granted by Section 37.
(2) Section 37 prescribes the procedure to be complied with to
effect a legal increase or decrease of the capital stock (not capital).

(a) The increase or decrease is now subject to prior
approval of the SEC,*2 and where appropriate, of the Philippine
Competition Commission, (par. 3.)
(b) Even holders of non-voting shares are entitled to vote
on the matter, (see Sec. 6, par. 3[e].)
(c) The written notice requirement (par. 1.) is mandatory
and is obviously designed to protect the interests of minority

stockholders.
(3) The Revised Corporation Code contains no prohibition for a
corporation to increase its authorized capital stock even if the same
has not yet been fully subscribed.

’An amended articles of incorporation is not required to be filed with the SEC to
reflect an increase in the contributed capita! of a nonstock/non-profit corporation. Such
requirement applies only to stock corporations. It is sufficient for purposes of updating
the SEC records, that such fact is reflected in the financial statements. (SEC Opinion, April

2. 1998.)

Sec 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

347

Limitations on the power. • •
(1) As a rule, a corporation cannot lawfully decrease its capital
stock if such decrease will relieve existing subscribers from the
obligation of paying for their unpaid subscriptions without a
valuable consideration for such release, as such an action of the
corporation constitutes an attempted withdrawal of so much capital
upon which corporate creditors are entitled to rely. (Phil. Trust Co.
vs. Rivera, 44 Phil. 649 (1923].)
(2) The corporation must submit proof to the SEC that such
decrease will not prejudice the rights of corporate creditors;
otherwise the SEC shall not approve the decrease.
(3) In case of increase of capital stock, at least 25% of such
increase has been subscribed and at least 25% of the subscription
has been paid to the corporation in actual cash.
(4) A corporation cannot issue stock in excess of the amount
limited by its articles of incorporation; such issue is ultra vires and
the stock so issued is void even in the hands of a bona fide purchaser
for value; and
(5) A reduction or increase of the capital stock can take place
only in the manner and under the conditions prescribed by law. (see
Sec. 37.)

Necessity for Increasing capital stock.
(1) Increase of corporate assets.
An increase of the amount of
the capital stock may be for the purpose of effecting an increase in
the corporate assets by authorizing:
(a) the creation of new shares to be offered and issued at a
fixed valuation; or
(b) the increase of the par value shares authorized to be
issued.
(2) Issuance of stock dividends.
The capital stock may also
be increased without any corresponding increase in the corporate
assets by issuing stock dividends? (18 Am. Jur. 2d 753-755.)

—

—

’It is considered as a cardinal rule in accounting that any business entity has
to
reflect at all times the actual business transactions and/or events in its books
happen. For this reason, the corporation can already enter the increase in its as they
authorized

r

348

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 37

Necessity of new subscription for increase.

(1) An increase in the authorized capital stock cannot be
lawfully accomplished without an actual increase in the assets of
the corporation and additional subscriptions unless such increase
is to effect a stock dividend (Sec. 37, par. 2[c]; see Sec. 42.) previously
authorized.
(a) If the actual capital is increased by accumulated profits
and such profits are distributed to the stockholders in the form
of stock dividends, the capital stock is increased, for the profits
are reinvested in the corporation by transferring the same from
surplus account to a capital account.
(b) The amount corresponding to the stock dividends
declared may cover the required 25% subscription to increase
the authorized capital stock and, if sufficient, will obviate the
necessity of taking in new subscription.
(2) If the increase of the authorized capital stock is for the
purpose of making effective stock dividends previously authorized, the
law requires to be stated in the certificate the matters mentioned
in paragraph 2(c). It is, therefore, clear that stock dividends once
declared and issued are paid, and this rule admits of no exception.
(SEC Opinion, Sept. 9, 1977.)
Effectivity of increase or decrease.

—

Under Section 37 (par. 4.), the
(1) After approval by SEC.
increased or decreased only
stands
of
a
corporation
stock
capital
from and after approval and the issuance by the SEC of its certificate
of filing of increase or decrease of capital stock. Before the issuance
of the certificate of filing of increase of capital stock, the subscribers
to the proposed increase cannot be considered as stockholders and

be accorded the rights as such for the shares subscribed by each.

capital stock as well as the stock dividends declared in its books as soon as the same
has been approved by the stockholders of the corporation. As to the increase of its
authorized capital stock, however, such increase becomes effective only after its approval
and issuance of the certificate filing of the increase by the SEC, and it retroacts to the
day of the approval of such increase by the SEC making valid the entries made in the
books. The stock certificates corresponding to the stock dividends should bear the date of
actual issuance, which must be after the increase in the authorized capital stock has been
approved by the SEC. (SEC Opinion, July 28, 1972.)

Sec. 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

349

—

(2) Use of amount of increase during pendency of application.
Where the corporation, however, is already a going concern, "in
need of steady supply of funds for its business operations," it is
the policy of the SEC to allow the use of the amount representing
the paid-up capital received on account of the proposed increase
of capital stock so as not to disrupt its operations even during the
pendency of the application for increase of the capital stock with the
SEC. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 30, 1975.)

The funds must be utilized purely for business operations and
duly accounted for or recorded in the books of the corporation,
and further, no loans or cash advances must be extended to any of
the subscribers to the proposed increase in the capital stock. (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 9, 1981.)
Over-issue of shares.
(1) An issue of stock by a corporation in excess of the amount
prescribed or limited by its articles of incorporation is ultra vires and
the stock so issued is void even in the hands of a bona fide purchaser for
value. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 757.)
(2) An over-issue of stock does not avoid the original issue. Where
the corporation is permitted by law to increase its capital stock,
mere irregularities in effecting such increase will not necessarily
invalidate the increased issue. (Ibid., 758.)
(3) There is no over-issue where shares have been surrendered and
new shares issued in their stead. The new issue in such case merely
replaces the shares surrendered nor is there an over-issue where the
corporate structure provides for conversion of one class of stock into
another at the option of a stockholder, or where a stock certificate is

issued to replace lost certificates. (Ibid.)

Unauthorized Increase of capital stock.
An attempted unauthorized increase of capital stock amounts
to an over-issue and such stock is, therefore, void and cannot
be
validated by application of the doctrine of estoppel. The same is true
of an increase which is unauthorized because it is attempted
under
such conditions or in such a manner that is not within statutory
authority to make the increase.

350

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 37

It follows that:
(1) Subscriptions for such stock are likewise void both on the
ground of illegality and for want of consideration;
(2) Subscribers for or purchasers of such stock acquire none of
the rights of stockholders, although bona fide purchasers of certificates
therefor may have a right of action against the corporation for

damages;
(3) Subscribers for or purchasers of such shares do not
become liable to creditors of the corporation or on a winding up
as stockholders for unpaid subscriptions, and are not subject to a
statutory liability to creditors imposed upon stockholders; and
(4) Subscribers for or purchasers of such shares from the
corporation may recover horn it, money paid to it under their
subscription of purchase as upon a failure of consideration, or
breach of warranty of the existence of the thing sold, unless they are
precluded from such relief as parties in pari delicto.
Failure to make a specific offer to return dividends received has
no material bearing upon the subscriber's right of action. Where the
corporation cancels the illegal shares and repays to the subscribers
the money paid by them therefor, they are not liable to or for
creditors for the amount so repaid. (18 C.J.S. 750.)
Subscription requirement In case of increase
in capital stock.

(1) Subscription and payments based on the increase in capital stock.
Under Section 37, the treasurer of the corporation must file an
affidavit showing that at least 25% of the increase in capital stock is
subscribed and 25% of the subscription is paid?

—

(a) If the corporation has an authorized capital stock of
P20,000.00 and it is proposed to increase it to P50,000.00, an
increase of P30,000.00 subscriptions must be obtained for not less
‘Where the stockholders authorized the increased the increase of the capital stock of
a corporation but the minimum legal requirement of 25% subscription and 25% payment
could not be met so that no certificate of increase in capital stock was filed with the SEC
the board of directors, acting in good faith, may authorize the refund to the subscribers
of subscription payments to the proposed increase. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 3, 1971, p. 262.)

Sec. 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

351

that P7,500.00 and payments in cash or in property amounting
to Pl,875.00 must be made on account of such subscriptions.
(b) It is not required for purposes of increase of capital stock
that every subscriber shall pay 25% of his subscription. The
paid-up requirement is met if "25% of the amount subscribed"
is paid although some subscribers have paid less than 25%, or
even have not paid any amount.
(c) It would seem that the minimum 25% paid-up
requirement applies only to par value shares because a subscriber
to no-par value shares must pay in full his subscription since
under Section 6, par. 7), "shares of capital stock issued without
par value shall be deemed fully paid and nonassessable and the
holder of such shares shall not be liable to the corporation or to
its creditors in respect thereto."
Ways of increasing or decreasing authorized
capital stock.

There are at least three (3) ways by which the authorized capital
stock may be increased or decreased:
(1) By increasing or decreasing the number of shares authorized
to be issued without increasing or decreasing the par value thereof;
(2) By increasing or decreasing the par value of each share
without increasing or decreasing the number thereof; and
(3) By increasing or decreasing both the number of shares
authorized to be issued and the par value thereof.

ILLUSTRATION:
Assume that the authorized capital stock of X Corporation
is fixed at Pl,000,000 divided into 100,000 shares with a par
value of P10.00 per share. The capital stock may be increased
(or decreased):

The number of shares is increased (decreased) to 150,000
(75,000) shares with the same par value of P10.00 each share; or
the par value per share is increased (decreased) to P15.00 (P5.00)
without increasing (decreasing) the number of authorized
shares; or the number of shares is increased (decreased) to
150,000 (75,000) and at the same time increasing (decreasing)
the par value of each share to P15.00 (P5.00).

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

352

Sec 37

Increase by way of stock dividends.
(1) Stock dividends (see Sec. 42.) are ordinarily declared
out of the authorized but unissued shares of the corporation. A
corporation, however, may also increase its capital stock by way of
stock dividends without touching its unissued shares if there are
sufficient retained earnings to cover the increase, (see Sec. 61[e].)
(2) If the proposed stock dividend would result in the issuance
of shares of stock in excess of the corporation's authorized capital
stock, the over-issue is null and void. Such dividend declaration
may be validly done provided that the corporation simultaneously
increases its capital stock and applies the proposed stock dividends
as full payment of the subscriptions to the capital stock increase.
(SEC Opinion, July 30, 1969.)
Par value or no-par value shares for
the authorized increase.

Under the authority granted under Section 37 and under Section
6, the increased capital stock may be divided into par value shares
and no-par value shares. In other words, the increase in capital stock
could belong to any of these two (2) classes of shares or to both.

The issue of no-par value shares out of the authorized increase
affords a means by which the corporation may attract investors. In
the course of its business, the corporation may meet reverses. Its
assets are reduced and the true money value of the issued shares
may be below their par value. Under the prohibition contained in
Section 61 (par. 1.), the unissued shares cannot be sold for less that
their par value. Buyers, however, will be reluctant to pay par value
because the outstanding shares have a book value or actual value
below par. Meanwhile, the corporation needs more capital. In this
particular case, it may issue no-par value shares, the selling price of
which may be fixed in the manner provided in Section 61 (last par.)
of the Revised Corporation Code. (C.G. Alvendia, op. cit., p. 199.)
Reduction of capital stock.
When a
(1) By decrease of number of authorized shares.
corporation is authorized to reduce its capital stock, it may do so

—

also:
(a) by redeeming redeemable shares (see Sec. 8.) or
purchasing its shares (see Sec. 40.) and cancelling or retiring the
same, including treasury shares (see Sec. 9.);

See 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

353

(b) by accepting a surrender of shares and give the holders
in exchange therefor a proportionate amount of its assets,
provided no rights of creditors are involved, or issue bonds for
that purpose or exchange another class of stock for that retired,
or exchange its outstanding shares for a smaller number of
shares; or

(c) by cancelling shares not yet issued.5

—

(2) By decrease of par value of authorized shares.
When a
corporation lawfully reduces its capital stock pursuant to Section
37, the shares which are retired or reduced no longer exist for any
purpose. If the shares acquired are not retired or cancelled, no
decrease in capital stock is effected, for the shares exist as treasury
shares, (see Sec. 9.) The capital stock may be decreased, however,
without decreasing the number of authorized shares into which it is
divided as stated in the articles of incorporation by decreasing the
par value of such shares.
The par value of shares of stocks of a corporation may be
reduced to eliminate its deficit.
The reduction or decrease surplus or surplus arising from the
reduction of capital stock under Section 37 in excess of the deficit
may be declared only as stock dividends since it partakes of the
nature or paid-in capital in excess of par value, (see SEC Opinion,
Aug. 8, 1991; see Sec. 139.)

Effect of reduction on liability for unpaid
subscription.
(1) As against corporate creditors.
A corporation has no
power to release an original subscriber to its capital stock from the
obligation of paying for his shares without a valuable consideration
for such release, and as against creditors, a reduction of the capital
stock can take place only in the manner and under the conditions
prescribed by the statute. (18
C.J.S. 746, 873-874.) Section 37 (par. 4.)

—

’A statute providing that a
"at any meeting called for the purpose,
may increase or reduce its capitalcorporation,
stock and the number of shares therein, does not
authorize a corporation to reduce its capital stock by purchasing the shares of a particular
Mockholder, unless all consent. In order that such reduction may operate
justly to all the
stockholders, each stockholder should be allowed to surrender such proportion
of his
Mock as the amount of the proposed reduction bears to the
whole amount of the capital
Mock. (6-A
Fletcher, p. 385.)

354

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 37

provides "that no decrease of the capital stock shall be approved by
the Commission, if its effect shall prejudice the rights of corporate
creditors."
Hence, "a resolution adopted at a meeting of stockholders
to the effect that the capital should be reduced by 50% and the
subscribers released from their obligation to pay the unpaid balance
of their subscription in excess of 50% of the same, was an attempted
withdrawal of so much capital from the fund which the company's
creditors were entitled ultimately to rely and having been effected
without complying with the statutory requirements, was wholly
ineffective." (Phil. Trust Co. vs. Rivera, 44 Phil. 470 [1925].)

—

One object
(2) As between the corporation and the stockholders.
at
only
corporate
diminished
be
to
of requiring capital stock
to
warn the
and
insure
publicity
to
is
called
meetings formally
This is
change.
intended
the
of
with
the
corporation
public dealing
reducing
and
contrivances
with
arrangements
secret
incompatible
capital stock by buying in the shares or by other devices, so as to
release stockholders from their obligations to creditors. But failure
to give the prescribed notice will not invalidate the reduction, if it
is otherwise valid as between the corporation and the stockholders
where all the stockholders consent (18 C.J.S. 747.), subject to the

rights of corporate creditors.
Distribution of surplus on reduction.
(1) Where there is no impairment of capital. Upon a reduction of,
capital stock, if capital has not been impaired by losses, there occurs
a surplus of assets to the extent of the reduction. Unless the rights of
creditors will be affected or the capital impaired, the directors may
make an equitable distribution of such surplus or so much thereof as
may not be required in carrying on the business for the best interests
of the stockholders.
(2) Where reduction is made to meet impairment. In other words,
there can be a distribution of only those assets over and above the
amount equal to the par value of the outstanding reduced capital
and the amount necessary to discharge the existing corporate
indebtedness. Thus, as a rule, where capital stock is impaired and a
reduction is made merely to meet that impairment, there will be no
distribution of assets among the shareholders. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 764765.)

—

—

Sec. 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

355

—

(3) Distribution resulting from decrease. As a rule, distribution
of assets or properties of a corporation can be done only upon
lawful dissolution of the corporation and after payment of its debts
and liabilities. The Revised Corporation Code recognizes that there
may be a distribution of assets or properties of the corporation after
a decrease of its capital stock, (see Sec. 139, last par.)
The Trust Fund doctrine considers subscribed capital as a trust
fund for the payment of the debts of the corporation, to which
the creditors may look for satisfaction. Until the liquidation of the
corporation, no part of the subscribed capital may be returned
or released to the stockholder without violating this principle.
However, a release of a subscriber from the payment of his unpaid
subscription may be effected through a reduction of the capital
stock, and as against creditors, such reduction can take place only in
the manner and under the conditions prescribed by Section 37. (SEC
Opinion, May 13, 2002.)
Persons entitled to question increase
or decrease of capital stock.
(1) An unauthorized increase or reduction of capital stock may
be attacked and avoided by the corporation itself or by dissenting
stockholders absent an estoppel; or by creditors of the corporation,
or by a receiver or assignee representing them, insofar as the
transaction affects their rights.
(2) An unauthorized increase of stock may be attacked by
subscribers for or purchasers of such stock in avoidance of their
subscriptions, or for the purpose of recovering what they have paid,
unless precluded as being in pari delicto. (18 C.J.S. 753; see National
Exchange Co. vs. Dexter, 51 Phil. 610 [1928]; Salmon Dexter Co. vs.
Unson, 47 Phil. 649 [1925].)

Meaning of bonded indebtedness.
(1) A corporate bond is an obligation to pay a definite sum of

money at a future time at fixed rate of interest.

(2) In an opinion, the SEC explains the meaning of "bonded

indebtedness":

A comparison of Section 37 of the Corporation Code of the

Philippines with Section 359 of the Civil Code of California shows

356

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 37

that our law on the subject of creation and increase of "bonded
indebtedness" is an adaptation of the law of California. Unfortunately,
neither the statutory law of that state nor its judicial decisions afford
any guidance as to the meaning of the term "bonded indebtedness."
The only decision bearing upon the question which has been
rendered by the California court up to the time is one articulated
in Underhill v. Santa Barbara Land & Building & Improvement Co.,
93 Cal. 300, 307, which holds that a non-negotiable note issued by
a corporation, although secured by mortgage, does not constitute
a "bonded indebtedness" and therefore does not require the
consent of shareholders, (cited in Fischer, the Philippine Law of
Stock Corporation, sec. 313, par. 180). The two principal elements
of distinction are time element and division of the whole debt into
like aliquot part units of round denominations, represented by
negotiable certificate of indebtedness, generally called "bonds",
the purpose being to enable the corporation to make use of the
borrowed money for a long period of years, to obtain it from a large
number of people, and to facilitate the transfer of the certificate
of indebtedness from hand to hand during the term of collective
obligations. Such bond issues are usually secured by the transfer to
a trustee of a specific property to secure the payment of debt. The
effect of the creation and issuance of such obligation is a borrowing
from the general public. Hence, whenever the corporation adopts
this method of borrowing funds, the resulting obligations constitute
"bonded indebtedness" subject to the statutory provision of the
corporation law as to increase or creation. (SEC Opinion, April 29,
1987.)

Thus, the term "bonded indebtedness" refers to negotiable
corporate bonds which are secured by mortgage on corporate

property."
Accordingly, if the notes are not secured by mortgage on
corporate property, the same need not comply with the requirements
of Section 37 of the Revised Corporation Code. (SEC Opinion, July
13, 1994; see SEC Opinion, April 6, 1990.) Similarly, if the debentures
are not secured by collaterals, they are not bonded indebtedness in
the true sense and will not require approval of the stockholders
although it is good corporate policy to require it. (SEC Opinion,

April 19, 1987.)

Sec 37

357

. TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Power to incur, create, or increase
bonded Indebtedness.
The power of a corporation to incur, create, or increase bonded
indebtedness or indebtedness secured by its notes or bonds is
likewise conferred by Section 37. But it is also a power implied from
the express powers.

—

(1) Stock and nonstock corporation.
A business corporation,
absent restrictions may borrow money whenever the necessity of
its business so requires and issue security or customary evidence or
debt such as notes, bonds or mortgages. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 496.) Under
Section 37 (par. 5.), nonstock corporations are authorized to incur,
create, or increase bonded indebtedness, (see SEC Opinion, Nov. 20,
1986; SEC Opinion, April 22, 1981.)

—

(2) Procedure and formalities.
The procedure prescribed in
Section 37 for incurring bonded indebtedness is the same as the

procedure for increasing or decreasing the capital stock except that
the certificate need not state the matters in Nos. (2) and (3) and is not
required to be accompanied by the sworn statement of the treasurer
of the corporation concerning the amount of the increased capital
stock subscribed and paid. The prescription of the formalities with
respect to "bonded indebtedness" only, implied of necessity a
distinction between debts which are "bonded" and all other debts.
(Fisher, op. cit., p. 312.)

—

(3) Shares and members entitled to vote.
Even holders of
non-voting shares or non-voting members, as the case may be, are
entitled to vote on die matter. (Sec. 6, par. 3[d].)
(4) Prior approval of, and registration of bonds with SEC.
Any
incurring, creating, or increasing by the corporation of any bonded
indebtedness is subject to prior approval of the SEC. (Sec. 37, par.
4.) The bonds issued by the corporation have to registered with the
SEC which is given the authority to determine the sufficiency of the
terms thereof. (Ibid., last par.)

—

The same considerations for stocks as provided in Section 62
insofar as they may be applicable may be used for the issuance of
bonds by a corporation. (Sec. 61, par. 3.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

358

When obligations constitute bonded
indebtedness.

Sec. 37

'■

—

(1) Notes and bonds. When a corporation borrows money, its
indebtedness may be evidenced by notes or bonds as its primary
security.
(a) If the amount borrowed is small and if it is borrowed in
a single sum, or from a few persons, or for a short time, notes are
usually given.
(b) If, however, the amount is large and obtained from
a number of people and extends over a period of years, the
corporate obligation is preferably and usually evidenced by
bonds.

—

(2) Distinctions.
The difference between a corporate note
and a bond is not always clearly marked. Both are promises to pay

money.

(a) The phrasing of the bond is usually more formal than
that of the note.
(b) Also, payment of bonds is usually, though not invariably,
secured as to both principal and interest by certain specified
property held for the purpose under a formal deed of trust.
(c) A bond issue consists of a number of bonds which, while
they may vary as to denomination, some may be registered and
some unregistered, are all of like general tenor and, if secured,
are all secured.

—

(3) Other characteristics of bonds. The two principal elements of
distinction are time duration and the division of the whole debt into
like aliquot part units of round number denominations, represented

by negotiable or assignable certificates of indebtedness.
(a) Such certificates are generally called "bonds," the
purpose being to enable the corporation to make use of the
borrowed money for long period of years, to obtain it from
a large number of people, and to facilitate the transfer of the
certificate of indebtedness from hand to hand during the term
of the collective obligation.
(b) Such bond issues are usually secured by the transfer to a
trustee of specific property to secure payment of the debt.

Sec 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

359

(c) The bonds usually, but not necessarily, run to bearer and
are transferable by delivery.
(d) The effect of the creation and issuance of such obligation
is a borrowing from the general public.4

ILLUSTRATIONS:
(1) A Mortgage Trust Indenture was executed by X
Corporation under these facts: X Corporation will obtain
credit /Ioan accommodations from three of four creditors,
each evidenced by a promissory note. As security for the
payment of the promissory note, X Corporation constituted a
mortgage in favor of each creditor, Z, a bank, was appointed
by X Corporation with the consent of the creditors as common
Trustee-Mortgagee. The mortgage is covered by an agreement
denominated as Mortgage Trust Indenture executed by X

Corporation to Z.

In addition to the mortgage contract, Mortgage Participation
Certificates (MPC) were issued by Z to creditors to evidence
the extent of their interest in the mortgaged property. As each
promissory note or amortization is paid, the corresponding
MPC covering the same is cancelled. This process enables X
Corporation to borrow again, using the same mortgaged
property via MPC as security with the same or a new creditor
protected by a first lien on the mortgaged property to the extent
of his interest.
Is the issuance of the MPC subject to the requirements of
bonded indebtedness under Section 38?
No. When a corporation secures its indebtedness whether by
notes or bonds, such notes or bonds, being the primary
security on the principal obligations, are created under Section
38. From the features of the MPC, it is clear, however, that they
are issued by Z (trustee-mortgagee) merely to evidence the
‘Whenever a corporation resorts to this method of borrowing funds, the resulting
obligations constitute a "bonded indebtedness," subject to the requirements of Sec. 38 of
the Revised Corporation Code as to creation or increase. (H.C. Bentley, Corporation Fi¬
nance and Accounting, cited in Fisher, pp. 315-316.) Other bonds issued by a corporation
against its general credit are not covered by the provisions of Sec. 38, but the SEC Rules
require their submission to the SEC for approval before they can be issued to the public.
(SEC Opinion, April 6, 1990.)

360

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 37

undivided interests of the creditors in the mortgaged property
covered by the Mortgage Trust Indenture. They strengthen the
claim of the creditors to the mortgaged property and in case of
default of X Corporation (debtor-trustor), the creditor will have
recourse to the mortgaged property in the hands of Z. (SEC
Opinion, Sept. 6, 1977.)
(2) X Corporation will borrow from a few lenders the
amount of P50 million to be evidenced by interest-bearing
promissory notes, to finance its subdivision/housing
development projects. The credit transaction will be for a
term of ten (10) years payable in periodic installments and the
principal, interest and premium due on outstanding balance,
will be secured by a guaranty to be executed by Y Corporation,
in its capacity as parent company of X Corporation, and a real
estate mortgage over certain properties of Y Corporation.
Z Corporation, an affiliate of X Corporation, will underwrite
the mortgage note issue for X Corporation.
Is the mortgage note issue an ordinary term loan or a bond
issue?

The features of the transaction characterize a term loan, as
distinguished from a bond issue. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 18, 1977.)
The corporate bond contract.

—

(1) Parties. There are three (3) parties to a corporation bond
contract: the borrowing corporation, the bondholders, and the
trustee. The trustee is a bank or trust company, which is chosen and
paid by the corporation but serves mainly to protect the bondholders.
(2) Trustee's functions. They usually include:

—

(a) Countersigning the bonds to assure authenticity;
(b) Collecting interest and principal payments from the
debtor-corporation and distributing them to those entitled;
(c) Acting as mortgagee or collateral holder if the bonds are

secured;

(d) Verifying the performance of the
debtor-corporation's
promises on behalf of the bondholders; and
(e) Taking legal action on behalf of the
bondholders if

necessary.

Sec 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

361

The bondholders cannot usually be parties to the framing of
the bond contract, but they adopt its provisions when they acquire
bonds.
The contract itself, known as the "bond
(3) Bond indenture.
is
legal document which constitutes
lengthy
complete,
a
indenture,"
the
between
parties. The bonds themselves are
the agreement
certificates of participation in their contract. In the indenture, the
corporation promises to pay principal and interest, promises to pay
the trustee, promises to pay its taxes and other debts, and promises
to maintain its property and conduct its business prudently.
(4) Usual provisions.
The bond indenture will contain many
other provisions, including:
(a) the total amount of the bonds authorized to be issued
under the indenture or a statement that the amount is unlimited;
(b) a statement that additional bonds may be issued in the
future (open indenture) or that the first issue will be the only one
permitted (closed indenture);
(c) statement of the purposes for which the additional
bonds may be issued, such as for construction or acquisition of
property;
(d) stipulation that all bonds must be identical in terms
or that a series of issues, possibly having different interest
rates, maturity dates, and call prices, may be sold under the
basic indenture (in the latter case, each series would have a
supplemental indenture detailing its special features);
(e) details of the collateral or mortgage security to be
provided;

—

—

(f) mechanics of interest payments, registration of bonds,
and principal repayments; and

(g) terms of special features such as sinking funds, call
provisions, and conversion options. (G.A. Christy & J.C.
Clendenin, "Introduction to Investments," 7th ed. [1978], pp.
138-139.)

362

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 37

Bond terminology.

Corporate bond issue are commonly given titles which
undertake to describe the terms of the contract. Thus:
(1) Promissory instruments running five (5) years or longer are
"bonds" or "debentures,"’ shorter maturities are "notes."
(2) An equipment obligation (Philadelphia plan) may be a
"trust certificate."
(3) To identify the type of lien, the word "mortgage," leasehold
mortgage," "collateral trust," and "secured" are used.
(4) For further clarification, adjectives such as "first," "second,"
"refunding," "consolidated," "general," "divisional," "prior," and
"adjustment" may be used singly or in combination.
(5) To describe the pledged property, such words as "bridge,"
"terminal," or "equipment" may be included.
(6) Additionally, such descriptive terms as "income sinking
fund," "purchase money," "extended," "series," "serial,"
"participating," and "convertible," are used. (Ibid., op. cit., p. 154.)
Type of bonds.
(1) Common types.

—

They may be secured or unsecured.

The major types of secured bonds are:
(a) Mortgage bonds or debt instruments of financing secured
by a lien on specifically named property. Land, building,
equipment, and other fixed assets are the kinds of property
most commonly pledged as security;
(b) Collateral trust bonds or debt instruments secured by a
pledge of either stocks or bonds, or both which are deposited
with a trustee; and
(c) Equipment obligations or debt instruments to secure
financing loans on locomotives, railway cars, buses, large trucks,
and similar equipment. The most outstanding characteristics
’The normal distinction between a corporate "bond" (bonded indebtedness) and
a corporate ' debenture or "note" is that the former is usually secured by a mortgage
on corporate property while the latter usually is not. (5-A Words and Phrases, p. 128.)
Debentures are serial obligations or notes issued on the basis of the general credit of the
corporation and since they are not secured by corporate property, they are not bonded
indebtedness as contemplated in Sec. 38.

Sec. 37

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

363

of an equipment obligation is the railroad equipment trust
certificate secured by title to rolling stock, such as cars and
locomotives.’
Examples of unsecured bonds are:
(a) Straight debenture bonds or general credit bonds not
secured by any specific property. The earning of the issuing
corporation protects the debenture bondholders;
(b) Guaranteed bonds or that type for which one or more
individuals or corporations other than the issuer guarantees the
payment of interest or principal or both; and
(c) Subordinated debenture bonds or debt instruments
specifying that the holder's rights are inferior in the event
or liquidation or recognition to any existing and future debt
defined in the indenture as senior debt. (Soldofsky & Olive, op.
cit., pp. 64-65.)
(2) Special types.
Besides the common types of bonds, there
are hybrid securities or bonds which have features similar to those
characteristics of common stock or preferred stock. These are:
(a) Convertible debentures or bonds which may be exchanged
for the common stock of the issuing corporation at a fixed
price by a predetermined redemption rate at the option of the
bondholder;

—

(b) Income bonds, sometimes called adjustment bonds, or debt
instruments with a fixed rate of interest payable only if earned
and declared by the board of directors. They are hybrid secu¬
rities combining some of the characteristics of preferred and
straight bonds; and
•Under the Philadelphia (or equipment lease) plan, a manufacturer builds equipment
to a railroad's specifications and then sells the equipment to the trustee who leases the
equipment to the railroad. Equipment trust certificates are sold by the trustee to investors
*o pay the manufacturer. The annual installment payments over a period of 15 years
or less are at rates calculated to be well within the economic life of the equipment, and
•here is a substantial down payment as further protection. (Soldofsky & Olive, "Financial
Management" 1974 Ed., pp. 62-65.)
Under the New York (conditional sale) plan, the trustee receives the equipment from
•he manufacturer and sells it to the purchasing corporation in return for a series of
equipment trust notes. These notes are interest-bearing and of serial maturities; when
sold to investors, they provide the money to pay the manufacturer. When the notes are
off by the purchasing corporation, the conditional sale becomes final and complete,
iristy & Clendenin, op. cit., p. 144.)

Sd

364

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 38

(c) Bonds with warrant or stock purchase warrant, or an option
or a right, exercisable by its holder, to purchase stock at a stated
price during a stipulated period of time. Bond warrant issues
are usually debentures, and the warrants are detachable or
non-detachable. Detachable warrants are preferred by investors
because such warrants may be sold or exercised apart from
the bond, whereas non-detachable warrants cannot be sold or
exercised separately from the bond. (Soldofsky and Olive, op.
cit., 65-69.)

—

Sec. 38. Power to Deny Preemptive Right.
All
stockholders of a stock corporation shall enjoy preemptive
right to subscribe to all issues or disposition of shares of
any class, in proportion to their respective shareholdings,
unless such right is denied by the articles of incorporation
or an amendment thereto: Provided, That such preemptive
right shall not extend to shares to be issued in compliance
with laws requiring stock offerings or minimum stock
ownership by the public; or to shares to be issued in good

faith with the approval of the stockholders representing
two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, in
exchange for property needed for corporate purposes or
in payment of a previously contracted debt

Right of preemption of stockholders.

Whenever the capital stock of a corporation is increased and
new shares of stock are issued, the new issue must be offered first to
the stockholders who are such at the time the increase was made in
proportion to their existing shareholdings1 and on equal terms with
other holders of the original stocks before subscriptions are received
from the general public, (see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 3-13,2 April 7,
2013.) For example, if a stockholder with preemptive right owns
'The mere fact that the subscriber is entitled by right of preemption to only a portion
of the total shares subscribed for does not militate against nor vitiate the validity of a
subscription contract (see Sec. 60.) partially paid for and duly recorded in the books of the
corporation. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 17, 1964.)
The corporation may still allow its stockholders who failed to exercise their
preemptive rights within the prescribed period, to subscribe at a later time especially
when fault is not attributable to the latter and provided all previous non-subscribing
stockholders are given the opportunity again. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 9, 1990.)
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 360 (2002].

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Sec. 38

365

20% of the outstanding shares of the corporation, he may subscribe
20% of any shares of stock issued by the corporation.
This is known as the right of preemption or preemptive right of
stockholders.
All stockholders whose names appear in the stock and transfer
book of the corporation on the date of the meeting authorizing the
issuance of shares are entitled to the preemptive right under Section
38 of the Revised Corporation Code. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-19,
March 13, 2019.)

—

(1) Availability of right to new issues of shares and unissued
shares. The rule is that preemptive right is recognized only with
respect to new issue of shares, and not with respect to additional
issues of originally authorized shares. This is on the theory that
when a corporation at its first inception offers its first shares, it
is presumed to have offered all of those which it is authorized to
issue. An original subscriber is deemed to have taken his shares

knowing that they form a definite proportionate part of the whole
number of authorized shares. When the shares left unsubscribed are
later reoffered, he cannot therefore claim dilution of interest. (SEC
Opinion No. 03-05, April 27, 2005, citing Benito vs. SEC, 123 SCRA
722, 726 (1983].)

—

(2) Acquisition by transferor of right. When shares of stock are
sold by the holder after an increase of the capital stock has been
voted, the purchaser acquires, as an incident to the stock, the same
right of preference in subscribing for or purchasing the new stock as
was possessed by the transferor. (Hogg v. Eckhardt, 175 N.E. 382.)

This principle, however, does not apply to transfers
where the assignors have exercised their preemptive rights to
subscribe to new issues. To rule otherwise would allow the
preemptive right attached to the original stock to be exercised twice.
(SEC Opinion, Nov. 28, 1990.)
(3) Right subject to exceptions. The application of the right of
preemption in a stock corporation depends on a consideration of
all the surrounding circumstances of each case. In other words, the
right is not absolute as it admits of certain exceptions.

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

366

Sec 38

Reason for the grant of right
The rule aims to safeguard the right of a stockholder to preserve
unaltered and unimpaired his proportionate influence and interest
in the corporation and the relative value of his holdings.

This right is based on the principle that a stockholder, in
subscribing to shares of stock, does so under the understanding
that his equity is fixed by the relation which the number of shares
he subscribes bears to the total authorized capital stock, issued or
unissued, subscribed or unsubscribed, at the time of his subscription,
as shown in the company's articles of incorporation, and should
not, therefore, be diluted by the issuance of additional shares as
to affect his rights to vote, to dividends, and to the distribution of
assets upon liquidation, without first giving him the opportunity to
subscribe to such shares in proportion to his shareholdings. (SECOGC Opinion No. 17-11, March 22, 2011.)
The purpose of the right is to protect from impairment
and dilution the basic rights of the existing stockholders in the
corporation, i.e., to voting control, to dividend payments, and
to the net assets of the corporation. However, a stockholder may
waive such right. The waiver should be given individually by the
stockholder concerned or by another by way of a special power of
attorney. Being a personal right, the waiver cannot be made by the
corporation itself through a stockholders' resolution. (SEC Opinion,
Dec. 12, 1994.)
A stockholder cannot be forced to waive the right even if majority
of the other stockholders opt to waive it. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 0808, March 31, 2008.)
ILLUSTRATION:
X Corporation has an original stock of P100,000 divided
into 1,000 shares with a par value of Pl 00 per share. A owns 500
shares. Subsequently, the capital stock is increased to P200,000
(to 1,000 more shares). Both the old and new shares are voting

shares.

—

(1) Right to vote. A must be given a right to subscribe to
500 of the new shares before they are offered to others. If A is
allowed to subscribe to only 100 shares of the increased stock,
his voting control would be reduced from 50% (500/1,000) to
only 30% (600/2,000).

Sec 38

367

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

—

(2) Right to net earnings as dividends.
Suppose the
corporation made a net earnings of P50,000.00. Had this entire
amount been distributed as cash dividends before the increase,
each stockholder, including A, would have received P50.00
(P50,000.00/ 1,000) per share. After the increase, the dividend
would be reduced to P25.00 (P50,000.00/2,000) per share.
(3) Right to net corporate assets after liquidation.
Assume
now that the total assets of the corporation amount to P170,000,
with liabilities of P20,000.00 and surplus of P50,000. Thus, its
net assets or net worth is P150,000.00. Therefore, the actual
value per share is P150.00 (P150,000.00/ 1,000). If the new
shares were to be issued at their par value of Pl 00, the actual
value of the original shares would be reduced to Pl 25.00

—

(P250,000.00/ 2,000).

If the rule of preemption will not be observed, it is evident
that existing stockholders who are allowed to subscribe to
more that their pro rata shares in the increase of the capital stock
and new stockholders will unjustly benefit by P25.00 per share
at the expense of the stockholders whose preemptive right is
violated. In the event of liquidation, each stockholder, old and
new, will participate in the net assets of the corporation at the
rate of P125.00 per share.

Non-avallablllty of preemptive right.

The preemptive right of stockholders of a stock corporation
"to subscribe to all issues or disposition of shares of any class in
proportion to their respective shareholdings 'may be "denied by
the articles of incorporation or an amendment thereto" or may fall
under any of the exceptions.5 (Sec. 38.)
(1) Unless so denied or excepted, the right should be granted to
a holder of shares although they are of a class different from those
issued or disposed of. For example, holders of Common "A" shares
are entitled to subscribe to Common "B" shares in proportion to their
interest, but they cannot be required to subscribe to the Common
The SEC requires an explicit written waiver of the right of preemption from the
non -subscribing stockholders every time it processes an application for increase in capital
stock.

368

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 38

"B" shares, especially since the latter are of a class different from the
class they are holding.4
(2) A stockholder whose preemptive right is violated may
maintain an action to compel the corporation to give him that right.
If the denial is by an amendment to the articles of incorporation, he
may exercise his appraisal right under Section 80(a).
Shares to which right not available.

Under Section 38, the preemptive right of stockholders to
subscribe to all issues or disposition of shares in proportion to their
respective shareholdings extends "to all issues or disposition of
shares of any class" (such as treasury shares) unless denied by the
articles of incorporation or an amendment thereto (in which case
they are deemed to have waived the right), and except to:
(1) Shares to be issued in compliance with laws requiring stock
offerings or minimum stock ownership by the public;
(2) Shares to be issued in good faith with the approval of
stockholders representing 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock in
exchange for property needed for corporate purposes; and
(3) Shares to be issued in good faith with the approval of the
stockholders representing 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock in
payment of previously contracted debt.
The preemptive right does not extend to the issue of shares
in No. (1) because of the need to comply with a legal requirement
which is paramount to the exercise of the right; and in Nos. (2) and
(3) for reasons based upon practical convenience and necessity and
the exercise of discretion of the board of directors in making new
issues of shares to enable the corporation to carry on the corporate

business.
*On granting preemptive rights toexisting shareholders, the law makes no distinction
between newly-issued shares and previously unsubscribed shares from the original
authorized capital stock. The right, however, may not be exercised by shareholders who
have already exceeded the ownership threshold laid down in Sec. 33.2(c) of the Securities
Regulations Code which takes precedence on Sec. 38 of the Corporation Code. (SECOGC Opinion No. 41-11, Oct. 5, 2011.) It is not clear whether common stockholders have
a preemptive right to acquire preferred shares and preferred stockholders to acquire
common shares. But if the preferred stock is convertible to common, holders of common
shares must be given the right.
Under the Old Corporation Law (Act No. 1459.), preemptive rights are recognized
only with respect to new issue of shares.

Sec 38

369

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Applicability to qualifying shares.
If the sole purpose of transferring the stock is only to qualify the
transferee for the election in the board of the corporation without
giving him the beneficial ownership thereof, the transfer may not
be violative of the stockholders' first refusal provision in the articles
of incorporation. Said transfer would be more of a trust and not
a sale or transfer contemplated by the first refusal proviso. In this
particular case, the transferee should be described in the corporate
books and certificate to be issued merely as nominee or trustee of the
transferor. The notation shall serve as notice to both the corporation
and third parties that the transferee only holds the share as nominee
for the benefit of the real owner. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 15, 1991; see
SEC Opinion, May 21, 1986; SEC Opinion, Feb. 12, 1985.)
Offering of remaining unsubscribed
shares.

—

(1) To public or any person acceptable to corporation.
If the
unissued shares, whether from the original or increased capital
stock, corresponding to one stockholder are not subscribed or
purchased by him within the period fixed for the exercise of his
preemptive right, he is deemed to have impliedly waived his
right to subscribe to the same or to the balance if he subscribes
only to a portion. It does not follow that the shares should again
be offered on a pro rata basis to stockholders who took advantage
of their right of preemption. This is because if they exercise their
preemptive rights, their relative and proportionate voting strength
in the corporation will not be affected adversely. (SEC Opinion, Sept.
24, 1974, citing C.G. Alvendia, The Law of Private Corporations,
pp. 172-173.)

Thus, the remaining unsubscribed shares may be offered to the
public on first-come, first-served basis or to any person acceptable
to the corporation without violating the preemptive rights of such

stockholders.

—

(2) To stockholders of record.
As a matter of policy, the SEC
considers it a sound corporate practice to offer always the remaining
shares to the stockholders of record whenever practical and feasible
before offering them to the public (Ibid.; May 14, 1990, Dec. 6, 1994,
March 23, 1998.), although this "right of first refusal” is not provided
for in the articles of incorporation.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

370

Sec. 38

ILLUSTRATION:
A owns 20% of the capital stock of Corporation X. He
exercised his preemptive right to new shares issued by the
corporation. B, another stockholder, did not exercise his right
with respect to the shares corresponding to him. His shares
were offered to and purchased by stockholder C.
Here, A still maintains his 20% interest in the corporation
although C's proportionate holdings increased. A has no cause
for complaint if his 20% interest is not reduced.
Time within which the right may
be exercised.

The time within which a stockholder must exercise his
preemptive right is generally fixed in the resolution authorizing the
increase of capital stock.
A majority of the stockholders have a right to fix the time to suit
themselves and the interests of the corporation. The only limitation
upon the exercise of the prerogative is that every stockholder shall
be treated alike and shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to
subscribe. (Hayt v. Great American Ins. Co., 200 Pa. 516, 50 A. 154.)
Parenthetically, such resolution may also require the stockholders
desiring to exercise his preemptive right to pay a deposit on the new
stock at the time of subscribing. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 29, 1976.)
Preemptive right as to treasury shares.

(1) In close corporations, the preemptive right of stockholders
extends to all stock to be issued (i.e., old or new) including
re-issuance of treasury shares, whether for money or for property
or personal services, or in payment of corporate debts, unless the
articles of incorporation provide otherwise. (Sec. 101.)
(2) In widely-held corporations, it would seem that existing
stockholders have also a preemptive right as to treasury shares
(Sec. 9.) because of the use of the phrase "disposition of shares of
any class" in Section 38. Note, however, that sale or disposition of
the treasury stock is not considered a new issue, (see SEC Opinion
No. 03-05, April 27, 2005, citing Benito vs. SEC, 123 SCRA 722, 726

[1983].)

Sec 38

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

371

Since the funds used in reacquiring the treasury shares come
from the surplus profits of the corporation, which could have been
declared instead as dividends, it is a desirable policy to recognize
the preemptive rights of stockholders over treasury shares.

Price of new stock offerings.
(1) Interests of the corporation and all stockholders to be considered.
The concept of preemptive rights is given by law to safeguard two
(2) distinct interests of stockholders
protection against dilution
of their equity in the corporation and protection against dilution
of their proportionate voting control. The law, however, gives no
indication regarding the price that a corporation must receive for

—

—

new shares.
The power to determine the price must be exercised for the
benefit of the corporation and in the interests of all stockholders.
(2) Where price far below fair market value.
When new shares
are issued at prices far below their fair value in a corporation with
only a limited market for its shares, existing stockholders who do
not want to invest or cannot invest additional funds can have their
equity interest in the corporation diluted to the vanishing point
(3) Right of stockholders to maintain proportionate equity and
at the same time not to acquire additional shares. One part of the
stockholders' right to maintain proportionate equity in a corporation
by purchasing additional shares is the right not to acquire additional
shares without being confronted with dilution of his existing equity
if there is no valid business justification for the dilution. This right
not to acquire is seriously undermined if the stock offered is worth
substantially more than the offering price. Any share subscribed or
purchased at this price dilutes his interest and impairs the value of
his original holdings.

—

—

—

(4) Right of stockholders to insist on legally adequate price.
A corporation is not permitted to dispose its stock for a legally
inadequate price at least where there is objection. While a stockholder
has no right to block a disposition of new shares for a fair price
merely because he disagreed with the wisdom of the plan, he has
the right to insist that the price be fixed in accordance with legal
requirements. (Katzowitz v. Sidler, 249 N.E. 2d 359 [Ct. Apps. N.Y.

1969].)

372

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 38

Availability of right to additional Issue
of originally authorized shares.
A shareholder's preemptive right is his option to subscribe to
allotment of shares, in proportion to his holdings of outstanding
shares, before new shares are offered to others. This doctrine applies
when a corporation increases its capital stock by declaring a stock
dividend, in which case it cannot discriminate between stockholders.
(1) All originally authorized shares initially offered for subscription.
When one subscribes for shares in a corporation, he realizes that
his position is fixed based on the proportion between the number of
shares subscribed by him and the total number of shares which the
corporation is authorized to issue. This presupposes, however, that
the corporation at its inception offered all its originally authorized
shares, although such should be the presumption, (see Datu
Tagoranao Benito vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 123
SCRA 722 [1983]; Dee vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 199
SCRA 238 [1991].)

—

—

(2) Number of such shares initially offered specified.
Where the
number of shares initially offered for subscription was specified, such
that the original subscribers could not have insisted on subscribing
for more, the corporation must first offer the additional issue of
shares from the unsubscribed portion of the authorized capital stock
preemptively to stockholders before the same is offered to third
parties. In this case, the original subscriber is deemed to have taken
his shares in relation to the number of shares then initially allotted
for subscription rather than to the total number of authorized shares
at the time of his subscription.
The subscriber cannot claim a dilution of interest if additional
issues of originally authorized shares are purchased by others.5

•The shareholders' preemptive rights do not generally apply where the shares
belong to the original (or increased) capital stock of the corporation unsubscribed or
undisposed of, inasmuch as such shares constitute a part of the assets, and may be sold
either to stockholders or to strangers as the corporation may deem best even without
notice to stockholders. They are not new issues.
The issuance of shares out of the unsubscribed shares of the authorized capital stock
of the corporation may be authorized by the board of directors thru a board resolution
without need of stockholders' approval. (SEC Opinion No. 03-05, April 27, 2005.)

Sec 39

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

373

ILLUSTRATION:
X, Inc. has an original capital stock of Pl,000,000 divided

into 100,000 shares with a par value of P10.00 each. At its
inception, Corporation X offered for subscription all the 100,000
shares but only 40,000 shares were subscribed and fully paid.
Z's subscription covers 4,000 shares.
Here, Z is not entitled to preemption with respect to the
remaining unissued 60,000 shares if they are later reoffered. He
cannot claim a dilution of interest.
Where the number of shares initially offered for subscription
was only 40,000, then Z may exercise his preemptive right
if the remaining 60,000 shares are subsequently offered for
subscription to the extent of 1 / 10, or 6,000 shares.

—

Sec. 39. Sale or Other Disposition of Assets. Subject to
the provisions of Republic Act No, 10667, otherwise known
as “Philippine Competition Act." and other related laws, a
corporation may, by a majority vote of its board of directors
or trustees, sell, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge or
otherwise dispose of its property and assets, upon such
terms and conditions and for such consideration, which
may be money, stocks, bonds or other instruments for the
payment of money or other property or consideration, as
Its board of directors or trustees may deem expedient.
A sale of all or substantially all of the corporation’s
properties and assets including, its goodwill must be
authorized by the vote of the stockholders representing at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, or at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the members, In a stockholders’ or
members’ meeting duly called for the purpose.

In nonstock corporations where there are no members
with voting rights, the vote of at least a majority of the
trustees in office will be sufficient authorization for the
corporation to enter Into any transaction authorized by
this section. (N)

Ihe determination of whether or not the sale involves
aU-Qf substantially all of the corporation’s properties and
assets must be computed based on Its not asset value,
as shown In Its latest financial statements, A sale or other

374

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF. THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 39

disposition shall be deemed to cover substantially all the
corporate property and assets if thereby the corporation
would be rendered incapable of continuing the business or
accomplishing the purpose for which it was incorporated.
Written notice of the proposed action and of the
time and place for the meeting shall be addressed to
stockholders or members at their place of residence as
shown in the books of the corporation and deposited to
the addressee in the post office with postage prepaid, or
served personally, or when allowed by the bylaws or done
with the consent of the stockholder, sent electronically:
Provided, That any dissenting stockholder may exercise
the right if appraisal right under the conditions provided
in this Code. (N)
After such authorization or approval by the stock¬
holders or members, the board of directors or trustees
may, nevertheless, in its discretion, abandon such sale,
lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge or other disposition of
property and assets, subject to the rights of third parties
under any contract relating thereto, without further action
or approval by the stockholders or members.
Nothing in this section is intended to restrict the
power of any corporation, without the authorization by
the stockholders or members, to sell, lease, exchange,
mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of any of its
property and assets if the same is necessary in the usual
and regular course of business of the corporation or if the
proceeds of the sale or other disposition of such property
and assets shall be appropriated for the conduct of its
remaining business.
Power to sell, lease, etc. all or substantially
all corporate assets.

There are two (2) types of corporate acquisitions: asset sales and
stock sales. In asset sales, the corporate entity sellsall or substantially
all of its assets to another entity. In stock sales, the individual or
corporate stockholders sell a controlling block to new or existing
stockholders. (SME Ban, Inc. vs. De Guzman, 707 SCRA 35 [2013];
see Secs. 75-78.) Section 39 deals with asset sales.

Sec. 39

*'

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

I

375

(1) Requisites. — A corporation, by the action of its board of
directors or trustees supported by the vote of shareholders or

members may sell, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise
dispose of all substantially all of its property, and assets including its
goodwill, (see Title IX [Merger and Consolidation].)
The requisites for the validity of such sale, etc., are:
(a) The sale, etc., must be approved by theboard of directors

or trustees;
(b) The action of the board of directors or trustees must
be authorized by the vote of stockholders representing 2/3 of
the outstanding capital stock including holders of non-voting
shares (see Sec. 6, par. 6[c].) or 2/3 of the members, as the case
may be; and

(c) The authorization must be done at the stockholders' or
members' meeting duly called for that purpose after written
notice.
(2) Other legal limitations. — As a safeguard against abuse of
power, Section 39 provides that the sale, etc., shall be subject to R.A.
No. 10667, otherwise known as the "Philippine Competition Act,"
and other related laws such as those on illegal combinations and
monopolies, (see Sec. 176.) Furthermore, under the Bulk Sales Law
(Act No. 3952, Secs. 3, 4, 5.), the sale, etc. of all or
any portion of
a stock of goods, merchandise, provisions or materials
otherwise
than in the ordinary course of business is declared fraudulent and
void as to creditors of the vendor unless specified formalities are
observed such as the giving by the vendor to the vendee of a list of
creditors to whom said vendor may be indebted.
(3) Sale of all assets without dissolution. — Subject to
the above
legal limitations, a corporation may sell all its assets without
necessarily dissolving or terminating its existence. If such sale is
made to another corporation and there is no intent to combine, the
selling corporation may continue in a state of suspended animation
(Ballantine, p. 666.), subject to the effect of non-use of corporate
powers and continued inoperation of a corporation
provided in
Section 21. (SEC Opinion, July 8, 1987.) The rights of creditors must
not be overlooked or disregarded when a corporation sells
its entire
assets and turns over its business to another. (Ballantine, p. 676.)

376

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 39

The only way the transfer can proceed without prejudice to the
creditor is to make the assignee assume the liabilities of the assignor,
unless the creditors who did not consent to the transfer choose to
rescind the transfer on the ground of fraud. (Caltex [Phils.], Inc. vs.
PNOC Shipping Transport Corp., 498 SCRA 400 [2006].)
Authority of the board.

—

(1) Stock corporations.
Section 39 covers not only sale but
lease,
exchange,
pledge or other disposition1 of its
mortgage,
also

properties.

(a) The board is given the right to decide upon the terms
and conditions of the transaction including the consideration
for the property disposed of, for, at any rate, the transaction is
still subject to approval by the stockholders or members.
(b) After such approval, the board may nevertheless, in
its discretion, abandon the transaction, without further action
or approval by the stockholders or members but subject to the
rights of third parties under any contract relating thereto, (par.
3.)
(c) If the property to be sold constitutes merely a part of
the assets of the corporation, even if substantial, and the sale
thereof will not render the corporation incapable of continuing
its business (par. 4.), the board of directors or trustees may
dispose of the same as it may deem convenient without need
of approval of the stockholders or members of the corporation.
(SEC Opinion, Dec. 4, 1990.)

—

(2) Nonstock corporations.
Under the second paragraph,
the vote of the majority of the trustees in office will be sufficient
authorization for the corporation to enter into any transaction
authorized by Section 39 in the case of nonstock corporations where

there are no members with voting rights.

’The words "or otherwise dispose of” in Section 39 is very broad and in a sense,
covers a merger or consolidation, (see Bank of Commerce vs. Radion Philippines
Network, Inc, 722 SCRA 520 (2014).)

Sec 39

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

377

Shareholders’ approval of sale, etc.
of corporate assets.

The Revised Corporation Code considers a sale, etc. to cover all
or substantially all the corporate property and assets "if thereby the
corporation would be rendered incapable of continuing the business
or accomplishing the purpose for which it was incorporated." In
other words, if the disposition does not render the corporation
incapable of continuing its ordinary course of business, the sale
may not require stockholders' or members' approval. Under the
last paragraph, the authorization by the stockholders or members
is not required. It is understood, however, that the transaction is not
tainted with fraud or bad faith or prejudicial to the interest of the
corporation.
When sale considered as involving all or
substantially all of corporate assets.

Previously, the test is not the amount of assets involved but
rather the nature or effect of the disposition, (see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 13-13,’ Dec. 5, 2013; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 01-19, Jan. 31, 2019;
SEC Opinion,5 Oct. 21, 2002.) However, the Revised Corporation
Code has added the requirement that the determination of whether
the sale involves all or substantially all of the corporation's properties
and assets must be computed based on its net asset value, as shown
in its latest financial statements.

Shareholders’ approval on sale of corporate
assets in publicly-listed companies

To promote good corporate governance and the protection of
minority investors, the SEC, pursuant to its regulatory power under
Section 179(d), issued these rules for publicly-listed companies:
(1) The sale or disposal of corporate property and assets
amounting to at least 51% of the corporation's total assets shedl
be considered as sale of all or substantially all of corporate
property and assets, whether such sale accrued in a single
transaction, taking place within one (1) year from the date of the
first transaction (aggregate sale transactions).
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippine Annotated, p. 316 [19931’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippine Annotated, p. 316 [1993].

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

378

Sec. 39

(2) In sale of corporate assets or property falling under the
preceding paragraph, the vote of the stockholders representing
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock in a
stockholders' meeting duly called for the purpose shall be
required prior to the execution of the sale transaction.

(3) In aggregate sale transactions, shareholder approval
shall be required for the sale transaction that breaches the 51%
corporate asset threshold.
(4) The determination of whether or not the sale amounts
to at least 51% of the corporation's assets must be computed
based on its total assets as shown in its latest audited financial
statements, provided that the computation may also be based
on the latest quarterly financial statement or a special purpose
financial statement prepared in connection with the execution
of the transaction.
If, after due notice and hearing, the SEC finds that any provision
of the Circular has been violated, it may impose any or all of the
sanctions provided under Section 158 of the Revised Corporation
Code. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 12-2020, April 15, 2020.)
That the sale constituted at least 51% of the corporation's total
assets should not trigger the need for stockholders' approval. The
sale must render the corporation incapable of continuing die business
or accomplishing the purpose for which it was incorporated. For
example, if a corporation engaged in the sale of services decides to
permanently implement a work-from-home arrangement because
of the pandemic, the sale of its office building constituting at least
51% of the corporation's total assets should not require stockholders'

approval.
Appraisal right of dissenting stockholder.
It is to be noted that the exercise of the appraisal right of any
dissenting stockholder (par. 1; see Sec. 80[b].) is predicated on the
"sale or other disposition of all or substantially all" of the corporate
assets, the phrase being defined as such which would render the
corporation "incapable of continuing the business or accomplishing
the purpose for which it was incorporated." The determination of
whether the sales involve all or substantially all the corporation's
properties and assets must be computed based on its net asset value,
as shown in the corporation's latest financial statements. (Sec. 39,
par. 4.)

Sec. 39

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

379

Conversely, any disposition which does not involve all or
substantially all of the corporate assets as defined above made in
the ordinary course of business, does not require the approval of
the stockholders or members as set forth in Section 39 and would
not entitle any dissenting stockholder to exercise his appraisal right.
(Ibid., par. 4.)
Liability of purchasing corporation in case
of asset sales.
(1) For debts of selling corporation.

—

Asa rule, a corporation that

purchases the assets of another will not be liable for the debts of

the selling corporation, provided the former acted in good faith and
paid adequate consideration for such assets, except when any of the
circumstances is present:
(a) the purchaser expressly or impliedly agrees to assume
the debts;
(b) the transaction amounts to a consolidation or merger of
the corporations;
(c) the purchasing corporation is merely a continuation of
the selling corporation; and
(d) the transaction is fraudulently entered into in order to
escape liability for those debts. (Nell vs. Pacific Farms, Inc., 15
SCRA 415 [1965]; Philippine National Bank vs. Andrada Electric
& Engineering Company, 381 SCRA 244 [2002]; Mclead vs.
National Labor Relations Commission, 512 SCRA 222 [2007];
see Bank of Commerce vs. Radio Philippines Network, Inc., 722
SCRA 520 [2014].)
If any of the above cited exceptions is present, the transferee
corporation shall assume the liabilities of the transferor. The general
rule is referred to by the Supreme Court as the "Nell Doctrine." (Y-l
Leisure Philippines, Inc. vs. Yu, 770 SCRA 56 [2015].)
(2) To affected employees of selling corporation.
In asset sales,
the rule is that the seller in good faith is authorized to dismiss the
affected employees, but is liable for the payment of separate pay
under the law. The buyer in good faith, on the other hand, is not
obliged to absorb the employees affected by sale, nor is it liable
for the payment of their claims. The most it may do, for reasons of
public policy and social justice, is to give preference to the
qualified

—

380

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 39

separated personnel of the selling firm. (SME Bank, Inc. vs. De
Guzman, supra.)
Liability of purchasing corporation
in case of stock sales.

In contrast with asset sales, the transaction in stock sales take
place at the corporate stockholder level. A shift in the composition
of its stockholders will not affect the existence continuity of the
corporation because the corporation possesses a personality separate
and distinct from that of its shareholders. This, notwithstanding, the
stock sale, the corporation continues to be the employer of its people
and continues to be liable for the payment of their just claims.
Furthermore, the corporation or its new majority shareholders are
not entitled to lawfully dismiss corporate employees absent a just or

authorized cause.
In a stock sale, there is no transfer of ownership of business. The
transfer of only involves a change in the equity composition of the
corporation. This being so, the employment status of the employees
is not affected by the stock sale and, therefore, the change should
not result in the automatic termination of the employment of the
corporation's employees nor give the new majority shareholders
the right to legally dismiss the corporation's employees, absent just
or authorized cause. (SME Bank, Inc. vs. De Guzman, supra.)
Business enterprise transfer.
In the last exception (1, d, supra.), the transferee purchases not
only the assets of the transferor but also its business. This is the sale
contemplated in Section 39 which refers not to an ordinary sale of
all corporate assets but to a transfer of such degree that the selling
or transferor corporation is rendered incapable of continuing its
business or its corporate purpose.

Given that the transferee corporation acquired not only the
assets but also the business of the transferor corporation, then the
liabilities of the latter are inevitably assigned to the former. To protect
the creditors of the transferor corporation against unscrupulous
conveyance of the entire corporate assets, the transfer under Section
39 must likewise carry with it the transfer of its liabilities. Fraud is
not an essential element for the application of the business enterprise
transfer. (Y-l Leisure Philippines, Inc. vs. Yu, 770 SCRA 56 [2015].)

Sec. 40

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

381

—

Sec. 40. Power to Acquire Own Shares. Provided, that
the corporation has unrestricted earnings in its books
to cover the shares to be purchased acquired, a stock
corporation shall have the power to purchase or acquire
Its own shares for a legitimate corporate purpose or
purposes, including the following cases:
(a) To eliminate fractional shares arising out of stock

dividends;

(b) To collect or compromise an indebtedness to
the corporation, arising out of unpaid subscription, in a
delinquency sale, and to purchase delinquent shares sold
during said sale; and
(c) To pay dissenting or withdrawing stockholders
entitled to payment for their shares under the provisions
of this Code.

Power to acquire own shares.

Section 40 authorizes a stock corporation to purchase or acquire
its own shares’ subject to the limitation that the acquisition is
for a legitimate corporate purpose or purposes and that there be
unrestricted retained earnings2 (see Sec. 42.) in its books to cover the

shares acquired.
(1) Elimination of fractional shares. A fractional share is a share
which is less that one (1) corporation share. Thus, if a stockholder

—

’Although shares thus purchased are, unless formally "retired," treated as "treasury
shares," and, under a discredited method of accounting, are carried on the corporation's
books as an asset or are applied to reduce "capital," "stated capital," or "capital stock"
issued, it is obvious that, although the selling shareholder has given up an asset, the
corporation has not acquired one. Its own shares are of no value to it unless and until they
are resold. What has actually happened is that the corporation's assets have been reduced
by the amount paid for the shares, while the proportionate interest of each of the
other
shareholder in the diminished assets have been decreased by diminishing the number of
outstanding shares. Legal capital is not reduced by the transaction. Reduction of capital
(see Sec. 38.) may be made only by the methods prescribed in
the statutes. Only a few
statutes include reacquisition of shares as such a method and then only in exceptional
circumstances. (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on Corporation Law, 1969 ed., p. 1592.)
’This requirement applies to an incorporated sports club that operates as a stock
corporation with an authorized capital stock consisting of no par value shares. While the
operations of the club do not generate profit, this does not necessarily make it a non-profit
organization. Although its operations do not generate unrestricted retained earnings, it
’till has the capacity to generate retained earnings and authority to distribute the same to
•is shareholders. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 14-10, March 31, 2010.)

382

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 40

owns 250 shares and the corporation declares 25% stock dividend,
his total shares will be 312 and 1/2 shares. Inasmuch as fractional
shares cannot be represented at corporate meetings,3 the corporation
may purchase the same from the stockholder concerned or issue
fractional scrip certificates to such stockholder who may negotiate
for the sale thereof with other stockholders also owning fractional
shares so as to convert them into full shares.
(2) Satisfaction of indebtedness to corporations.
Section 40(b)
to
purchase
arbitrarily
the shares
a
corporation
authorize
not
does
it issued to any of its stockholders indebted to it, whether at the
prevailing market price or at par value for the purpose of applying
the proceeds thereof to the satisfaction of its claim against them,
and this is particularly true where the consent such stockholders
has not been secured. Even where their consent has been secured,
the corporation can buy their shares only if the conditions for the
purchase (Infra.) are present (see SEC Opinion, Aug. 11, 1961.)

—

—

(3) Payment of shares of dissenting or withdrawing stockholders.
Section 40(c) refers to instances when a dissenting stockholder is
given appraisal right (see Sec. 80.) and the right to withdraw from
the corporation as provided in Section 15 (Amendment of articles
of incorporation), Section 36 (Power to extend or shorten corporate
term, Section 39 (Sale or other disposition of corporate assets),
Section 41 (Power to invest corporate funds in another corporation
or business or for any other purpose), Section 67 (Delinquency sale),
Section 76 (Stockholders' or members' approval [of plan of merger
or consolidation]), and Section 104 (Withdrawal of stockholder or
dissolution of [close] corporation).

—

(4) Other cases.
This power of the corporation to acquire its
own shares is not limited to the cases enumerated in Section 40.
(a) It may also be exercised under Section 9 (treasury

shares).
(b) With respect to redeemable shares, they may be
purchased by the corporation regardless of the existence of
unrestricted retained earnings in the books of the corporation,
(see Sec. 8.)
’Fractional shares standing in the name of a stockholder may not be used as a basis
of voting for directors at a shareholders' meeting, either cumulatively or otherwise.
(Ballantine, p. 401.)

Sec 40

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

383

(c) Shares may also be reacquired to effect a decrease in the
capital stock of a corporation, (see Sec. 38.) Where a corporation
reacquires its own shares, it does not become a subscriber
thereof.
(d) In close corporation, where there is a deadlock respecting
the management of its business, the SEC may order the purchase
at their fair value of shares of any stockholder by the corporation
regardless of the availability of unrestricted retained earnings in
its books. (Sec. 103, par. l[d]; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 11-09/ May

8, 2009.)

Conditions for the exercise of the power.
The right and power of a corporation to acquire or purchase its
own shares is not absolute, but depends upon the contingency of
the condition of its affairs and its relation to creditors at the time of
the purchase. (Fisher, op. cit., p. 287.)
Briefly, a corporation's right to purchase its shares according to
the weight of authority is subject to these limitations:
(1) its capital is not thereby impaired;
(2) it is for a legitimate and proper corporate purpose;
(3) there shall be unrestricted retained earnings (see Sec. 42.) to
purchase the same;’
(4) the corporation acts in good faith and without prejudice to
the rights of creditors and stockholders; and

‘Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 318 (1993).
’No corporation shall redeem, repurchase or reacquire its own shares, or whatever
dass, unless it has an adequate amount of unrestricted retained earnings to
support the
cost of the said shares, except:
a. When the shares are reacquired in the redemption of redeemable shares of
the
corporation or pursuant to the conversion right of convertible shares of the corporation,
accordance with the provisions expressly provided for in its articles of incorporation
and certificates of stock representing said shares;
b. When the shares are reacquired to effect a decrease in the capital stock of the
corporation

as approved by the SEC;
c When the shares are reacquired by a close corporation pursuant to the order
o* the SEC acting to
arbitrate a deadlock as provided for under Section 104 of the Cor¬
poration Code of the Philippines. (Sec III,
CCP No. 1-Rules Governing Redeemable and
Treasury Shares, 1982; see Sec. 8.)

384

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 40

(5) That the conditions of corporate affairs warrant it.* (SECOGC Opinion No. 11-09/ May 8, 2009; SEC Opinions, Sept. 11, 1985,
Oct. 12, 1992, and April 11, 1994.)
Although the existence of legitimate corporate purposes may
justify a corporation's acquisition of its shares under Section 40, such
purpose cannot excuse the stockholder from the effects of taxation
arising from the redemption of stocks by the corporation. If the
issuance of stock dividends is part of a tax evasion plan and thus,
without legitimate business reasons, the proceeds of the redemption
may be deemed as taxable dividends.1 (Comm, of Internal Revenue
vs. Court of Appeals, 301 SCRA 152 [1991].)

Trust fund doctrine.

This doctrine, first enunciated by the Supreme Court in the case
of Philippine Trust Co. vs. Rivera (144 Phil. 469 [1923].), holds that the
assets of the corporation as represented by its capital stock are "trust
funds" to be maintained unimpaired and to be used to pay corporate
creditors in the sense that there can be no distribution of such assets
among the stockholders without provision being first made for
the payment of corporate debts and that any such disposition of
its assets to the prejudice of the creditors of the corporation who
extended credit to the corporation on the faith of its outstanding
capital stock is null and void.
It is established doctrine
(1) Subscription to capital stock.
that subscriptions to the capital of corporation constitute a fund to
which creditors have a right to look for satisfaction of their claims
and that the assignee in insolvency can maintain an action upon any
unpaid stock subscription in order to realize assets for the payment
of its debts. (Donna C. Halley vs. Printwell, Inc., G.R. No. 157549, 30

—

•The SEC has exclusive supervision, control, and regulatory jurisdiction to investigate
whether the corporation has unrestricted retained earnings to cover the payment for the
shares, and whether the purchase is for a legitimate corporate purpose as provided in
Secs. 40 and 139. (Boman Environmental Dev. Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 167 SCRA 540
[1988].) Thus, it the aforementioned conditions are present, a corporation may acquire
the shares of alien stockholders to comply with constitutional or legal requirements
prescribing the minimum percentage of capital stock ownership of Filipino citizens in
certain corporations. (Ibid.; see Sec. 12.)
’(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 11-09, May 8, 2009; SEC Opinions, Sept. 11, 1985, Oct. IX
1992, and April 11,1994.)
•Tax treatment of stock dividends," under Sec. 42.

Sec 40

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

385

May 2011.) While the assets of a dissolved corporation belong to the
stockholders, the corporate debts must be paid and its obligations
discharged before the proceeds obtained in liquidating the assets
may be distributed among the stockholders. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 60-19, Dec. 20, 2019.)
(a) Upon the acceptance of a stock subscription by a
corporation, the subscription becomes a binding contract
to which the subscriber cannot withdraw. Neither does the
corporation have the power to release an original subscriber
from its subscription, and as against the creditors, a reduction of
the capital stock can only take place in the manner and under the
conditions prescribed by law or the charter of the corporation. To
do so would be violative of the trust fund doctrine since it does
not fall under any of the allowable instances where a corporation
may distribute its assets to its creditors and stockholders.
(b) Hence, subscription contracts cannot be cancelled by the
board of directors without justifiable cause. This is tantamount
to relieving an original subscriber from the subscription, a
contractual obligation, which a corporation has no power
to do so. Thus, a corporation may not condone subscription
receivables due from shareholders as it violates the trust fund

doctrine.
(c) Additional paid-in capital (APIC) already forms part
of equity emanating from the original subscription agreement.
APIC, as a premium, forms part of the capital of the corporation
and therefore, falls within the purview of the trust fund doctrine.
Thus, APIC is also governed by the doctrines and restrictions
enunciated in the above-stated jurisprudence. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 50-19, Oct. 11, 2019.)
Thus, the nullification of APIC and its subsequent conversion
into a loan violates the trust fund doctrine. This is because the APIC
is considered a contribution of a stockholder over and above
the
par value of shares and falls under the concept of corporate trust
hind upon its recording in the books of the corporation. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 13-14, June 11, 2014.)
‘ Similarly, the reversal of the APIC and itsconversion to subscribed
capital violates the trust fund doctrine. When corporate funds will
be used for purposes other than those enumerated in Ong
Yong,

386

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 40

i.e., to pay for the stockholders' additional subscription to capital
stock, it will effectively result in the unauthorized distribution of
the corporate trust fund, thereby violating the Trust Funds doctrine.
If the reversal of the APIC and its conversion into subscribed capital
are allowed, the same would be tantamount to the corporation using
its corporate trust fund to pay for the subscription of its stockholder
for the issuance of its own shares. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 13-14,

June 11, 2014.)

—

(2) Corporation generally without power to purchase its own shares.
It could be inferred from our law that a corporation has generally
no power to purchase its own shares of stock except otherwise
provided in the Revised Corporation Code. This rule is dictated by
the necessity of protecting the interests of existing creditors who
might be adversely affected by the stock purchase which, in effect,
may operate to reduce its capital stock to the extent of the shares

purchased without complying with the formalities required by

Section 37.
A stockholder has no right to demand refund of his investment
without complying with the requirements of Section 41 since this
will constitute acquisition by the corporation of its own shares. (SEC
Opinion, Jan. 3, 1985.)
(3) Repayment to stockholders a fraud on corporate creditors.
The purchase, in effect, constitutes fraud on corporate creditors as
it amounts to repayment to the stockholder of his proportionate
share from the corporate assets and hence, an impairment of the
capital available for the benefit and protection of creditors who
are preferred over the stockholders in the distribution of corporate
assets, (see Sec. 139, last par.)

—

—

A corporation
(4) Existence of unrestricted retained earnings.
must have restricted earnings before it may acquire its own shares,
based on the trust fund doctrine that the capital stock, property
and other assets of a corporation are regarded as equally in trust
for the payment of corporate creditors. The prohibition against the
distribution of the capital of a corporation as cash dividend is also
based on the same doctrine, (see Sec. 42.)

Note that under the doctrine, the corporation is not prohibited
to use its assets for purposes of its business.

Sec. 40

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

387

Effects of purchase on corporate creditors.
(1) Impairment of capital. If at the time the purchase is made,
the corporation does not have unrestricted retained earnings or
has negative earnings, or if the amount paid for the shares exceeds
the surplus, the purchase necessarily operates as a distribution to
the selling shareholders of a part of the capital, and to that extent
impairs capital.

—

(a) The impairment may be intentionally permanent, as
where the corporation thereafter treats the purchased shares as
retired but does not formally reduce capital, or merely refrains
from reselling the shares.

(b) The impairment may be unintentionally permanent
to the full amount paid, as where the corporation finds itself
unable to resell the shares, or to the extent of part of the amount
paid, as where it is unable to resell except at a lower price.
(2) Current creditors and long-termcreditors. These consequences
affect creditors. But there may be a difference between current
creditors and long-term creditors. If the corporation is solvent, the
former can enforce their claims. But the latter take the risk of future
insolvency as they await maturity of their claims, (see W.L. Cary,
Cases and Materials on Corporations, p. 1592 [1969] Ed.].)

—

Effects of purchase on remaining
stockholders.

In addition to diminishing assets and thereby reducing the
creditors' margin of safety, the purchase of shares by a corporation
is objectionable also in that it injures the rights of remaining
shareholders, although it may be advantageous also to those who
do not sell.
(1) In general.
The impact of this purchase on the rights of
remaining shareholders is discussed below:

—

"A reduction of capital must be an all-around affair; that
is, where capital is to be paid off or to be cancelled as lost or
unpresented by any available assets, or where the liability
of unpaid capital is to be reduced in each share this ratable
reduction would leave each shareholder the same proportionate

interest and rights which he had before. Any other scheme
would disturb or alter the relative positions of the members."

388

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 40

The purchase by a corporation of its own shares withdraws
part of die original capital from the venture and redistributes
and changes the relative rights of the remaining members.
Shareholders should have the right to insist on the preservation
of all the contributed capital for the prosecution of the venture,
except in case of legitimate reduction of capital which statutes
authorize and which shareholders are presumed to have
made part of their contracts with the corporation. The capital
subscribed is considered to be permanently devoted to the
enterprise by the shareholders and it constitutes a basic business
fund which must not be paid back except in entire or partial
liquidation of the corporation.
It might be said that when a corporation purchases its own
stock, a situation is created which is analogous to the non¬
issuance of authorized stock. Non-issue of authorized stock is
one thing, retirement of issued, another thing. Issued capital
has contributed to the growth of the corporation on which the
public in giving credit, by purchasing or loaning on shares or
bonds or in many other ways, may rely." (Jose S. Campos, Jr.,
"The Purchase by a Corporation of its Own Shares," Phil. Law
Journal, Oct. 1952, p. 707, quoting Prof. Nussbaum, "Acquisition
by a Corporation of its Own Stock," 35 Col. L. Rev. 976, 982.)

—

(2) Share in dividends.
The stockholders would also be
the
of dividends. How a purchase
field
affected
in
adversely

of shares by a corporation affects the rights to dividends of the
remaining stockholders is explained below:
"If the shares are purchased at a price above the actual value
of the shares, the remaining members' share in the undivided
surplus is impaired and money is actually being taken from the
pockets of the remaining members for the benefit of the retiring
shareholders. If the purchase is made at a price commensurate
with the actual value of the shares, the surplus which would
ordinarily be devoted to dividends is instead tied up to effect
either an indirect and unauthorized reduction in capital, or
else the possibility of dividends is postponed until such time
as she treasury stock can be and is resold at an adequate price.
And even when the price paid is less than their intrinsic value
and a profit is later realized when they are reissued at a higher
price, the distribution of the surplus as dividends has still been

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Sec 41

389

postponed." (Ibid., quoting Levy, "Purchase by a Corporation of
its Own Stock" [1930], 15 Minn. L. Rev. 1.)

—

(3) Share in possible losses. The diminution of the number of
shareholders may entail still other dangers. As treasury stock does
not share in the profits, it may be contended that the remaining
shareholders would as a result get a bigger individual share therein
by way of increased dividends per share. On the other hand, their
share of possible losses is increased, inasmuch as part of the working
capital disappears. With this decrease in working capital, the chances
are, the profits will be less and, therefore, the proportionate share of
the remaining shareholders would also be decreased. (Ibid.)

—

(4) Others. The purchase has or may have a variety of other
consequences with respect to shareholders.
(a) On the one hand, it diminishes the number of shares,
so that each shareholder who does not sell has a larger interest
in a smaller total of assets. By reducing the number of shares, it
affects voting control, if the shares purchased are voting shares.
(b) If the shares are purchased at less than their value, it
benefits those who do not sell, and on the other hand, if the
price is unduly high, it enables the selling shareholders to retire
from the enterprise with corresponding disadvantage to other
shareholders.
(c) It enables the management to use corporate funds to
rid themselves of shareholders whose activities are believed by
them to be detrimental to the enterprise or inconvenient to the
management. (W.L. Cary, op. cit., p. 1592.)

Sec. 41. Power to Invest Corporate Funds in Another
Corporation or Business or for Any Other Purpose. — Subject
to the provisions of this Code, a private corporation may
Invest Its funds in any other corporation or business or for
any purpose other than the primary purpose for which It
was organized when approved by a majority of the board
of directors or trustees and ratified by the stockholders
representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding
capital stock, or by at least two-thlrds (2/3) of the members
in the case of nonstock corporations, at a meeting duly
called for the purpose. Notice of the proposed investment

390

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 41

and the time and place of the meeting shall be addressed
to each stockholder or member at the place of residence
as shown in the books of the corporation and deposited to
the addressee in the post office with postage prepaid, or
served personally, or sent electronically in accordance with

the rules and regulations of the Commission on the use of

electronic data message, when allowed bv the bylaws or
done with the consent of the stockholders: Provided, That
any dissenting stockholder shall have appraisal right as
provided in this Code: Provided, however, That where the
investment by the corporation is reasonably necessary to
accomplish its primary purpose as stated in the articles
of incorporation, the approval of the stockholders or
members shall not be necessary.

Sea 41

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

391

A corporation may be organized with multiple lawful purposes
so long as the primary purpose is indicated in the articles of
incorporation. However, the investment of its funds is limited to
the primary purposes except as provided in Section 41. Should the
corporation decide to engage in another business authority as its
primary purpose an amendment of the articles of corporation is

necessary.
(4) Investment by a nonstock corporation. The power to acquire
and convey property is an incident to every corporation as declared
under Section 35(g). (see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 47-11,' Nov. 25,
2011.) It may be exercised by the corporation whether or not such
power is stated in its articles of incorporation or bylaws. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 22-19,1 June 24, 2019; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 33-11, July

—

29, 2011.)

Power to Invest funds in other corporations
or for other purposes.

—

(1) Scope of the term "funds."
The term, as used in Section
41, includes any corporate property to be used to further the
business. Thus, idle corporate property may be temporarily leased
to make it productive absent express restrictions in the articles of
incorporation or bylaws and the leasing is not used as a scheme to
prejudice corporate creditors, subject to the requirements of Section

41. The term also includes "donations" received by the corporation
from other entities. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 3, 2003.)

—

(2) Compliance with requirements.
In order that a corporation
may invest its funds in any other corporation or business or for
any purpose other than the primary purpose, compliance with the
requirements of Section 41 is necessary (see De la Rama vs. Mao
Sugar Central Co., Inc., 27 SCRA 247 [1969].) and subject to the
prohibition against certain corporations (e.g., insurance and banking
corporations) from having more than one purpose.
(3) Rule where corporation with multiple purposes.
Where
the purpose clause of the articles of incorporation of a company
embodies different and related purposes, the corporation may
intend to carry them out simultaneously or to prosecute first the
primary business in which it is most interested and them embark
later in any one of the other purposes, as the need to expand the
enterprise may warrant or the necessity of a change of business may
demand. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 2, 1973.)

—

A nonstock, non-profit foundation may invest its funds in or
subscribe to shares of another domestic corporation. However,
its power to invest is limited by its articles of incorporation. (SEC
Opinion No. 54, Nov. 3, 2003.)
Purpose of the Investment.
(1) Primary purpose. Where the investment by the corporation
is reasonably necessary to accomplish its primary purpose as stated
in its articles of incorporation, the approval only of the board of
directors or trustees is necessary. (Sec. 41; sec SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 03-20, Nov. 23, 2020; SEC Opinion, Nov. 3, 2003.)

—

Thus, the purchase of beer manufacturing facilities by a
corporation in a foreign country for the manufacture and marketing
of beer thereat was held as an investment in the same business
stated as its main purpose in its articles of incorporation, which
is to manufacture and market beer and, therefore, does not need
the approval of the stockholders. (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and
Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)
(2) Other than primary purpose. Where the investment of funds
is made in any other corporation or business or for any purpose
other than the primary purpose for which the investing corporation
was organized, the approval by the majority of the board of directors

—

'Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 327 [2002].
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 267 [1993],

392

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 41

or trustees need the ratification by the stockholders representing at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock or by at least
two-thirds (2/3) of the members in case on nonstock corporation.
Corollary thereto, other purposes not allied or incidental to its
primary purpose shall be classified as secondary purposes. (SECOGC Opinion No. 03-20, Nov. 23, 2020.)
(3) Not among the secondary purposes. The other purposes for
which the funds may be invested without amending the articles
of incorporation must be among those enumerated in the articles
of incorporation. In order to legally engage in any of its secondary
purposes, the corporation must comply with Section 41.
A corporation is not allowed to engage in a business distinct
from those enumerated in the articles of incorporation without
amending the purpose clause of the articles3 (see Secs. 13(2], 15.) to
include the desired business activity among its secondary purposes.

—

Ratification of defective Investment.

—

(1) By stockholders.
A corporate transaction or contract
which is within the corporate powers, but which is defective from
a purported failure to observe in its execution the requirement of
Section 41 that the investment must be authorized by the affirmative
vote of the stockholders (or members), may be ratified. The
requirement is for the benefit of the stockholders who may ratify
the investment and its ratification obliterates any defect which it
may have had at the outset. (Ibid.)
(2) Investment merely vires, not illegal. Mere ultra vires acts (see
Sec. 44.) or those which are not illegal and void ab initio, but are not
merely within the scope of the articles of incorporation, are merely
voidable and may become binding and enforceable when ratified by
the stockholders. (Pirovano vs. De La Rama Steamship Co., 96 Phil.
335 (1954].)

—

’Corporate funds may be temporarily loaned even to stockholders, provided the fol¬
lowing conditions are observed: (1) The funds are not presently used by the corporation
and the loaning is not made on a regular basis; (2) By lending Ore funds, the corporation
will make them productive instead of allowing them to remain idle; (3) There is no ex¬
press restrictions in the articles of incorporation or bylaws; (4) There must be a collateral
or assurance that the borrower is capable of paying them at maturity date; (5) The lend¬
ing is not used as a scheme to prejudice corporate creditors or result in the infringement
of the trust fund doctrine; and (6) Sec 41 is complied with. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 11, 1991.)

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

393

Sec. 42. Power to Declare Dividends. — The board of
directors of a stock corporation may declare dividends
out of the unrestricted retained earnings which shall be
payable in cash, property, or in stock to all stockholders
on the basis of outstanding stock held by them; Provided,
That any cash dividends due on delinquent stock shall
first be applied to the unpaid balance on the subscription
plus costs and expenses, while stock dividends shall
be withheld from the delinquent stockholders until their
unpaid subscription is fully paid; Provided, further, That
no stock dividend shall be issued without the approval of
stockholders representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
outstanding capital stock at a regular or special meeting
duly called for the purpose.

Stock corporations are prohibited from retaining
surplus profits in excess of one hundred percent (100%)
of their paid-in capital stock, except: (a) when justified
by definite corporate expansion projects or programs
approved by the board of directors; or (b) when the
corporation is prohibited under any loan agreement with
financial institutions or creditors, whether local or foreign,
from declaring dividends without their consent, and such
consent has not yet been secured; or (c) when it can be
clearly shown that such retention is necessary under
special circumstances obtaining in the corporation, such
as when there is need for special reserve for probable
contingencies. (A)

Concept of dividends.
A stock corporation exists to make a profit and to distribute a
portion of the profits to its stockholders.
(1) A dividend is that part or portion of the profits of a corporation
set aside, declared and ordered by the directors to be paid ratably
to the stockholders at a fixed time. (Fisher vs. Trinidad, 43 Phil.
480 [1922]; Nielson & Co., Inc. vs. Lepanto Consolidated Mining
Co., 26 SCRA 540 [1968].) It is a payment, ordinarily in cash, to the
stockholders of a corporation as a return upon their investment, (see
Cojuangco vs. Sandiganbayan,’ 586 SCRA 790 [2009].)
'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 384 [2002]

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(2) A dividend is a sum which can be divided

among

services" (Nicolas vs. Court of Appeals, 288 SCRA 307 [1998], citing
Webster's Third New Int. Diet., p. 1986 and Barron's Law Dictionary,
p. 1991.)

word has also been used with no reference to surplus or net profits,
e.g., to describe distributions made to stockholders on liquidation of
the corporation, and to distributing assets upon a reduction of the
capital stock. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 283.)
(3) A partnership has neither shares of stocks or capital stock,
nor does it have a board of directors that can declare dividends
out of its unrestricted retained earnings. Dividends are property
of the corporation and is payable only when the board of directors
declare them as dividends even if there are existing profits of the
corporation. On the other hand, in partnerships, profits are already
due to the partners during the life of the partnership /joint venture
in proportion to their interest as set forth in their agreement, and are
deemed to have been actually or constructively received in the same
taxable year. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 13-17, Nov. 3, 2017.)

(3) As applied to a corporation, the term has a larger meaning
than dividends cover benefits of any kind, the excess of value over
cost, acquisition beyond expenditures, gain or advance. (Ibid., citing
Booth v. Gross, Kelly & Co., 238 P. 289, 831, 41 A.L.R. 868.) It is the
excess of receipts over expenditures, that is, net earnings. (Ibid.,

394

stockholders without touching the capital stock. (Lockhart v. Van
Aestyne, 31 Mich. 76.) The term has been regarded as indicating
that there must be a surplus or profits to be divided. However, the

Valuation of, and share in, dividends.
(1) Dividends, regardless of the form these are declared, that is,
cash, property, or stocks, are valued at the amount of the declared
dividend taken from the unrestricted retained earnings of the
corporation. (PLDT vs. National Telecommunications Commission,
539 SCRA 365 [2007].)

(2) It is a characteristic of a dividend that all stockholders of
the same class share in it in proportion to the respective amounts of
stock which they hold. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 281-283.)

Concept of profits.
(1) In its usual and ordinary meaning, the term profit means
the "return to capital rather than earnings from labor performed
or services rendered." (U.S. Employees Association Employees
Association [USEAEA] vs. U.S. Employees Association [USEA], 107
SCRA 87 [1981], citing Ballantine's Law Diet., 3rd Ed.)
(2) It has also been defined as "the excess of return over
expenditure in a transaction or series of transactions," or the
"excess of an amount received over the amount paid for goods and

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

395

citing American cases.)

To make profits is the main purpose or goal of a business
corporation.
Dividends distinguished from profits
or earnings.
(1) A dividend, as applied to corporate stock, is that portion of
the profits or net earnings which the corporation has set aside for
ratable distribution among the stockholders. Thus, dividends come
from profits, while profits are the source of dividends.
(2) Profits are not dividends until so declared or set aside by the
corporation. They may be paid out in whole or in part, in dividends.
In the meantime, all profits are a part of the assets of the corporation
and do not belong to the stockholders individually. (19 Am. Jur. ad
284.) They may be in cash and in kind.

Nature of dividends received
by a corporation.

Dividends received by a company which is a stockholder in
another corporation are corporate earnings arising from corporate

investment.

The right to a share in such dividends, by way of salary increases,

may not be denied its employees when they are entitled thereto. It

is not a case of a corporation distributing dividends in favor of its

stockholders, in which case, such dividends would be the absolute
property of the stockholders and hence, out of reach by creditors of
the corporation. (Madrigal & Company, Inc. vs. Zamora, 151 SCRA
355 [1987].)

396

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

Power to declare dividends.

The board of directors of a stock corporation has the power to
declare dividends out of the "unrestricted retained earnings" which
shall be payable in cash, in property, or in stock to all stockholders
"on the basis of the outstanding shares held by them."2
(1) Stock dividends. In the case of stock dividend, it shall not
be issued without the approval of stockholders representing at least
2/3 of the capital stock then outstanding at a regular meeting of the
corporation or at a special meeting duly called for the purpose. (Sec.
42, par. 1.)
If the requisite vote for the declaration of stock dividends has
been secured, the stockholders who are opposed cannot legally
refuse to receive their participation in the stock dividends. However,
before stock dividends represented by one class of shares may be
given to holders of another class of shares, it is necessary that the
consent of such holders be first secured, they being given a class
of shares different from the class they are holding. (SEC Opinion,
March 1, 1973.) Thus, a corporation may declare stock dividends
to both holders of founders and common shares, since there is no
prohibition on the matter either in the Revised Corporation Code or
jurisprudence, provided the stockholders affected will agree to such
declaration. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 15, 1972.)
(2) Other dividends.
A mere majority of the quorum of the
board of directors is sufficient to declare other dividends. The board
may declare, other dividends other than stock without need of
stockholders' approval. (Sec. 42, par. 1.)

—

—

Payment of dividends.

The dividends are paid to the registered owners of stock
as of a record date (Infra.), usually a date different from the date
of declaration. The record date determines the time when the
stockholders of record shall be ascertained.
The dividends are stated either at a given percent or a fixed
amount for each share.
’Dividends are declared and paid on the basis of the paid-up stock. The basis is the
number of shares held by the stockholders, not the amount paid in consideration thereof,

(see Sec. 137.)

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

397

Dividends payable only out of unrestricted
retained earnings.
Under the law, dividends other than liquidating dividends
(which are not really dividends as they are from capital) may be
declared and paid only out of "the unrestricted retained earnings"
of the corporation.5 (Ibid.)
(1) A corporation cannot make a valid contract to pay dividends
other than from unrestricted retained earnings or profits and an
agreement to pay such dividends out of the capital is unlawful
and void. The power of a corporation to acquire its own shares is
likewise subject to the condition that there be unrestricted retained
earnings in its books to cover the shares to be purchased. (Sec. 40.)
(2) For purposes of the general rule, the capital or capital stock
which may not be impaired or depleted by dividends is not the
entire net assets of the corporation; rather, it is the legal capital4 of
the corporation in the strict sense, referring to that portion of the
net assets directly or indirectly contributed by the stockholders as
consideration for the stocks issued to them upon the basis of their
par or issued value.

Reasons for the rule.
(1) The main reason for the rule is that the outstanding capital
stock of a corporation, including unpaid subscriptions, is a trust
fund (supra.) for the security of creditors and cannot be distributed

’The Revised Corporation Code, in Sec. 42, adopting the change made in accounting
terminology, substituted the phrase "unrestricted retained earnings," which may be
considered a more precise term, in place of "surplus profits arising from its business,"
in the former law. "Surplus profits" was used in the past to mean "retained earnings"
as presently understood. Indeed, the Revised Corporation Code still speaks of "surplus
profits" in the second paragraph of Sec. 42 in fixing the maximum earnings which may be
retained by a corporation and in Sec. 3 in defining stock corporations. The Revised Code
deleted the phrase "arising from its business."
It may be argued that the term "unrestricted earnings," as used in the Revised
Corporation Code, refers to all the excess of assets of the corporation over its liabilities
including the amount of the legal or stated capita). Hence, it is limited to accumulated net
profits of the corporation "arising from its business" but may now comprehend also
other
gain such as those derived from the sale of fixed assets. But the term does not include
the
unrealized increase in the value of fixed assets. (Infra.)
’For definition of "legal capital," see comments under Sec. 6.

398

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 42

to their prejudice to the stockholders as dividends, the creditors
being precluded from holding the stockholders personally liable of
their claims.
The reason has also been stated to be that the capital stock of a
corporation cannot be diverted or withdrawn to the prejudice of its
creditors and stockholders. This latter statement of the reason for
the rule, however, has been criticized, for although a court will treat
the assets of an insolvent corporation as a trust fund for its creditors
and stockholders, a corporation cannot be said to hold any of its
property subject to a trust while it is a solvent and going concern.
(2) The requirement of unrestricted retained earnings to cover
the shares is based on the trust fund doctrine which means that the
capital stock, property and other assets of a corporation are regarded
as equity in trust for the payment of corporate creditors. Hence,
any disposition of corporate funds to the prejudice of creditors is
null and void. Creditors of a corporation have the right to assume
that so long as there are outstanding debts and liabilities, the board
of directors will not use the assets of the corporation to purchase
its own stock. On this premise, "the declaration of dividends is
dependent upon the availability of surplus profit or unrestricted
retained earnings, as the case may be." (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 0319, February 14, 2019.)
(3) Moreover, each stockholder is entitled as a matter of right
to have the capital of the corporation unimpaired to carry out the
purpose for which the corporation has been created. The rationale
is that stockholders should receive dividends only from their
investment, and not from the investment itself. (18 C.J.S. 1097.)

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Dividends from property in which
capital is invested.

399

./

—

(1) To engage in "wasting business." In the case of corporations
engaged in "wasting business," such as mining or timber-cutting,
sometimes capital consumed in the regular course of operation,
is treated as earnings. According to the so-called "wasting assets"
doctrine, which is based on an English case, such as a "wasting
assets" corporation, the capital of which is necessarily exhausted
in the carrying on of its operations, may rightfully declare and pay
dividends out of net income without making up for the loss of its
capital which is thus being constantly diminished.5 (19 Am. Jur. 2d
298.)

Each dividend payment represents a liquidation of capital
assets.
(2) To utilize a lease or patent. The same is true of a corporation
created for the purpose of utilizing a lease for a term of years, or a
patent.

—

—

(3) To liquidate a business.
Similarly, where a corporation is
formed for the purpose of liquidating the business of a partnership,
and selling all of its property and dividing the proceeds among its
stockholders, such as property is, in no proper sense, its capital
stock within the meaning of the rule prohibiting a corporation from
distributing its capital in the form of dividends, but is rather to be
regarded as property held by the corporation in trust for the benefit
of its stockholders, and which may be distributed by it to them in
the manner prescribed in the articles of incorporation, at least where
the rights of creditors are not involved. (11 Fletcher, pp. 1079-1083.)

Rule as to no-par value stock.

The Revised Corporation Code makes it clear that with respect
to no-par values shares, the entire consideration (including paid-in
surplus, infra.) received from the same shall be treated as capital and
shall not be available for distribution as dividends. (Sec. 6, par. 7.)
The theory is that the stockholders intended that all such
consideration shall constitute the basic business fund of the
corporation to be permanently devoted in the prosecution of the
corporate business.

5In other words, when a corporation is created for the purpose of investing its capital
in property which will necessarily be consumed or exhausted in the ordinary course of
its operations, so that the depreciation in the value of the property cannot be repaired, it
is not subject to the same rules as other corporations. A mining company, for
example,
is not informed for the purpose of permanently using the
property in which its capital
is invested, but for the purpose of investing in property which, in the nature of things,
will be gradually consumed in making profits, and, in estimating the profits of such a
corporation for the purpose of determining whether it may lawfully declare a dividend,
no deduction is to be made for depreciation in the value of its mine by reason of its use
and consumption in taking out the ore or other minerals. Dividends may be lawfully
declared out of the net proceeds of its operations after deducting expenses and debts and
a reasonable fund for contingencies. (11 Fletcher, p. 1079.)

400

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Unrestricted retained earnings explained.

*»

Sec. 42

o

(1) The retained earnings of a corporation is "the difference
between the total present value of its assets after deducting losses
and liabilities and the amount of its capital stock." (11 Fletcher, p.
1041.) Capital stock, in this instance, should be understood to refer
to outstanding stock (see Sec. 137.), and not to the stated or nominal
(authorized) capital stock, (see Secs. 12, 13[h].)

Stated otherwise, the ordinary way of determining whether
or not a corporation has retained earnings is to compute the value
of all its assets and deduct therefrom all of its debts and liabilities,
including legal capital. This may be expressed in the following
equation:

-

Retained earnings = Assets Liabilities and Legal Capital

The difference between the total assets and liabilities of a
corporation represents its net worth or net assets or the stockholders'
equity consisting of the capital investing and the retained earnings.
Thus, the retained earnings will be the balance of the net worth or
net assets after deducting the value of the corporation's outstanding
capital stock. They refer to the accumulated undistributed earnings
or profits realized by a corporation arising from the transaction of
its business and the management of its affairs, out of current and
prior years.6
Section 42 does not categorically state that the retained earnings
of a corporation from which dividends may be declared should arise
from its business as required by Section 16 of the former Corporation
Law. However, sound accounting principles dictate that dividends
may be declared only out of the actual earnings or profits realized
from the business of the corporation.
(2) Such retained earnings or portion thereof are said to be restricted
and, therefore, free for dividend distribution to stockholders, if they
have not been reserved or set aside by the board of directors for
some corporate purpose or for some other purpose in accordance
with managerial, legal, or contractual requirements, (see Sec. 42,
par. 2.)
‘Dividends from the profits may come from the current net profits, i.e., those earned in
the preceding year, or from the undistributed profits or earned surplus, i.e., the accumulated
profits realized during all prior years.

Sec 42

401

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

SEC rules.
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 11-08 provides these guidelines in
determining retained earnings available for dividend declaration.
(1) Definitions. - The Circular provides these definitions:
(a) The term "retained earnings" refers to "the accumulated
profits realized out of normal and continuous operations of the
business after deducting therefrom distributions to stockholders
and transfers to capital stock or other accounts. The retained
earnings shall be the amount as shown in the financial statements
audited by the company's independent auditor. If applicable,
such amount shall refer to the retained earnings of the parent
company but not the consolidated financial statements."
(b) The term "unrestricted retained earnings" refers to "the
amount of accumulated profits and gains realized out of the
normal and continuous operations of the business after deducting
therefrom distributions to stockholders and transfers to capital
stock or other accounts, and which is: (1) not appropriated by its
board of directors for corporate expansion projects or programs:
(2) not covered by a restriction for dividend declaration under
a loan agreement; and (3) not required to be retained under
special circumstances obtaining in the corporation such as when
there is a need for a special reserve for probable contingencies.
(2) Items affecting unrestricted retained earnings.
These items
affect the unrestricted retained earnings account from an accounting

—

purview.

(a) Nominal or temporary or income statement accounts
closed to income and expense summary at the end of the period to
determine actual results of operations during the period and further
closed to retained earnings account;
(b) Effects of changes in accounting policy;

(c) Foreign exchange gains and losses;
(d) Actual gains or losses;

(e) Share in the net income of associates /joint ventures
accounted for under equity method of accounting;
(f) Dividend declarations during the period;

(g) Appropriations of retained earnings during the period;

402

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(h) Reversals of appropriations;

(i) Effects of prior period adjustments; and

(j) Treasury shares.

—

(3) Retained earnings available for dividends.
Dividends,
whether cash, property or stock, shall be declared out of unrestricted
retained earnings of the corporation. Accordingly, a corporation
cannot declare dividends when it has zero or negative retained
earnings otherwise known as retained earnings deficit. For such
purpose, the surplus profits or income must be a bona fide income
founded upon actual earnings or profits. The existence, therefore, of
surplus profits arising from the operation of corporate business is a
condition precedent to the declaration of dividend.
(4) Actual earning or profits.
For purposes of the Guidelines,
the phrase "actual earnings or profits" as mentioned refers to the
net income for the year based on the audited financial statements,
adjusted for unrealized items discussed below, which are considered
not available for dividend declaration.
(a) Share /equity in net income of the associate or joint
venture accounted for equity method as the same is not yet
actually earned or realized. It is only after the investee company
declares such income as dividend that said income is actually
realized or the earnings becomes available for dividend
declaration. Due to the effect on the investment account, only
cash or property dividends declared by the investee company
shall be considered as earnings declarable as dividends by the
investor company;
(b) Unrealized foreign exchange gains, except those
attributable to cash and cash equivalents, for the time being
that they are not yet actual income prior to realization of such
foreign exchange gain;
(c) Unrealized actuarial gains which is the result when the
company chooses the option of recognizing actuarial gains or
losses directly to profit or loss statement;
(d) Fair value adjustment or the gains arising only from
marked-to-market valuation which are not yet realized;

—

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

403

(e) The amount of recognized deferred tax asset that
reduced the amount of income tax expense and increased the
net income and retained earnings, until realized;
(f) Adjustment due to deviation from PFRS/GAAP of the
audited financial statements which results to gain;
(g) Other unrealized gains or adjustments to the retained
earnings brought about by certain transactions accounted for
under the PFRS such as accretion income under LAS 39, Day
1 gains on initial recognition of financial instruments, reversal
of revaluation increment to retained earnings, and negative
goodwill on investments in associate;
(h) Other adjustments that the SEC may prescribe by
amending the Annex "A" of these Guidelines.
The items above are defined in accordance with the financial
reporting framework, i.e., Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles in the Philippines or Philippine Financial Reporting
Standards (PFRS), followed by the company.
(5) Additional paid-in capital. Additional Paid-In Capital Stock
shall neither be declared as dividend nor shall it be reclassified to
absorb deficiency except through an organizational restructuring
duly approved by the SEC.

—

1982 rules on redeemable shares.
(1) The 1982 SEC Rules Governing Redeemable and Treasury
Shares provides that generally, treasury shares shall be deducted
from the unrestricted retained earnings to arrive at the 'Retained
Earnings Available for Dividend Declaration.' "The reason for this
is that such amount of earnings equivalent to the cost of treasury
shares is not considered part of earned or surplus profits that is
distributable as dividends." Also under the same 1982 rules, an
exception has been drawn under section 4 (1) in relation to section
3 (1). Under the provided exception, redeemed redeemable shares,
although part of the treasury shares, is not subtracted from the
unrestricted retained earnings to arrive at the 'Retained Earnings
Available for Dividend Declaration.' (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-19,
Feb. 14, 2019.)

(2) There is no conflict between the general guide formula as
provided for in 2008 Guidelines and the explicit exception under

404

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

the 1982 Rules. "It is well settled that a special and local statute or
rules, providing for a particular case or class of cases, is not repealed
by a subsequent statute or rule, general in its terms, provisions and
application, unless the intent to repeal or alter is manifest, although
the terms of the general act are broad enough to include the cases
embraced in the special law." Under this premise, the repealing
provision under the 2008 Guidelines, did not repeal previous
guidelines and rules of the SEC which are not in conflict with the
current rules. In this regard, it is appropriate to note that the 2008
Guidelines, although making no distinction as to the manner in which
treasury shares are acquired, only enumerates "treasury shares" as
one of the items affecting the unrestricted retained earnings account
from an accounting perspective. It does not specifically state that all
types of treasury shares, regardless of the nature of their acquisition,
should be deducted from the unrestricted retained earnings to arrive
at the 'Retained Earnings Available for Dividend Declaration.' In
this regard, no conflict is present.
As a summary, the annexes in the 2008 Guidelines and SEC
Rule 68 should be read in harmony with the 1982 Rules. The cost
of treasury shares acquired from the redemption of redeemable
shares is not deducted; rather, it forms part of the 'Retained
Earnings Available for Dividend Declaration.' In effect, a dividend
declaration from the unrestricted retained earnings gross of the cost
of redeemed preferred shares acquired pursuant to the Articles of
Incorporation is considered as valid. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-19,
February 14, 2019.)
Existence of actual profits or earnings.

To justify the declaration of dividends, there must be an actual
bona fide surplus profits or earned surplus over and above all debts
and liabilities of the corporation. (Steinberg vs. Velasco, 52 Phil. 953
[1929].) Hence:
(1) Earnings of the corporation which have not yet been received
even though they consist in money which is due cannot be included in
the profits out of which dividends may be paid.7 (11 Fletcher, p. 1064.)
’Corporation X owns more than 20% of the voting common shares of Corporation Y.
Under the equity method of accounting. Corporation X is required to book its share in the
net earnings or loss of Corporation Y. Can Corporation X declare cash or stock dividend or
both from its recorded equity earnings in Corporation Y which are not yet receive in cash?

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

405

(2) As a rule, dividends cannot be declared out of borrowed
money, for borrowed money is not profit; but money may be
borrowed temporarily to pay dividends, if the corporation has used
its surplus assets to make improvements for which it might have
borrowed money. (18 C.J.S. 1102.)
(3) A corporation

may properly pay dividends from

accumulated surplus out of previous years although realizing no
profit from earnings.
(4) On the other hand, it cannot pay dividends although it has
realized actual profits for the year in which dividends are declared
until it has eliminated a deficit resulting from its operation of
preceding years. (William v. Western Union Tel. Co., 93 N.Y. 162.) In
other words, dividends may not be declared if deficit exists. (Infra.)
(5) Treasury shares (see Sec. 9.) not being part of earned or
surplus profits, are not distributable as dividends but if there are
retained earnings previously held to support their acquisition, they
may be declared as property dividend out of the earnings, (see infra.)

Deduction of expenses.

In addition to deducting the amount of the capital stock from the
value of the assets of the corporation, deduction must also, as a rule,
be made for all expenses incurred in the conduct of the business of

the company.
(1) Generally, net earnings are what remains of gross receipt
after deducting the expenses of producing them. The Supreme
Court of the United States has said: "The term 'profits', out of which
dividends alone can properly be declared, denotes what remains
after defraying every expense, including loans falling due, as well
as the interest on such Ioans."

No. Retained earnings or surplus profits referred to under Sec. 43 from which dividends
can be legally declared do not include participation or share of a corporation in the profits
of its subsidiaries and affiliates, unless and until such profits are actually received in the
form of cash or property dividends. Thus, while for purposes of management account,
Corporation X can recognize as income its equity in the net earnings in Corporation Y,
•he same cannot be declared as dividends since it is not yet actually realized as income
“I as much as Corporation Y has not yet declared the same as dividends. (SEC Opinion,
Oct. 6, 1995.)

406

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(2) Depredation in the value of the .corporation's plant is a
proper expense charge and the same is. true of expenditures for
maintenances and upkeep. And a reserve, fund may be accumulated
for the purpose of making repairs and renewals.
(3) Taxes are properly treated as a part of the company's
operating expenses, to be paid out of the earnings, and this is true
even though they are found upon an erroneous valuation of the
property upon which they are assessed.
Only such expenditures as have actually been made can properly
be claimed as a deduction from earnings. (11 Fletcher, pp. 1056-1060;
see also 18 C.J.S. 1100-1102.)

Distribution of paid-in surplus as dividends.
Under Section 16 (now Sec. 42.) of the former Corporation Law,
(Act No. 1459.) which reads: "No corporation shall make or dedare
dividends except from the surplus profits arising from business, or
divide or distribute its capital stock or property other than actual
profits..." dividends whether cash or stocks, must be dedared only
out of surplus profits arising from corporate business.
The SEC has expressed the view that paid-in or premium surplus
(difference between the par value and higher price for which stock
is sold by the corporation) cannot be dedared as cash dividends
under Section 15 (SEC Opinion, May 7, 1968; see SEC Opinion No.
51-03, Oct. 21, 2003.) or even as stock dividends because dividends
can be dedared only from the unrestricted retained earnings.’ (SEC
Opinion, April 16, 1988.)
The SEC has allowed the dedaration of the dividends from paidin surplus subject to these conditions: (a) they shall be dedared only
as stock dividends; (b) no creditors shall be prejudiced therefrom;
and (c) there shall be no resulting impairment of capital. (SEC
Opinion, Od. 19, 1989; SEC Opinion, Od. 2, 2001.) The reason is
*The reason given is that "the entire proceeds of sales of a corporation of its own
stock, even when sold for more than par value are part of its capital stock (ix, to he
regarded as paid-in capital, rather than as retained earnings) and, therefore, cannot be
profits earned through the conduct of its business out of which dividends may be paid(Merchants and Insurance Reporting Co. v. Youtz, 178 P. 540.) It also said that to permit
this capital surplus to be distributed as cash dividend is a "fraud upon creditors who
extend credit on the faith of its capital stock." (14 GJ. Sec 1210, p. 801.)

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

407

that when a corporation converts the premium or contributed
surplus into capital by issuing to its stocldiolders stock dividends,
it actually parts with nothing but merely transfers the surplus to
capital account and issues shares of stock to represent the same.
(SEC Opinions, Aug. 16, 1993 and March 27, 1995.)
Distribution of the revaluation surplus
as dividends.

A corporation can have its fixed assets like real estate revalued
to determine its current market value. The excess increment on
the property over the stated cost is credited to an account called
revaluation or appraisal surplus to show that such is the result of an
estimated increase in the value of the property, (see SEC Opinion,
May 14, 1970.)

—

(1) General rule.
An increase in the value of the fixed assets
such as land as a result of mere valuation cannot be counted in the
computation of a surplus as basis for a dividend declaration.
The reason why purely conjectured increase in valuation
cannot be considered for dividend declaration is because such
appraisal, however, justified for the time being, is subject to market
fluctuations, is merely anticipatory of future profits and may never
be actually realized as an asset of the corporation by the sale of the
property at the value it was appraised. The surplus of a corporation
which may be used for the payment of dividend must be a bona
fide and not an artificial or fictitious one and not be dependent for
its existence upon a theoretical estimate of an appreciation in the
value of the corporation's assets. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 15, 1973, citing
Berkes Broadcasting Co. v. Crawmer, 356 Ph. 620.)
Sound accounting requires that such unrealized appreciation
shall not be confused with a paid-in surplus or an earned surplus
due to accumulated profits arising from the successful conduct of
the business. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 7, 1971, citing Ballantine, p. 541.)
(2) Exceptions.
The above ruling is not absolute as the
SEC allows certain exceptions making revaluation increment or
reappraisal surplus available for cash and stock dividend. Thus,
where a fixed asset is being depreciated based on its appraisal
value, and the depreciation on the appraisal increment is
charged
against operations, the earnings from operations in
that period are

—

408

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 42

diminished by the amount of such depredation which amount,
therefore, is actual income shifted to and lodged in another account.
Whether such amount is restituted to retained earnings or not is of
no consequence. In such event, the portion of increase in the value
fixed assets as result of revaluation thereof may be dedared as
dividends provided these conditions exist:
(a) The corporation has suffident income from operations
from which the depredation on the appraisal increase was
charged;
(b) It has no defidt at the time the depredation on the
appraisal increase was charged to operations; and
(c) Such depredation on appraisal increase previously
charged to operations has not been erased or impaired by
subsequent losses; otherwise, only that portion is not impaired
by subsequent losses is available for dividend. (SEC Opinion,
Oct. 2, 1981 and March 19, 1992.)

Declaration of dividends.

—

(1) Conditions. A dividend dedaration ordinarily requires the
concurrence of two things, namely:
(a) The existence of "unrestricted retained earnings" out of
which the dividends may be dedared and paired; and
(b) A corporate resolution of the board of directors
dedaring the payment of a portion or all of such earnings to the
stockholders.
(2) Additional requirements for stock dividends. Cash dividends
require only approval of the board of directors. Stock dividends are
issued by resolution of the board of directors and approval of the
resolution by the stockholders. For the dedaration of stock dividends,
the corporation must have also a suffident number of authorized
unissued shares for distribution to stockholders; otherwise, it must
increase its capital stock to the extent of the corporate earnings to be
dedared and distributed as stock dividends, (see Sec. 37.)
The distribution of the dividends will reduce the retained
earnings of the corporation by exactly the amount paid out to
stockholders in the case of cash dividend, or transferred to capital
account in the case of stock dividend. (Infra.)

—

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

409

(3) SEC approval, ^it is not mandatory for the corporation to
seek prior approval/ ad vice from the SEC to declare cash and stock
dividend provided the following are complied with:
(a) For cash dividend declaration:
1. Board of Directors approval of the cash dividend
declaration; and
2. Sufficient unrestricted retained earnings as of the
last fiscal or calendar year.
(b) For stock dividend declaration:
1. Board of Directors approval of the stock dividend
declaration;

2. Stockholders' approval representing at least twothirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital and sufficient portion
of the present authorized capital; and
3. Sufficient unrestricted retained earnings as of the
last fiscal or calendar year.
However, corporations may, at their option, apply for
acknowledgment notice of their declaration of the cash and / or stock
dividend out of the unissued portion of their previously approved
authorized capital stock for whatever legal purpose it may serve.
If they avail of such option, they must submit the documentary
requirements stated in the SEC's website (Other Applications
Documentary Requirements) and pay the filing fee.
Further, if the stock dividend declaration requires an increase of
authorized capital stock, an application therefor is mandated to be
filed with the SEC pursuant to Section 37 of the Revised Corporation
Code. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-19, June 17, 2019.)

—

Discretion of the board of directors
to declare dividends.

The board of directors has the responsibility to declare dividends
and determine the timing as well as their amount subject
to the
rights of stockholders as to the order or preferences for the payment
of dividends on various classes of stock (e.g., preferred stock)
as

fixed by the articles of incorporation.

410

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(1) That profits or earnings have accrued in the prosecution
of the corporate business does not necessarily impose upon the
directors the duty to declare them as dividends. (Wabask R. Co. v.
Barclay, 280 U.S. 197.) They are given wide discretion over whether
dividends will be declared and paid.
(2) If in their honest judgment the directors reasonably
determine that the profits should be kept in the business, no court
has the power to compel them to make the distribution in the
absence of bad faith’ or clear abuse of discretion, or such arbitrary
or unreasonable conduct as amount to a breach of trust. The
apportionment of the net earnings to the payment of dividends is
largely a question of policy trusted to the discretion of the board
of directors. If there is any doubt about the propriety of declaring
dividends, the directors are justified in resolving the doubt against
such action. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 322-323.)
(3) So long as the board of directors acts in good faith, it is at
liberty to distribute at all any dividend subject to the prohibition in
the second paragraph of Section 42.'° (Infra.)

Limit on retained earnings.
Stock corporations are prohibited from retaining surplus
profits in excess of 100% of their paid-in capital stock except when
justified by the reasons mentioned. (Sec. 42, par. 2.) The prohibition
on retention of profits provided in Section 42 applies to all stock
corporations, including wholly-owned subsidiaries. Section 42
’There are no infallible distinguishing earmarks of bad faith. The following facts
are relevant to the issue of bad faith and are admissible in evidence; intense hostility of
the controlling faction against the majority; exclusion of the minority from employment
by the corporation; high salaries or bonuses, or corporate loans made to the officers in
control; the fact that the majority group may be subject to high personal income taxes if
substantial dividends are paid; the existence of a desire by the controlling directors to
acquire the minority stock as cheaply as possible. But if they are not motivating causes,
they do not constitute bad faith as a matter of law.
The essential test of bad faith is to determine whether the policy of the directors
is directed by their personal interests rather than the corporate welfare. Directors
are fiduciaries. Their cestui que are the corporation and the stockholders as a body.
Circumstances as those mentioned and any other significant factors, appraised in the
light of the financial condition and requirements of the corporation, will determine the
conclusion as to whether the directors have or have not been animated by personal
distinct from corporate, considerations. (Gottfried v. Gottfried, 73 N.Y.S. 2d 696.)
'"In view of the restrictions imposed by Sec. 42, the "business judgment' rule which
upholds judicial non-interference in corporate management (see Sec. 22.) has limited
application with regard to dividend declarations.

Sec 42

411

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

makes no qualification in using the words "stock corporations."
(SEC Opinion, July 22, 1993.)
There may be some question as to whether or not the retention
of profits is justified by the "reasonable needs of the business."
Suffice it to say that the policy of the law to encourage and force
the distribution of dividends curtails the discretionary power of
directors to retain corporate earnings.
Action to enforce declaration of dividends
(1) General rule.
Since a stockholder has no individual
interest in the profits of a corporation until a dividend has been
declared, the rule is that, before the declaration of a dividend, a
stockholder cannot maintain an action at law to recover his share of
the accumulated profits. Mandamus is not a proper remedy in such a

—

case.

—

(2) Where there exist sufficient net profits. An action at law may
be maintained where it is alleged that sufficient net profits have
been earned to obligate the corporation to pay the amount agreed.
(a) The stockholders may sue the directors to compel them
to declare and pay dividend if they unreasonably accumulate
profits of the corporation but they must prove the justification
of declaring dividends.
(b) Before an action to compel the declaration and payment
of a dividend can be maintained, it maintained, it must appear
that the complaining stockholder has made application to the
directors of the corporation for the relief sought.
(c) Where, however, it appears that the directors of a
corporation have wantonly violated their duty, and that an
application by a stockholder to them for relief would be
inefficacious, such application need not be made. In such an
action, the corporation is a necessary party defendant. (18
C.J.S.
1142.)

Time for declaration of dividends.
(1) At the end of the year.

—

A corporation has a fiscal year to
whether it
earned profits or incurred losses. Of course, such results may also
be computed monthly, quarterly, or semi-annually, but a summary
is always made at the end of the year to
determine the performance

determine the results of its operation during the year

of the company for the whole year.

—

412

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 42

(a) If the company earned profits during the past year, it
may declare the same as dividends, but if it does not, the profits
are carried over to the next fiscal year. Conversely, if the company
incurred losses during the past year, its books will record such
loss and no profits, unless it accumulates earnings during the
previous years which have not been distributed as dividends.
If follows from this that a corporation may incur losses
during one fiscal year or any portion thereof and still be able
to declare dividends, that is, if such losses do not affect profits
that the company has accumulated. On the other hand, a
corporation may earn profits in one fiscal year but because of
losses suffered during the previous years, it may not be able to
declare dividends.
(b) From the foregoing, what is material is the existence of
earned profits on the date of declaration, taking into account the
results of the entire operations of the company. Since the finan¬
cial statements are generally prepared after the end of the fiscal
year, dividends are declared, as a general rule, after the fiscal
period has ended, when retained earnings are shown to exist.
The determination of the existence of retained earnings may
be made even before the end of the fiscal year, but this is merely
to enable the management to map out its dividend policy for the
next fiscal year.
As a rule, a corporation should
(2) Before the end of the year.
earned
during an interim period
not declare dividends out of profits
or before the end of the fiscal year, considering that profits earned
during say, the first half of the year may be wiped out by losses
incurred during the latter part of the same year. (SEC Opinion,
July 16, 1971.) However, a corporation may declare dividends even
before the end of the fiscal year, provided it has sufficiently earned
surplus for the purpose which will not be impaired by losses,
whether expected or not, during the remaining period of the fiscal
year." (SEC Opinion, Oct. 22, 1974.)

—

"Reduction surplus or surplus realized by the reduction of the capital stock effected
under Section 38 by decreasing the par value of authorized shares may be declared only
as stock dividend. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 8, 1991; see Sec. 38.)

Sec 42

413

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

The SEC requires that the projected income statement of the
corporation for the remaining period of the year as well as the
basis and assumptions used shall be submitted to the SEC. Should
the corporation sustain losses during the year, cash dividends
distributed to the stockholder of record must be correspondingly
refunded to the corporation. (SEC Opinion, July 24, 1991.)
To summarize a corporation may declare cash dividends
payable from the net earnings realized before the end of the relevant
year, subject to these conditions:
(a) The amount of dividends involved would not be impaired
by losses during the remaining period of the year;
(b) The projected income statement of the company for the
remaining period of the year and the bases and assumptions used
shall be submitted to the SEC; and
(c) Should the company sustain losses during the year,
cash dividends distributed to the stockholders of record must be
correspondingly refunded to the company, (see SEC Opinion, Jan.
15, 1986; SEC Opinion, July 24, 1991.)

Validity of dividend determined
at time of declaration.
(1) Effect of subsequent insolvency of corporation. In determining
whether dividends were lawfully made, the transaction must be
viewed in the light of the time of its occurrence.

—

If net or surplus profits existed at that time, the payment of the

dividends is not rendered unlawful by the subsequent insolvency

of the corporation, and if the assets of a corporation are valued
honestly and fairly in view of all the facts known at the time of the
declaration, a dividend is not rendered unlawful by the fact that
such assets subsequently prove to be worth less than the valuation
placed upon them.

—

(2) Effects of good faith in making payment out of capital.
However, mere ignorance of facts showing the true condition of
the assets of a corporation which could have been ascertained by
reasonable inquiry and examination is not sufficient to validate a
dividend which has been paid out of capital.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

»14

Sec. 42

Whether the assets of a corporation were so valued is not a
question to be determined by the board of directors of a corporation,
nor by a majority of its stockholders; hence, a finding but the
directors of a corporations that certain dividends, although in
fact paid out of capital, were declared fairly and in good faith, in
the light of what was known and believed at the time they were
declared, and a subsequent ratification of such finding by a majority
of the stockholders, do not validate the payment of such dividends.
(18 C.J.S. 1102.)

Payment of subscription from dividends.
It has been held that a
(1) From dividends to be declared.
is "payable from the
subscription
the
that
stipulation to the effect
the company owned
of
all
shares
and
on
any
first dividends declared
full amount of the
the
until
declared
are
dividends
time
by me at the
the subscriber
it
"obligates
for
is
illegal
been
paid"
has
subscription
to pay nothing for the shares except as dividends may accrue upon
the stock." In the contingency that dividends are not paid, there is
no liability. (National Exchange Co. vs. Dexter, 51 Phil. 601 [1928].)

—

—

Where payment has been made on
on whether the stockholder is
the
rule
depends
stock subscription,
or
not.
delinquent
(a) The stockholder is still entitled to receive cash dividends
due on delinquent stock but the dividends "shall first be applied
to the unpaid balance on the subscription, plus costs and
expenses." (Sec. 42, par. 1.) The cash dividends may be applied
as payment for the unpaid subscription of all delinquent shares,
(2) From cash dividends.

(see Sec. 70.)

(b) Cash dividends cannot be withheld from the subscribers
who have not fully paid their subscriptions (unless they are
delinquent on their unpaid subscriptions). Basically, this is
because the balance of the unpaid subscription is not yet due
and demandable. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 05-16, March 31,

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

415

—

(3) From stock dividends.
A stockholder's indebtedness to a
corporation under a subscription agreement cannot be compensated
with the amount of his shares in the same corporation, there being
no relation of creditor and debtor with regard to such shares, (see
Art. 1249, Civil Code.) Under Section 42 (par. 1.), "stock dividends
shall be withheld from the delinquent stockholder until his unpaid
subscription is fully paid."
In other words, under the provision, it is not allowed to apply
stock dividend to unpaid subscription.1’
(a) A stockholder, as such, is not a creditor of the corporation
for his shares although the latter is creditor of the former for the
unpaid balance of his subscriptions.” It is the prevailing doctrine
that the capital stock of a corporation is a trust fund to be used
more particularly for the security of creditors of the corporation
who presumably deal with it on the credit of its capital stock.
(18 C.J.S. 618.) In view of the foregoing, a stockholder's liability
for unpaid subscriptions (although not yet delinquent) may not
be offset by the issuance and distributed of stock dividends.
(Supra.)
(b) A stock dividend requires a transfer of surplus to capital
account and it cannot be made without issuing new shares. Since
the retained earnings of the corporation are already applied
as payment to the new issuance of shares, the same cannot be
reapplied to previous subscriptions still unpaid as this would
be, in effect, reacquiring its own shares, the proceeds of which
will be applied to the unpaid subscription, which case is not
allowed under Section 41. (SEC Opinion, July 4, 1984.)
(c) Section 6 states that preferred shares may be given
preferential right in the distribution of dividends among
others, but it does not prohibit holders of preferred shares from
acquiring shares of whatever class by the way of stock dividend.
As long as all the requirements for the declaration of stock
dividend are complied with, the issuance of common shares in

2016.)
(c) The corporation may use the cash dividends to pay off
stockholders' subscriptions but which have not been declared
delinquent only if the stockholders concerned give their consent
thereto. (SEC Opinion, March 18, 1991.)

"Note that stock dividend can be withheld only from a delinquent stockholder.
Stock dividends may be declared out of retained earnings even
if there are still unpaid
subscriptions.
"A subscription contract (see Sec 60.) creates a creditor-debtor
relationship between
the corporation and the subscriber.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OB THE PHILIPPINES

416

Sec 42

favor of stockholders holding preferred shares in valid. (SEC
Opinion No. 28-04, April 27, 2004.)

Instead of stock dividends, the corporation may declare cash

dividends, and use the said dividends to pay off the delinquent
stockholder's unpaid subscriptions. (SEC Opinion, March 15, 1968.)

Liability of stockholders and directors
for illegally received dividends.

—

(1) Liability of stockholders to refund them to corporation or its
In case dividends are wrongfully or illegally declared
creditors.
and paid, there is ample authority for the rule that the stockholders
who received them can be held liable to refund them to the
corporation or its creditors. It is immaterial that the dividends were
mistakenly paid out or were received in good faith. Since they do
not act in a corporate capacity in receiving the dividends, they do
not ratify the illegal act of the board as to preclude a subsequent
recovery. (Lovington Life, F. & M. Ins. Co. v. Page, 66 Am. Dec. 165.)

—

(2) Where corporation insolvent at time of wrongful payment. The
rule is especially true if the corporation is insolvent (McDonald v.
Williams, 174 U.S. 397.), although the authorities are conflicting
where the corporation was solvent at the time of the wrongful

payment.
(a) It seems to be an unfair and unreasonable burden to
require innocent stockholders to repay dividends, perhaps
years after they have been spent, when they were received in
good faith from a solvent corporation in the regular course of
business, even if it has later become bankrupt. If a wrong was
done to the security of creditors by the directors, they are the
ones to be held responsible. (Ballantine, p. 600.)
(b) In view, however of the trust fund theory adopted in
our jurisdiction, the payment of dividends from capital may
be considered a wrongful diversion of a "trust fund" held for
the benefit of creditors, so that the fund may accordingly be
followed into the hands of stockholders, (see Phil. Trust Co.
vs. Rivera, 44 Phil. 469 [1925]; Lumanlan vs. Cura, 59 Phil. 746
[1934].) The innocent stockholders can recover damages from

the guilty directors.

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

417

—

(3) Liability of directors.
If the directors acted in good faith,
and without negligence, they are not liable to the corporation or
to creditors for declaring and paying dividends when they should
not have done so, and thereby diminishing the capital stock. But
if they have been guilty of a fraudulent breach of trust, or of gross
negligence, in paying dividends when they had no right to pay them,
they are personally liable to creditors to the extent that creditors are
damaged by the dividend.
Liability of directors for unlawfully paid dividends may be
enforced under Section 30.

Remedies of corporate creditors.
(1) If dividends are improperly declared and paid when there
are no net earnings, they may be reclaimed by the corporate creditors
or by a receiver or assignee acting for the benefit of the creditors
from the hands of any one who is not an innocent purchaser or
recipient of the same for a valuable consideration.
(2) If such a wrong is threatened, a creditor may maintain
a suit for an injunction, since the fund to which the creditors
look for security would be impaired. (Clark on Corporations,
pp. 435-436; Steinberg vs. Velasco, 52 Phil. 953 [1929].)

Persons entitled to dividends.
The right of one to receive dividends from a corporation on
its stock is, manifestly, justified only on the theory that he is a
stockholder. In other words, the right to dividends is an incident to
ownership of stock, and this applies to stock dividends and to cash
dividends. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 370.)
(1) Unless the dividend is payable to stockholders of record
on
a specified date, the real owner of corporate stock at the time
the
dividend is actually declared thereon is the person entitled to the
dividends (Ibid.), without regard to the time when the dividends
where earned or made payable. In other words, it is only the
stockholders of record as of the date of the declaration of dividends or holders
of record on a certain future date, as the case may be, who are
entitled
to receive dividends unless the parties have agreed
otherwise. (SEC

418

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

Sec 42

Opinion, Nov. 12, 1986; Cojuangco vs. Sandiganbayan,14 586 SCRA
790 [2009].)
Naturally, the persons appearing as stockholders in the stock and
transfer book on the date fixed will be the ones entitled to dividends,
and the date for payment is only indicated for convenience of the
company. With respect to the payment of dividends, there must
be no discrimination against any stockholders (1 Fletcher, pp. 882887.), so that the date for the purpose must ordinarily apply to all

stockholders.
(2) As between parties respectively entitled to capital and
to income of stock held in trust, the right to particular dividends
depends generally upon the creator of the trust, actual or presumed.
(19 Am. Jur. 2d 371.)
(3) A transfer of shares not recorded in the books of the
corporation is valid only as between the parties (Sec. 63.); hence,

the transferor has the right to dividends as against the corporation
without notice of the transfer but he is the trustee of the real owner
of the dividends subject to the contract between the transferor and
transferee as to who is entitled to receive the dividends.
(4) Share subscriptions not yet recorded in the stock and
transfer book on the date of dividend declaration are not entitled
to dividends. Hence, subscribers to the increase of capital stock are
considered stockholders of record only at the time of the approval of said
increase by the SEC (see Sec. 37, par. 3.) and not at the time of filing
of the certificate of increase of the capital stock, (see SEC Opinion,
Sept. 15, 1980.)
Right of stockholders after declaration
of dividends.

—

(1) Cash dividends.
As soon as cash dividends are publicly
declared, the stockholders have the right to their pro rata share. (1
Fletcher, pp. 780-789.)

“Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines., Annotated, p. 410, 2002

Ed.

>

TITLE TV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

419

(a) In the absence of a record date,'5 the dividend belongs
to the person who is the owner of the shares of stock at the time
of declaration, and not to the owner of the shares at the time
of payment. The reason is that when a dividend declaration
is made, the corporation becomes debtor and the right of the
shareholder to distribution, unless a record date is specified,
becomes fixed by the declaration. (Ballantine, p. 566; see Barretto
vs. Sta. Maria, 26 Phil. 200 [1914].)
(b) It is the declaration of the dividends which creates both
the dividends itself and the right of the stockholders to demand
and receive it. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 9, 1992.) So, one who receives
stock from a corporation immediately before a dividend is
declared has the same right as the other stockholders to share,
unless he is excluded by the term of his contract. (SEC Opinion,
Aug. 6, 1990, citing Fletcher, Sec. 5376.)
(c) When a cash dividend is duly declared, the amount
due a stockholder belongs to him and it cannot, without his
consent, be reverted to the surplus account of the corporation.

“A record date is the date fixed in the resolution declaring dividends, when the
dividend shall be payable to those who are stockholders of record on a specified future
date or as of the date of the meeting declaring said dividend, (see Ballantine, pp. 566-567.)
The date fixed determines the stockholders who are to receive the dividends. The usual
practice is for the corporation to provide for the closing of its transfer books on a certain
date such that only stockholders as of the given date are entitled to dividends. Usually,
several days elapse between the time a person buys stock and the time the corporation
records the sale. Thus, a seller of stock who is still the stockholder of record on a specified
date may receive a dividend after he has sold his stock to another person. Thus, only
those whose ownership of shares are duly registered in the stock and transfer book are
considered stockholders of record and therefore, entitled to all rights of stockholders.
Because payments of stock dividends requiring an increase in the authorized capital
stock are contingent upon SEC's approval (see Sec. 37.), record and payment dates are
ordinarily indicated as falling within a certain period following SEC's approval of capital
increase. AU cash dividends declared by a corporation shaU have a
date which
shall not be less than ten or more than 30 days from the said declaration.record
In case,
date is specified, the date shall be deemed fixed at 15 days from declaration. no record
Companies
obliged to pay dividends may have a single declaration for several cash dividends
within
a year subject to the condition that their record and
payment dates are also explicitly
provided. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 2, April 17, 2009; amending Sec. 3 of
Amended
Governing Preemptive and Other Subscription Rights and Declaration of Stock andRules
Cash
Dividends.)

The term a dividends is used to indicate that the price of shares of a
excludes the dividend payable on a certain future date to the stockholders of corporation
record on a
preceding date (E.L. Kohler, op. dt., p. 198.) or a previously declared dividend.
The buyer is entitled to the declared dividend when the stock is sold
cum dividends or
atvidends-on.

’P^ified

420

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

The company should exert reed and sincere efforts to contact
and deliver the dividend to him,16 and only after the lapse of
the prescriptive period for claiming the dividend may the same
be reverted to the surplus account of the corporation. (SEC
Opinion, Jan. 29, 1971.)
It is preposterous to say that a debt can be cancelled by the
action of the debtor without the consent of the creditor. (McLaran v.
Crescent Planning Mill Co., 93 SW 819.)
The above rule does not apply to stock
(2) Stock dividends.
dividends as the declaration of such dividends may be rescinded at
any time before the actual issuance of the stock. (Stats v. Biograph
Co., 236 Fed. 454.)
(a) Unlike a cash dividend, a stock dividend requires, as a
general rule, more than mere declaration to make it effective.
The vote to increase stock is not per se an increase; and until the
stock is actually issued, or at least in some manner especially set
apart to the stockholder, its effect is not complete. (19 Am. Jur.
2d 317.)
(b) The stock dividend in shares of the kind already held
gives the shareholder nothing in the way of a distribution
of assets but merely divides his existing shares into smaller
units. There is not increase in his proportionate claim upon the
corporate assets or income by reason of such a paper dividend.
There is no obligation upon the corporation to declare stock
dividends, which are not distributions but only a change of the
share and capital structure. (Ballantine, p. 560.)

—

(c) Since the declaration of stock dividend gives the

stockholder nothing until all the formalities necessary to a valid

increase of stock are complied with, its revocation, therefore,
takes away nothing. But unless rescinded, the shareholders have
absolute right to their respective shares in the stock dividends so
declared and actual delivery of the corresponding certificate is
not essential to make the shareholder the owner of the dividend.

'•Check payments are mailed directly to the stockholder or his nominee by the
company's stock transfer agent. For unissued stock certificates or those registered in
street name, checks are sent to the handling broker who, in turn, remits payment to the
beneficial owner of the shares.

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

421

Time for payment of dividends.
(1) Frequency and intervals of declaration. Dividends are usually
declared, one at a time, generally quarterly.

—

(a) Where the condition of the company is sound and the
earnings are regarded as constant, the directors may, at one
meeting, declare dividends in advance for succeeding quarters,
hardly even longer than a year altogether, the dividend for each
succeeding quarter being made payable as of a certain date in
the same manner as the first dividend.

(b) Where the business of the corporation is running along
in good shape, with abundant revenues with which to pay
dividends, the payment of the regular dividends on the various
classes of stock becomes a more or less routine matter, called
to the attention of the board of directors by the treasurer at the
directors' meeting prior to the expiration of the quarter or the
half year or the year for which the dividends are to be payable.
(19 Fletcher, pp. 220-221.)

—

(2) Date of payment. There is no hard and fast rule describing
the interval of time between the date for the declaration of dividends,
the date of record of stockholders entitled thereto, and the date of
payment, the same being left to the sound and judicious discretion
of directors. (SEC Opinion, April 11, 1962.)
(a) It is customary for the directors to fix the time for
payment of a dividend. The payment date may be the same date
as the record date or it may also be a later date. But a corporation
cannot discriminate among the shareholders as to the time of
payment of dividends.
(b) If no time is fixed by the resolution declaring a dividend,
it is payable on demand, and if the resolution declares that it
shall be payable at such time as the board of directors may direct
and the board fixes no time, the law implies that it shall be paid
within a reasonable time. (18 Fletcher, pp. 887-888.)

Equal participation In the distribution
of dividends.
(1) General rule on all the stocks. As a rule, dividends among
stockholders of the same class must always be pro rata, equal and
without discrimination and regardless of the time when the shares

—

422

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

were acquired. The dividends must be general on all the stocks
so that each stockholder will receive his proportionate share. The
directors have no authority to declare a dividend on any other
principle. They cannot exclude any other portion of the stockholders
from and equal participation in the profits of the company. The rule
against discrimination equally applies to stock dividends. Each
stockholder is entitled to receive new shares in proportion to the
stock held by him and any discrimination is illegal. (11 Fletcher, pp

1101-1104.)

—

(2) Fractional shares included in computation.
For the same
reason that a corporation cannot exclude stockholders owning full
shares from equal participation in the distribution of dividends,
it cannot deny stockholders to fractional shares (see Sec. 40[a].)
from participation in the dividends to the extent of their respective
holdings. Thus, fractional shares resulting from a previous
distribution of dividend by a corporation shall be included in
the computation of stock dividend subsequently declared. (SEC
Opinion, July 12, 1961.)

Total subscription basis of share
in dividends.

—

(1) General rule.
As a general rule, and as applied to any
form of dividend declaration, the participation of each stockholder
in the earning of profits of the corporation is based on his total
subscription and not on the amount paid by him in account thereof.
(Secs. 42 [par. 1], 71.) For example, if a person subscribes for 1,000
shares of the par value of P10.00 per share and has paid P5,000 on
his subscription, he will participate in dividends based on of 1,000
shares, not 500 shares.

The reason is that a stockholder's entire subscription represents
his holdings in the company for which he pays interest on any unpaid
portion, (see Secs. 63, 65.) Subscribers are considered stockholders
not from the time they are issued stock certificates but from the time
their subscriptions are accepted by the corporation because it is
from this time that they are bound by their subscriptions, subjecting
them to all the liabilities and entitling them to all the rights of
stockholders. (SEC Opinion, June 28, 1966.)
(2) Where stockholder delinquent.
Only where a stockholder
is delinquent in the payment of his unpaid subscription that
he loses his privilege in a corporation where he has holdings, as

—

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

423

provided in Section 70, except his right to receive cash dividends,

which, however, shall first be applied to his unpaid balance on the
subscription plus cost and expenses. (Sec. 42, par. 1.)

Other modes of division of dividends.
The above rule is not absolute and is subject to the rule of consent.
Thus, it has been opined under the old Code that the distribution of
dividends based on the paid-up shares or any other mode which
itself is lawful may be adopted by a corporation, but the unanimous
consent of the stoddwlders is indispensable. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 7,
1973.)

It is believed that the same scheme is still legally feasible under
Section 42 as it is not immoral nor against any public policy.17
Classes of dividends.
Dividends payable to shareholders may be classified:
(1) Cash dividend.

—

It is dividend payable in cash.1*
(a) Dividends on par value shares are made at a stated
percentage (e.g., 10%) of the par value although they may also
be paid as fixed amount per share.

"The SEC has rendered an opinion that dividends cannot be declared and paid
based on the paid-up stock. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 29, 1987.)
'•"It is generally accepted auditing principle that cash means 'cash on hand or in
bank.' Standard test in accounting defines 'cash' as consisting of those items that serve as
a medium of exchange and provide a basis for accounting measurement To be reported
as 'cash,' an item must be readily available and not restricted for use in the payment of
current obligations. A general guideline is whether an item is acceptable for deposit at
face value by a bank or other financial institution.
Item classified as cash include coin and currency on hand, and unrestricted funds
available on deposit in a bank, which are often called demand deposits since they can be
withdrawn upon demand. Petty cash funds or change funds and negotiable instruments,
such as personal checks, travelers' checks, cashiers' check, bank drafts, and money orders
are also items commonly reported as cash. The total of these items plus undeposited
coin and currency is sometimes called cash on hand. Interest-bearing accounts, or time
deposits, also are usually classified as cash, even though bank legally can demand prior
notification before a withdrawal can be made. In practice, banks generally do not exercise

this legal right.

Deposits not immediately available due to withdrawal or other restrictions
require separate classification as 'restricted cash' or 'temporary investments.' They are
not 'cash'." (Rueda, Jr. vs. Sandiganbayan, 346 SCRA 341 [2000], citing Intermediate
Accounting Comprehensive Volume, Ninth Ed., by Smith, Jr. and Skousen, Brigham
Young University, Copyright 1987.)

424

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(b) As to no-par value shares, dividends are payable in
terms of so many pesos or centavos (e.g., P10.00, P0.01) per share
since there is no basis on which a percentage can be stated. In
other words, a stockholder participates in the dividends based
on the par value in case of par value shares, and the number of
shares in case of no par value shares, and not upon the amount
of the consideration paid by him for his shares.
(c) If gift certificates are given to stockholders as share
in the profits earned by the corporation, they may be treated
as dividend subject to the requirements of Section 42. (SEC
Opinion, Oct. 5, 1994.)
Cash and stock dividends are the more common forms of
dividends.
(2) Property dividend.
It is dividend distributed to the
stockholders in the form of property, real or personal, such as
warehouse receipts or shares of stock of another corporation, (see
Ballantine, p. 564.)

—

(a) A dividend payable in property is actually a cash
dividend, (see SEC Opinion, March 19, 1999.) The stockholder

can take the property, sell it, and realize the cash. A corporation
can, therefore, pay declared cash dividend in the form of a
"property."1’
(b) When a corporation has retained earnings arising out
of its operations, properties which represent investments in the
capital stock of the corporation may be declared as property
dividend out of such retained earnings, provided said properties
constitute assets in excess of the other assets which are adequate
to support the issued and outstanding capital stock of the
corporation. (SEC Opinion, February 5, 1991.)
(c) Under the SEC's Rules Regulating the Declaration of
Property Dividends (June 9, 1992), the issuance of the property
dividends must conform with these conditions: (1) the property
to be distributed as dividends shall consist only of property
which are no longer intended to be used in the operation of
”The SEC allows the distribution of property dividend as liquidating dividend ot
where the distribution of the same is practicable, specifically where the surplus is in that
form (property) and it is no longer intended to be used In the operation of the business.

(SEC Opinion, Feb. 5, 1991.)

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

425

the business of the corporation and which are practicable to
be distributed as dividends; (2) the issuance of the property
dividends shall not result to an inequitable distribution of
property to the stockholders in terms of the book values and
market values, if any, of the property distributed; and (3) when
the distribution of dividends is made where some stockholders
will receive cash and the others will receive property, the
prevailing market value of the property, as agreed upon by the
stockholders shall be considered in determining the equitable
distribution of the total dividends.
No actual distribution of property dividends shall be made
unless approved by the SEC.
(d) Treasury shares may be declared as property dividends.
(SEC Opinion, July 17, 1984.)
(3) Stock or share dividend. It is dividend payable in unissued
or increased or additional shares of the corporation instead of in
cash or in property out of the unrestricted retained earnings of the
corporation. A stock dividend may be declared only to the extent
of the maximum number of shares authorized in the articles of
incorporation.
(a) Shares of stock are given the special name "stock
dividends" only if they are issued in lieu of undistributed
profits. If they are issued in exchange for cash or property, then
they do not fall under the category of "stock dividends."
(b) A corporation may legally issue shares of stock (not as
stock dividend) in consideration of services to it by a person
not a stockholder or in payment of its indebtedness. A share of
stock issued to pay for services rendered is equivalent to stock
issued in exchange of property, because services is equivalent to
property.
(c) Likewise, a share of stock issued in payment of
indebtedness is equivalent to issuing a stock in exchange for

—

cash.

(d) Shares of stock may be issued to a non-stockholder or
to a person who is not a stockholder but shares of stock coming
from stock dividends are payable only to stockholders of the
corporation and not to strangers or non-stockholders because
only shareholders are entitled to dividends. (Nielsen & Co., 26
SCRA 540 [1968].)

426

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

(e) Stock dividends are in the nature of shares of stock, the
consideration for which is the amount of unrestricted retained
earning converted into equity in the corporation's books. It
is actually two (2) things: 1) a dividend; and 2) the enforced
use of the dividend money to purchase additional shares of
stocks at par. (Lincoln Phil. Life Insurance Co., Inc. vs. Lepanto
Consolidated Mining Co., 26 SCRA 540 [1968].)
(f) A corporation may increase its authorized capital stock
by way of stock dividends without touching its unissued shares
as long as there are retained earnings to justify the declaration."
(see SEC Opinion, Oct. 11, 1972.)
(g) A stock dividend has the same effect as cash dividends
distributed to the stockholders who subsequently used said cash
dividends in purchasing shares of the corporation. Since selling
of shares at a premium is not prohibited (Sec. 61, par. 1.) stock
dividends may be declared at a premium for such declaration is
in the nature of a sale of shares at a premium.
(h) As long as the requirements for the declaration of stock
dividends are complied with, the issuance of common shares
in favor of stockholders holding preferred shares is valid (SEC
Opinion No. 28-04, April 27, 2004.);
(4) Optional dividend.
It is dividend which gives the
stockholder an option to receive cash or stock dividend;
(5) Composite dividend. It is dividend partly in cash and partly
in stocks. Here, there is no option involved;
(6) Preferred or preferential dividend. It is dividend payable, by
virtue of contract, to one class of stockholders in priority to that to
be paid to another class (19 Am. Jur. 2d 286.);

—
—

—

—

(7) Cumulative dividend. It is dividend contracted to be paid
at a certain rate at stated times and, if net earnings at any dividend
period are insufficient to pay the contract dividend, it is to be made
out of subsequent net earnings (Ibid.);

"The procedure prescribed by Sec. 37 to effect an increase of capital stock must be
complied with. The increase will be to the extent of the retained earnings to be distributed
as stock dividends.

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

(8) Scrip dividend.

—

427

It is dividend in the form of a writing or

certificate issued to a stockholder entitling him to the payment of
money, stock or other benefit at some future time inasmuch as the
corporation at the time such dividends are declared has profits not
in cash or has no sufficient cash, or has the cash but wishes to reserve
it for some corporate purposes. It is in the form of a promissory note
or a promise to pay and may be issued to bear interest;

—

(9) Bond dividend.
It is dividend distributed in bonds of the
corporation to the stockholders. The bondholder becomes a creditor
of the corporation to the extent of the amount of the bond. Thus,
a corporation may use its retained earnings in improvement of
its plant, or purchasing machinery or other property and issue its
bonds in payment of dividends from such earnings (seq 11 Fletcher,
p. 893.); and

—

(10) Liquidating dividends.
They are dividends which
are actually distributions of the assets of the corporation upon
dissolution or winding up of the same. (Wise & Co. vs. Meer, 78 Phil.
655 [1947].) They are not paid because of earnings or profits, but as
a return of capital invested. So, the assets of a dissolved corporation
are not distributed as dividends, as dividends are commonly
known. The term has also been used to describe a distribution of
assets made upon a reduction of the capital stock. (19 Am. Jur. 2d
283-284.) A corporation can distribute liquidating dividends only
after it is dissolved and all its creditors have been paid, (see Sec
139.)

Dividends may also be participating and non-participating, (see
Sec. 6.)
Ordinary and extraordinary dividends.

Dividends may be divided into the ordinary or regular current
dividends payable by the corporation and extraordinary or
"extra" dividends, which may consist of cash, property, or stock

distributions.

(1) As usually understood, ordinary dividends are those paid out
of current earnings of a corporation according to some fixed plan
or scheme, usually at regular intervals and sometimes limited to a
substantially fixed rate of return to the shareholder. Generally, they
are cash dividends, stock dividends being regarded as extraordinary

428

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

dividends and not included within the phrase "regular dividends,"
although a policy of regular stock dividends is not unknown.
(2) Extraordinary dividends, whether cash or stock, usually
represent an accumulated excess of earnings over normal return on
capital invested and constitute a distribution or a capitalization of
surplus profits remaining after distribution of ordinary dividends.
(19 Am. Jur. 2d 287.)

Effect of declaration of cash or property
dividend.

(1) When a corporation issues cash and property dividends,
the assets of the corporation diminish by exactly the amount or
value paid out and correspondingly, the property of the individual
stockholder increases. The dividends reduce the net worth of the
corporation.
(2) The declaration itself of cash and property dividends is
considered effective to create a debt from the corporation to each of
its stockholders and segregate the amount thereof from the assets,
even though the resolution provides that the dividend is payable of
the stockholders in the corporate assets.

Effect of declaration of stock dividend.
(1) A stock dividend converts the surplus or profits of the
corporation covered by such dividend into the permanent account,
thereby placing it beyond the power of the board of directors to
withdraw from corporate use and to distribute to the stockholders.
(Eisner v. Macomber, 252 U.S. 189.)
(2) It shows that the corporation's accumulated profits have
been capitalized instead of distributed to the stockholders or
retained as surplus available for distribution, in money or kind,
should opportunity offer. For from being a realization of profits for
the stockholder, it tends rather to postpone said realization. (Nielsen
Co., Inc. vs. Lepanto Consolidated Mining Co., 26 SCRA 540 [1969].)
The declaration of a stock dividend is akin to a forced purchased
of stocks. (PLOT vs. National Telecommunications Commission,
539 SCRA 365 [2007].)
(3) Such a capitalization of surplus or transfer of such surplus
to the capital account of the corporation adds nothing to and takes

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

429

nothing from the corporation. The corporation merely transfers the
surplus to capital account and issues shares of stock to represent the
same. Such shares may be preferred and common stock. So far as
the stockholder is concerned, the stock dividend does not result in
any increase in value in the holdings of the stockholder because he
ends up with merely a larger number of ownership's units of shares
representing the same proportionate interest in the corporation
which he possessed before without decreasing the corporation's
assets.
(4) The declaration likewise adds nothing to the interest
of the stockholders. After a declaration of stock dividends, the
stockholder receives no greater proportional interest in the assets of
the corporation than he heads before. In this respect, it is identical
in substance with a splitting of original shares (Infra.) in which
outstanding shares are exchanged for an increased number of new
shares of proportionally less par value that the old, leaving the
aggregate value of all his stock substantially the same. Such an
increase simply dilutes the shares as they existed before. (19 Am.

Jur. 2d 288-289.)

(5) A stock dividend is, in essence, not a dividend at all in the
ordinary sense of the term since, as indicated above, no cash or
property leaves the corporation. It does not reduce the real worth of
the corporation or increase the real worth of the stockholder.
(6) When stock dividends are distributed among the
stockholders, the amount declared ceases to belong to the
corporation. The unrestricted retained earnings of the corporation
are diminished by the amount of the declared dividends, while the
stockholder's equity is increased.
The stockholders, by receiving stock dividends, are forced to
exchange the monetary value of their dividends of capital stock, and
the monetary value they forego is considered the actual payment or
consideration for the original issuance of the stocks given as stock
dividends. (PLDT vs. National Telecommunications Commission,
supra.)

(7) The declaration of stock dividend is advantageous to existing
creditors of the corporation to the extent that corporate earnings
are capitalized, unavailable for distribution to stockholders. At the
same time, it improves the cash position of the corporation with
expansion projects or programs obviating the necessity of borrowing

and paying high interest rates.

430

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

ILLUSTRATION:
A, B, C, D, and E organized a stock corporation with an
authorized capital stock of P400,000 divided into 4,000 shares

with a par value of P100 per share. Each subscribed to and paid
for 400 shares. Hence, the actual asset of the corporation at the
beginning of the business was P200,000.
After a few years of profitable business, the assets of the
corporation amounted to P400,000, with no debts. Instead of
declaring cash dividends, it was agreed to increase the capital
stock and for that purpose, to issue 400 additional shares each
stockholder in the form of stock dividends with a total value
of P40,000 which amount represents the actual increase of his
share of interest in the business.
At the start of the year, each stockholder held 400
shares with a total value of P40,000, which is 1/5 of the total
corporate capital of P200,000. At the close of the year, after
stock dividends are declared, each stockholder still holds 1/5
interest in the corporation with his 800 shares worth P80,000
in relation to the increased corporate capital of P400,000. But
the proportional interest of each share in the corporate assets is
decreased because of the increase in the number of shares, from
1/2,000 to 1/4,000.
The mere issuance of the stock dividends is not subject to
income tax as they do not constitute income to their recipients.
Effect of declaration of bond or scrip
dividend.
Absent statutory provision to the contrary, a corporation may
use its retained earnings, for example, in improvements of its
property of in purchasing machinery or other property which it is
authorized under its articles of incorporation to acquire and hold,
and issue its bonds in payment of dividend from such earning. Or
the corporation may issue a scrip dividend. (11 Fletcher, pp. 11161117.)

Sec 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

431

or scrip issued as dividends, but the assets of the corporation remain
the same as nothing passes out of the corporation to the stockholder.
(3) It has the effect of deferring the payment of cash dividends.

Distinctions between cash dividend
and stock dividend.
They are:
(1) A cash dividend involves a disbursement to the stockholder
of accumulated earnings, while stock dividend involves no
disbursement;

(2) Cash dividend declared and paid becomes the absolute
property of the stockholder and cannot be reached by the creditors of
the corporation absent fraud, while stock dividend, being still part
of corporate property, may be reached by corporate creditors;
(3) Cash dividend is declared only by the board of directors, at
its discretion, while stock dividend is declared by the board with
the concurrence of the stockholders representing at 2/3 of the
outstanding capital stock at a regular or special meeting called for
the purpose (Sec. 42.);
(4) Cash dividend does not increase the corporate capital, while it
is increased by a stock dividend;
(5) The declaration of cash dividend creates a debt from the
corporation to each of its stockholders who then hold such stock,
while no debt from the corporation to the stockholders is created
by the declaration of stock dividend, except in the sense that capital
stock constitutes a liability. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 317.)
A dividend payable in stock is not synonymous with, and is
not always or necessarily, a stock dividend. A dividend payable
in stock may, under some circumstances, be a cash dividend (Ibid.,
292.), as where the dividend consists in treasury stocks or in stocks

of another corporation (Supra.); and
(6) Cash dividend is taxable as income to the stockholder, while
stock dividend is generally not subject to income tax.

(1) Such a dividend, when the obligation to pay is absolutely
due to the stockholders, although payment is postponed to a future
date. (Ibid.)

Stock dividend from Issue

(2) The declaration of a bond or scrip dividend makes the
stockholder a creditor of the corporation for the amount of the bond

Whenever an increase is made in the capital account of a stock
corporation, the increase is valid only when it represents additional

of additional shares.

432

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 42

shares issued for which the equivalent consideration is received by
the corporation.
(1) The increase may result from an issue of additional shares or
the re-investment of retained earning effected by the distribution of
shares as stock dividend. Hence, a corporation with outstanding no¬
par value shares originally issued at P5.00 per share cannot increase
its capital account by transferring its surplus to its capital account
without issuing additional shares for the amount transferred. Under
such method, stockholders who have paid in full their no-par value
shares would in effect be made to pay additional amount for the
same shares to increase their value.
(2) Section 6 (par. 6.) provides that "shares of capital
stock issued without par value shall be deemed fully paid and
nonassessable." Once no-par value shares have been issued at their
issued price, their value can no longer be changed, (see Sec. 61, last
par.) Accordingly, such stock dividend by a transfer of the surplus
to capital with no shares to be issued cannot validly be made. (SEC
Opinion, March 28, 1974.)
Distribution or reissue of treasury
stocks.
The mere acquisition and distribution of previously issued stock
does not constitute a stock dividend. (11 Fletcher, p. 891.)

—

(1) As a reissue of existing paid-up shares. Treasury stocks (see
Sec. 9.), being property of the corporation, may not be distributed
among stockholders as stock dividends, but would constitute
property dividends. (SEC Opinion, June 13, 1963; see SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 16016, June 27, 2016.)

No increase of capital is involved, since there is merely a reissue
of existing paid-up shares. Such a distribution of treasury stock
would not be a stock dividend within the ordinary meaning of the
term. (Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. Manning, 66 SCRA 14 [1975L
citing Bass v. Comm, of Internal Revenue, 129 F 2d 300.)
If the dividend in stock
(2) As a distribution of earnings.
consists not of stock created or issued therefor as evidence of the
transfer of surplus or undivided profits to fixed capital, but of
stock in which corporate earnings have been invested or for which
corporate assets have been exchanged or of stock received from the

—

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Sea 42

433

stockholders in payment of debts to the corporation and carried
in treasury, it is a cash dividend whether such stock is previously
issued and outstanding of the same corporation or stock of another
corporation. (SEC Opinion, June 13, 1963.)
It is the same as if the corporation had used accumulated earning
to buy any other property say, the stock of another corporation
and had distributed such substituted property in specie as a dividend
to its shareholders. Thus, in a case, where a company utilized a
portion of its earning "to buy" the majority shares of a stockholder
and distributed such shares to the remaining stockholders, it was
held that the distribution was not a stock dividend but in effect a
distribution of earnings to stockholders and, therefore, subject to
income tax. (Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. Manning, supra.)
(3) As representing a prior disbursement of purchase price to a former
stockholder. The reissue of treasury shares by a corporation as a
purported stock dividend cannot be approved, since there is no
capitalization of surplus. The stated capital was not reduced when
the treasury shares were acquired and is not increased upon their
reissue. Such so-called stock dividend is simply stock watering
which does not represent net worth or surplus, but only a prior
disbursement of purchase price to a former stockholder. (SEC
Opinion, June 13, 1963, citing Ballantine, p. 484.)

—

—

—

Stock splits.
(1) Distinguished from stock dividends.
The courts have
recognized a distinction between a "stock split" and a "stock

—

dividend."
The essential distinction between a stock dividend and a stock
split is that in the former, there is a capitalization of earnings or
profits, with a distribution of the added shares which evidence
the assets transferred to capital, while in the latter, there is a mere
increase in the number of shares which evidence ownership without
altering the amount of the capital, surplus or segregated earnings.
In brief, a stock split is merely a dividing up of the outstanding
shares of a corporation into a greater number of units, without
disturbing the stockholder's original proportional participating
interest in the corporation. A stock split is essentially one of form
and not of substance.

434

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 42

—

It is said that stock splits are
(2) Way by which accomplished.
(2)
different
ways:
two
in
accomplished
generally
(a) If the stock is of the par value type, then the original
certificate is exchanged and a new certificate substituted,
embodying the original shares, plus the new number of shares

authorized by the split.
(b) If it is no-par value stock to be split, then the stockholder
retains his original certificate and receives additional certificates
for the additional shares. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 284-285.)
The reverse procedure is known as "reverse stock split.”
ILLUSTRATION:

X Corporation has 100,000 outstanding shares of stock,
with a par value of P1O.00 per share. Because the market price
of the shares is considered high, the board feels that a lower
price will improve marketability of the shares and attract
more investors. It may authorize that the 100,000 shares be
replaced by 500,000 shares with a par value of 2.00. Thus, each
stockholder will receive five shares in exchange for each share
owned. This increase in the number of outstanding shares is
called stock split.
"Reverse stock split," on the other hand, involves the
reduction of the outstanding shares into a smaller number of
shares by increasing the par value thereof. For example, there
is a reverse stock split when the articles of incorporation are
amended by changing the equity structure from an authorized
capital stock of P20 million divided into two (2) million shares
with a par value of P10.00, to an authorized capital stock of
PhP20 million divided into 400,000 shares with a par value of
P50.00. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-17, June 24, 2017; see SEC
Opinion No. 01-95, Jan. 4, 2005.)21
’'Changes in par values of capital stock should be charge or credited to additional
paid-in-capital (APIC). If the increases in capital stock values exceed APIC, they should
be charged to retained earnings. The common sources of APIC are: (1) excess of par
value paid tor capital stock; (2) resale or retirement of treasury share; (3) distribution
of stock dividends; (4) issuance of detachable stock purchase agreements; (5) changes
in par value; (6) donated assets; and (7) that created by corporate readjustment of
quasi-reorganization, (see annotation under Sec. 80.) APIC, however, shall not be used to
relieve income of the current or future years of charges chargeable against income except
in the case of reorganization wherein a recognized enterprise may be relieved of such
charges against income on condition that if the existing enterprise shall be continued

Sec. 42

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

435

In either case, the split merely changes the number of outstanding
shares without affecting the stockholders' equity nor the capital
stock. The receipt of shares as a result of the split does not generate
taxable income to either the stockholder or the corporation.

Distinction between distribution In liquidation
and ordinary dividend.

The distinction between a distribution in liquidation and an
ordinary dividend is factual, the result in each case depending on
the particular circumstances and the intent of the parties.

If the distribution is in the nature of a recurring return on stock,
it is an ordinary dividend. However, if the corporation is winding
up its business or recapitalizing and narrowing its activities, the
distribution may properly be treated as in complete or partial
liquidation and as payment by the corporation to the stockholder
for his stock or as return of the capital invested by him. The
corporation is, in the latter instances, wiping out all or that part of
the stockholders' interest in the company. (Wise & Co., Inc. vs. Meer,
78 Phil. 655 [1947].)

Applicability to partnerships.
Section 42 applies only to stock corporations. A partnership has
neither shares of stocks or capital stock, nor does it have a board of
directors that can declare dividends out of its unrestricted retained
earnings. Dividends are property of the corporation and is payable
only when the board of directors declare them as dividends even if
there are existing profits of the corporation. On the other hand, in
partnership, profits are already due to the partners during the life
of the partnership /joint venture in proportion to their interest as set
forth in their agreement, and are deemed to have been actually or
constructively received in the same taxable year. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 13-17,” Nov. 3, 2017.)
the same result may be attained even without reorganization, provided said facts are
fully disclosed and formally approved as in reorganization in which event the articles of
incorporation shall be amended accordingly to reflect the changes in the capital structure
(SEC Opinion No. 01-05,
Jan. 4, 2005, dting Statement of Financial Accounting Standard
No. 18 which lays down the generally accepted accounting standards in our jurisdiction.)
or trustees.
“Citing De Leon, Comments and Cases on Partnership, Agency and Trust p. 157

[2010],

436

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 43

—

Sec. 43. Power to Enter into Management Contract. No
corporation shall conclude a management contract with
another corporation unless such contract is approved
by the board of directors and by stockholders owning
at least the majority of the outstanding capital stock, or
by at least a majority of the members in the case of a
nonstock corporation, of both the managing and managed
corporation, at a meeting duly called for the purpose:
Provided, That (a) where a stockholder or stockholders
representing the same interest of both the managing
and the managed corporations own or control more than
one-third (1/3) of the total outstanding capital stock
entitled to vote of the managing corporation; or (b) where
a majority of the members of the board of directors of
the managing corporation also constitute a majority of
the members of the board of directors of the managed
corporation, then the management contract must be
approved by the stockholders of the managed corporation
owning at least two-thirds (2/3) of the total outstanding
capital stock entitled to vote, or by at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the members in the case of a nonstock corporation.

Sec. 43

title IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

437

corporation, whether such contracts are called service contracts,
operating agreements or otherwise."
Briefly stated, it is an agreement which a corporation delegates
the management of tis affairs to another corporation for a certain
period of time. Since the corporation can employ officers and agents
to manage its business, there can be no objection to employing
another corporation for the purpose. A corporation under
management is bound by the acts of the managing corporation and
is estopped to deny its authority, (see National Bank vs. Producers'
Warehouse Association, 42 Phil. 609 [1922].)
With parent corporation. Absent a finding of fraud or bad faith,
contracts entered into by a parent corporation with a subsidiary of
affiliate may be held legal where the purpose is to provide more
efficient operation and greater convenience to both. Thus, a holding
company may, in some cases, intervene in the management and
affairs of its subsidiaries or affiliates such as the centralization of
accounting and personnel function, provided the management in
those affairs will not affect the separate and continuing existence of
the managed corporation.

—

These shall apply to any contract whereby a corporation
undertakes to manage or operate all or substantially
all of the business of another corporation, whether
such contracts are called service contracts, operating
agreements or otherwise: Provided, however, That such
service contracts or operating agreements which relate to
the exploration, development, exploitation or utilization of
natural resources may be entered into for such periods as
may be provided by pertinent laws or regulations.

However, since this situation may, in effect, place the subsidiary
or affiliate to a certain extent within the control of the present
company and the latter in turn, assumes responsibility for such
management, the same shall be subject to Section 43 relative to
execution of management contracts. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 28, 1990.)
(3) With a natural person.
Section 43 refers only to a
management contract with another corporation with another
corporation, Hence, it does not apply to management contracts
entered into by a corporation with natural persons.

No management contract shall be entered into for a
period longer than five (5) years for any one (1) term. (N)

Limitations on the power.

Power to enter into management contract.

—

(1) With another corporation. Under Section 43, a corporation is
allowed, without the need of amending its articles of incorporation,
to enter into a management contract with another corporation,
which refers "to any contract whereby a corporation undertakes to

manage or operate all or substantially all of the business of another

—

The following are the limitations for the exercise of the power:

—

(1) Ratification of the contract. The management contract must
be approved by a majority of the board of directors or trustees (before,
majority of the quorum) and ratified by the prescribed vote of the
outstanding capital stock entitled to vote or if the members, as the
case may be, of both the managing and the managed corporations,

438

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44
Sec 44

at a meeting duly called for the purpose. Unless approved by the
required vote of the stockholders, the management contract cannot
take effect. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 1, 1992.)

In either of the two (2) cases mentioned in Section 43 (par. 1.) the
management contract must be approved by the stockholders of the
managed corporation owning at least 2/3, not merely a majority, of
the total outstanding capital stock entitled to vote, or if the managed
corporation is a nonstock corporation, by at least 2/3, not merely
a majority, of the members. Where the contract is between two (2)
corporation having interlocking directors, the contract must comply
with the requirements of Section 32.

—

The period of the management
(2) Period of the contract.
(5) years for any one term. The
five
than
contract must not be longer
and the stockholders
of
directors
board
term limitation affords the
five
years and decide
every
the
situation
an opportunity to review
not. The period
or
to
expire
allowed
be
will
whether the contract
into again by
looked
are
contracts
guarantees that management

the stockholders every five years so that if there have been abuses
by the managing corporation, the contract may not be renewed for
another term. (SEC Opinion, March 6, 1986.)
A management
(3) Managerial potver under the contract.
control over
and
contract cannot delegate entire supervision
as this will
another
the officers and business of a corporation to
contravene Section 22, which lays down the fundamental rule that
the corporate powers of all corporations shall be exercised by the
board.
In general, the management contract must always be subject to
the superior power of the board to give specific directions from time
to time or to recall the delegation of managerial power. The board
cannot surrender or abdicate its power and duty of supervision
and control for otherwise, it becomes a mere instrumentality of the

—

management company. (Ballantine, p. 136.)
ILLUSTRATIONS:

—

(1) Interlocking stockholders. If A, B, and C, stockholders
in both X Corporation and Y Corporation, the managing and

managed corporations, respectively, own 35% of the total
outstanding capital stock entitled to vote of X Corporation,

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

439

management contract must be approved by the prescribed

2/3 vote of the stockholders of Y Corporation. The same vote
shall apply where A is the only stockholder in both corporation
and he owns more than 1/3 of the total outstanding capital

stock entitled to vote of X Corporation. Only a majority vote is
required if the more than 1/3 ownership of A, B, and C, or of
A refers to the outstanding capital stock of Y Corporation, the
managed corporation.
(2) Interlocking directors.
If A, B, C, D, and E constitute
the majority of the members of the board of directors of X
Corporation and also of Y Corporation, the bigger 2/3 vote by
the stockholders of Y Corporation is necessary. This is a case
of a contract between two (2) corporations with interlocking
directorates, (see Sec. 33.) The extent of the shareholdings of A,
B, C, D, and E in X Corporation is immaterial.
In both illustrations, the management contract need only
be approved by the majority of the outstanding capital stock of
X Corporation, or in illustration No. 2 of the members, in case
X Corporation is a nonstock corporation.

—

—

Sec. 44. Ultra Vires Acts of Corporations.
No
corporation shall possess or exercise corporate powers
other than those conferred by this Code or by its articles
of incorporation and except as necessary or incidental to
the exercise of the powers conferred.

Ultra vires and Intra vires acts
explained.
A corporation is not restricted to the exercise of powers expressly
conferred upon it but has the implied or incidental power to do
what is reasonably necessary to carry out its express powers and
to accomplish the purposes for which it was formed. Sections 35(k)
and 44 recognize these implied and incidental powers possessed
by

private corporations.

(1) Acts or transactions within the legitimate

powers of a
vires.
(2) Any business not authorized by law or the
articles of
incorporation if pursued by a corporation as part of its
regular
or permanent business would be violative of law or
articles of
incorporation, hence, "ultra vires". (SEC Opinion, Dec. 17, 1990.)
corporation or are related to its purposes are said to be intra

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

440

Sec 44

According to the strict construction of the term, an ultra vires
act is one not within the express, implied, and incidental powers
of the corporation conferred by the Revised Corporation Code or
the articles of incorporation. It is an act which is not positively
forbidden, but impliedly forbidden, because it is not expressly or
impliedly authorized or necessary or incidental in the exercise of
the powers so conferred. Since corporations, unlike natural person,
have no inherent powers, third persons dealing with them cannot
assume that corporations and have powers.

The test to be applied is whether the act of the corporation is in
direct and immediate furtherance of its business, fairly incidental to
the express powers and reasonably necessary to their exercise. If so,
the corporation has the power to do it; otherwise, not. (6 Fletcher,
pp. 198-199; Montelibano vs. Bacolod-Murda Milling Co., Inc., 5
SCRA 36 [1962]; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 20-09, August 4, 2009.)

ILLUSTRATIONS:
(1) A corporation was organized to engage in the buying
and selling of home appliances. The act of buying and selling
motor vehicles would be ultra vires although it is itself lawful
because it is outside the object for which the corporation is
created and, therefore, beyond its powers.

The buying and selling of refrigerators would be intra vires.
(2) A corporation was organized to engage in the business
of manufacturing a particular product. Marketing and selling
the product may be logically necessary to the business of
manufacturing, considering that there must be an end-user for
the goods manufactured or produced.
A seller, trader, dealer or importer of goods is not necessarily
or indispensably the manufacturer of the goods. Therefore,
manufacturing cannot be treated as reasonably necessary to the
business of the selling. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 14-07, July 18,
2007.)

Contracts intra vires entered into by the board of directors
are binding upon the corporation and courts should not
interfere unless such contracts are so unconscionable and
of
oppressive as to amount to wanton violation to the rights

Sec. 44

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

441

the minority, as when, a stockholder avers that the board of
directors has concluded a transaction that will result in serious
injury to him. (Gamboa vs. Victoriano, 90 SCRA 40 [1979]; Ong
Yong vs. Tiu, 401 SCRA 1 [2003].)
Ultra vires acts distinguished from
other acts.

Although the term ultra vires' act has been used indiscriminately,
it properly differs from acts which are illegal, in excess or abuse
of power, or executed in an unauthorized manner, or acts within

corporate powers but outside the authority of particular officers or
agents. (19 C.J.S. 419.)
(1) From illegal act.
When properly used, an ultra vires act
simply means an act beyond the conferred powers of a corporation
or the purposes or object for which it is created as defined by the
law of its organization.2 (Republic vs. Acoje Mining Co., Inc., 7
SCRA 361 [1963]; Atrium Management Corporation vs. Court of
Appeals, 353 SCRA 23 [2001].) The language of Section 43 appears
to confine the term to this meaning. By itself, an ultra vires act is
not necessarily illegal. On the contrary, it may be lawful, moral,
and even praiseworthy. Nevertheless, an ultra vires act ostensibly
includes acts declared illegal by general or special laws.
An illegal corporate act, on the other hand, is an act contrary
to law, morals, good custom, public order, or public policy (Art.
1306, Civil Code.) and, therefore, per se illicit, (see Pirovano vs. De
la Rama, 96 Phil. 335 [1954].) The buying and selling of contraband
goods would not only be illegal but also ultra vires. The term ultra
vires is distinguished from an illegal act for the former is merely
voidable which may be enforced by performance, ratification or
estoppel while the latter is void and cannot be validated. (Ibid.)

—

'Literally, beyond the scope of the purpose (i.e., object of the corporation) or the
powers (i.e., the means by which the corporation carries out the
object) of the
The only ground and policy upon which the defense of ultra vires, propercorporation.
defined, can
have real basis is the interest of the stockholders, if any, to confine the business
activities
of the corporation to the scope of the purposes specified in its
of incorporation.
(Ballantine, p. 242.) Creditors cannot attack a contract or transferarticles
merely because it is ultra
vires. The only ground for objection by creditors is its effect as a fraudulent
diversion of
corporate assets from the payment of their claims. (Ibid., p. 258.)

442

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44

If a foreign-owned corporation authorized under its articles
of incorporation to sell its products at wholesale only, the sale on
retail would be considered an ultra vires act, or an act beyond the
corporate powers conferred t it by the State. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.
10-18, June 4, 2018.)
(2) From act done without complying with certain conditions and
formalities. Another class of corporate contracts sometimes said to
be ultra vires, although the phrase as applied to them is inaccurate,
is where the power exists to do what was done, provided the
corporation does it in a certain prescribed way? Thus, informalities
with the consent of stockholders (or members) to the contract are
often incorrectly called ultra vires, using the term in its strict sense.
The fact that the required consent of stockholders is not obtained
does not make a contract ultra vires. (7 Fletcher, p. 567; also 14-A C.J.,
pp. 312-313)

—

—

(3) From act beyond powers of particular officers. The expression
ultra vires has also been applied to acts by the directors (or trustees)
or other officers of a corporation in excess of the powers conferred
upon them by the stockholders (or members).

Such an act, however, is not necessarily ultra vires act of the
corporation. An act may be within the powers of a corporation
and not within the powers of the directors, for the powers of
the latter are derived, not from the legislature, like the powers
of the corporation, but from the stockholders in their corporate
capacity.4 (11 Fletcher, pp. 566-567.)
formalities,
HTie genera) rule is that a corporation mustact in the manner and with the
if any, prescribed by its charter or by the genera) law. However, a corporate transaction
itself
or contract which is within the powers of the corporation, which is neither wrong in
execution
its
in
observe
to
failure
a
from
defective
nor against public policy but which is
voidable
a requirement of the law enacted for the benefit or protection of a certain class, is
enacted
was
the
requirement
benefit
whose
for
voided;
the
parties
until
valid
is
only and
faith
good
in
acting
third
persons
and
invalidity,
its
may ratify it or be estopped to assert
of
are not usually affected by an irregularity on the part of the corporation in the exercise
432-444.)
(19
C.J.S.
its granted powers.
while they
’A result of the above distinction is that the stockholders of a corporation,
corporation,
the
cannot by ratification, render valid an act which is beyond the powers of
The
may ratify an act which is within its powers, but beyond the powers of the directors.
particular
a
that
is
meant
is
that
all
courts often refer to contracts as ultra vires where
is merely
officer had no power to make the contract. In this class of cases, the question agency.
to
relating
law
of
rules
well-settled
and
therefore,
old
by
and,
one of the agencies

(Ibid.)

Sec. 44

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

443

—

(4) From act involving inexistent contract.
A contract may not
be illegal but inexistent and, therefore, void, when it lacks one or
some of the essential elements (i.e., consent, object, and cause) of a
contract, such as those which are absolutely simulated or fictitious;
those whose cause or object is outside the commerce of men; those
which contemplate an impossible service; and those where the
intention of the parties relative to the principal object of the contract
cannot be ascertained. (Art. 1409, Civil Code.)

Such contracts are not necessarily ultra vires. Neither party has
a right of action against the other who can always raise the defense
of the inexistence of the contract to defeat the claim of the former.
Ratification of ultra vires acts.
(1) Where the contract or act is illegal per se, it is wholly void
or inexistent. It cannot be ratified in Article 1409 of the Civil Code
cannot also be ratified. The doctrine of estoppel cannot operate to
give effect to an act which is null and void.
(2) Where the contract or act is not illegal per se but merely beyond
the power of a corporation, the same is merely voidable and may be
enforced by performance, ratification, or estoppel, or on equitable
grounds. (Republic vs. Acoje Mining Co., Inc., supra.)
(a) A corporation, like an individual, may ratify and render
binding upon it the originally unauthorized acts of its offices
or other agents (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].) and ultra vires acts which are
not illegal especially so if no creditors are prejudiced and no
rights of the State or the public are involved. (7 Fletcher, p. 585.)
(b) Ratification can never be made on the part of the
corporation by the same persons who wrongfully assume the
power to make the contract, but the ratification must be by
the officer or governing body having authority to make the
contract. (Vicente vs. Geraldez, 22 SCRA 210 [1973]; Arguenza
vs. Metropolitan Bank & Trust Co., 271 SCRA 1 [1997].)
(c) Ratification by all stockholders could be express or
implied, e.g., receipt of benefits under the contract without

objection.

444

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44
Sec. 44

Effects of ultra vires acts which
are not illegal.

These rules5 are recognized:
(1) An ultra vires contract, while executory on both sides, cannot
be enforced by either party thereto. (7 Fletcher, p. 607.) It is in
the public interest that corporations do not transcend the powers
granted to them by law and their assets be not subjected to risks
created by forbidden acts;
(2) When an ultra vires contract has been fully performed on both
sides, neither party can maintain an action to set aside the transaction
or to recover what has been parted with. The well-settled doctrine
is that the defense of ultra vires cannot be set up or availed of in
completed or consummated transaction (Ibid., p. 652.) to assure the
security of transactions that had been closed. Only the State may
challenge the contract on ultra vires grounds. No public interest is
involved here since both parties have received to their advantage
the benefits of the contract voluntarily entered into; and
(3) When an ultra vires contract has been performed on one side
and the other has received benefits by reason of such performance,
recovery is permitted in most courts on behalf of the former (Ibid.,
p. 620.) on the ground that it would be unjust to sanction retention
of benefits coupled with refusal to perform. Other courts hold the
contract unenforceable but compel the party who has received the
’The effects of illegal contracts of a corporation are governed by the following
provisions of the Civil Code:
of
"Art. 1411. When the nullity proceeds from the illegality of the cause or object
deiicto,
pari
in
being
offense,
both
parties
criminal
a
the contract, and the act constitutes
the
they shall have no action against each other, and both shall be prosecuted. Moreover,
a crime
of
instruments
or
effects
of
the
disposal
to
relative
Code
Penal
the
of
provisions
shall be applicable to the things or the price of the contract.
This rule shall be applicable when only one of the parties is guilty; but the innocent
one may claim what he has given, and shall not be bound to comply with his promise.not
"Art. 1412. If the act in which the unlawful or forbidden cause consists does
constitute a criminal offense, the following rules shall be observed:
(1) When the fault is on the part of both contracting parties, neither may recovers
what he has given by virtue of the contract, or demand the performance of the other
undertaking;
he
(2) When only one of the contracting parties is at fault, he cannot recover what
promised
been
has
what
has given by reason of the contract, or ask for the fulfillment of
him. The other, who is not at fault, or ask for the fulfillment of what has been promised
without
him. The other, who is not at fault, may demand the return of what he has given
any obligation to comply with his promise."

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

445

benefits of performance to return what he has received or, failing to
do that, to pay its reasonable value. (Ibid., p. 613.)
Contracts ultra vires in part only.
If the contract is separable, it may be sustained and enforced as
to the part not ultra vires, and held invalid as to the part ultra vires.

By way of illustration:
(1) Securities taken by a corporation, though ultra vires as to
some debts secured, may be enforced as to those debts for which the
corporation was authorized to take them.

(2) Where a corporation issues bonds and executes a mortgage
to secure the same, the bonds are valid if within the powers of the
corporation, though the mortgage may be ultra vires.
(3) The rule also applies where the corporation executes a
mortgage covering property which it has no power to mortgage,
and property which it may mortgage. The mortgage is valid as to
the latter. (7 Fletcher, p. 587.)

Acts presumed to be within corporate
powers.

—

(1) Where private rights only are involved.
It is the policy of
the law to look with disfavor upon the defense of ultra vires, where
private rights only are involved, especially when interposed by a
corporation to avoid an obligation otherwise legal and equitable.
(Ibid., p. 570.) Thus, "when a contract is not on its face necessarily
beyond the scope of the power of the corporation by which it was
made, it will, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed
to be valid. It is not seemly for a corporation, any more for an
individual, to make a contract and then break it, to abide by it so long
as it is advantageous, and repudiate it when it becomes onerous."
(Coleman vs. Hotel de France Co., 29 Phil. 323 [1915].)
The defense of ultra vires rests on violation of trust or duty toward
stockholders (or members), and should not be entertained where its
allowance will do greater wrong to innocent parties dealing with
the corporation. (19 C.J.S. 433.)

—

(2) Where act clearly beneficial to the corporation. The tendency
of more recent decisions is to hold an act within corporate powers

446

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44

where it is dearly beneficial to the company as where the act directly

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

Sec 44

447

(4) When an ultra vires contract with a corporation has been
fully performed by one party, and the other has received the benefits of
such performance (Supra.), the latter is estopped to set up the ultra
vires character of the transaction to defeat an action on the contract
itself.*
(5) Torts and crimes are always ultra vires, and yet a corporation
may commit a tort and be liable in damages therefor, and it may
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be indirectly convicted and
fined therefor. This is sufficient to show beyond any doubt that a
corporation may exceed its powers. (7 Fletcher, pp. 579-580; see Sec.

tends to increase its business. Thus, a corporation, a financial
institution, which owns and maintains a computer to service its
data processing needs may sell the computer to other entities after
servicing its needs. Whatever transactions as are fairly incidental or
auxiliary to the main business of a corporation may be undertaken
by the same. (SEC Opinion, May 3, 1976.)
Section 35(k) is broad enough to cover a wide range of implied
powers as to make difficult the avoidance of corporate contracts on
the ground of ultra vires.

44.)

Ultra vires acts as the acts of the corporation.
Thedoctrine so often laid down by the courts that a corporation
has such powers only as conferred upon it by its charter if taken
literally, would be equivalent to saying that an act by the officers of a
corporation on its behalf and in its name, but in excess of its powers,
even though authorized by the stockholders (or members) in their
corporate capacity, is not the act of the corporation, as distinguished
from its officers and stockholders.

Invocation of ultra vires.
The doctrine of ultra vires cannot be invoked when it would
defeat the ends of justice or work a legal wrong. (Coleman vs. Hotel
de France, 29 Phil. 323 [1915].)
It cannot be allowed to prevail whether the pleas interposed for
or against a corporation when it will cause prejudice to a party who
acted in good faith. Thus, loans given to or by a corporation have to
be repaid notwithstanding that the transaction is ultra vires.

— —

The rule that a corporation has no powers except such as
conferred by its charter cannot and does not mean that it cannot
exceed its powers.
(1) A corporation has no right or authority to do acts not within
the powers conferred upon it by the legislature, but, as in the case of
an individual, it is possible for it do wrong. It may exceed its powers
and do an ultra vires act, and the act will be, in contemplation of the
law, not merely the act of the officers or stockholders, but the act of
the corporation itself. Thus, a conveyance or transfer of property to or
by a corporation may transfer the title, though the corporation has
no power under its charter to hold or transfer the property.
(2) When an ultra vires contract with a corporation is fully
executed by both parties (Supra.), the court will not interfere at the
instance of either party to deprive the other of the rights acquired
under the contract.
(3) Actions quasi ex contractual may be maintained under some
circumstances, by or against a corporation, for money or property
loaned, paid or delivered under an ultra vires contract.

Who may invoke ultra vires.

—

(1) Generally. The question as to the effect of ultra vires acts
often depends on who is invoking ultra vires.
(a) Thus, the State may have the right to invoke it, although
neither party to the contract may urge it, as in the case of an
executed contract.
(b) A party to the contract may, under some circumstances,
urge ultra vires where a total stranger would not have that right.

(c) Likewise, dissenting stockholders sometimes sue to
enjoin the execution or performance of an ultra vires contract
where neither party to the contract could set up the claim.
(2) State. When the State creates a corporation, the grant of
the charter is on the implied condition that the corporation shall
act within the powers conferred upon it. Ultra vires acts, whether
otherwise wrong or not, breach this condition.

—

*See "Effects of ultra vires contracts which are not illegal" (Supra.)

448

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44

(a) Such an act does not of itself put an end to the existence
of the corporation, but it is, subject to certain qualifications, a
ground for a direct proceeding by the State to obtain a judgment
of forfeiture.
(b) When a corporation is guilty of exercising powers not
authorized by its charter, the State instead of proceeding against
it to obtain a judgment forfeiting its charter may proceed by quo
warranto, to obtain a judgment merely ousting it from further
exercise of the unauthorized power. (7 Fletcher, pp. 604-605; see
Rules of Court, Rule 66, sec. l[c].)
(c) The SEC may suspend or revoke the certificate of
registration of a corporation for commission of ultra vires acts,
(see P.D. No. 902-A, Sec. 6[1J.)
The stockholders of a corporation have a
(3) Stockholders.
right to expect and to insist that its funds shall not be diverted by
giving them away or by employing them in an ultra vires business or
transactions.
(a) Any stockholders, therefore, has such an interest that
he may apply to a court for an injunction to prevent such a
diversion, even though all other stockholders may consent to the
ultra vires act. In like manner, he may sue to enjoin a corporation
from using its funds in the ultra vires purchase of shares of stock
in another corporation.
(b) A stockholder, however, may be precluded from
attacking an act as ultra vires, by his laches. If a stockholder
wants protection against the consequences of an ultra vires act,
he must ask for it with sufficient promptness to enable the court
to do justice to him without doing injustice to others.

—

(c) It need hardly be stated that where the stockholder has
himself participated in the ultra vires act, or consented thereto,
he will be estopped from maintaining legal proceedings to

secure the annulment of the consequences thereof.

(d) So, also a stockholder may be barred from asserting the
invalidity of a transaction whereby a corporation has borrowed
money beyond the limit of its authorized indebtedness where
the money has been expended for the benefit of the stockholders
and the corporation. (7 Fletcher, pp. 600-603.)

Sec 44

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

449

—

(4) Strangers. Except where it is otherwise provided by statute,
it is a general rule that a plea of ultra vires cannot be interposed by
a stranger not a party to the contract, at least if he is not injured by
such act or contract.

(a) For instance, although the act of a corporation in
acquiring a cause of action is ultra vires, the want of power to
engage in such business cannot be interposed as a defense when
the corporation seeks to enforce such cause of action. Thus, the
maker of a note cannot defend upon the ground that the contract
whereby the note was transferred was ultra vires, on the ground
that the payee had no power to indorse it for transfer.
(b) So also, if a person is in possession of real property and
an action is brought against him by a corporation to recover
it or to quiet title or the like, defendant cannot set up that the
title of plaintiff was acquired ultra vires, where defendant was a
stranger to the original transaction alleged to be ultra vires. (Ibid.,
pp. 594-596.)

—

(5) Compensation in business.
A stranger whose rights have
not been infringed by an ultra vires act of a competitor corporation
cannot urge ultra vires to prevent the latter from acting beyond
its powers, unless the right to do so is given by a statute. In other
words, a competitor cannot attack acts of a corporation as ultra vires,
merely on the ground of injurious competition, where such acts are
neither public nuisances or trespasses.

The only injury of which he can be heard in a judicial tribunal
to complain is the invasion of some legal or equitable right. (Ibid.,
p.598.)

—

(6) Creditors. Judgment creditors may impeach an ultra vires
contract as in fraud of creditors, the same as any other contract.

But creditors of the corporation, whose rights are not infringed
by the ultra vires contract, cannot attack it. They cannot attack
a corporate transaction as ultra vires unless its intent or
effect
is fraudulently to divert the corporate assets from
their debts.
Ordinarily, a subsequent creditor cannot object. (Ibid., p. 599.)

i

450

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 44

Estoppel to deny corporate power
to contract

—

As provided in Section 21, an association
(1) General rule.
which assumes to exercise corporate powers and enters into a
contract as a corporation and persons who contract with it as a
corporation are estopped, in an action on the contract, to deny its
corporate existence.
The general
(2) Where power to enter into contract in issue.
principle does not apply where the question is whether a contract
is within the powers conferred upon a corporation by its charter to
make, and hence, since estoppels must be mutual, the other party to
the contract is not estopped to set up that the contract was beyond
the powers of the corporation.
(3) Where contract wholly executory. In other words, the mere
act of entering into the contract does not estop either party to show
that the contract is ultra vires. If it did, ultra vires could not be set
up as against a contract wholly executory, whereas the rule that a
wholly executory contract may be attacked as ultra vires is one of the
few rules as to which there is no contention. All this does not mean
that either party to the contract may not, by his acts, be estopped
from setting up ultra vires.
It is held in some
(4) Where contract apparently ultra vires.
its power to enter
to
deny
estopped
states that a corporation may be
within
is
apparently
contract
the
into a particular contract, where
facts
extraneous
of
because
vires
ultra
its powers, and is rendered
known
not
and
the
of
corporation,
peculiarly within the knowledge
to the other party.
(5) Where contract has been performed on one side. And in some
States, although not in all, the contention that a contract is ultra
vires, either against the corporation or against the other party, where
the contract has been performed by one party and the other has
received the benefit of such performance, is said to be precluded on
the theory of an estoppel. (7 Fletcher, pp. 580-581.)

—

—

—

—

Corporation liability for torts, crimes,
and other violations.

—

(1) General rule.
A corporation, being a juridical entity, can
only act as such through its officers and agents. This being the case.

Sec 44

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

451

it is responsible for the tortious acts of the latter done within the
scope of their authority or in the course of employment to the same
extent that an unincorporated individual or association would be.
(see 1 Fletcher, pp. 27-28; Stevens on Corporation, p. 355; see Art.
2180, Civil Code.)

(a) The authority may come from the stockholders or
members acting as a body, or generally, from the directors (or
trustees) as the governing body. (PNB vs. Court of Appeals, 83
SCRA 237 [1978].)
(b) The act of the officer or agent must have been within
the scope of his authority or course of employment; but sub¬
ject to this limitation, it may have been without orders, or even
in disregard of the instructions to the officer or agent or may
have been in excess of instructions, or may have been malicious
or willful. Nor need the corporation have authorized doing the
particular act or ratified it after it was done. (19 C.J.S. 946-949.)
(c) A corporation cannot, to escape liability for damages for
the wrongful acts of its agents or employees, assert that such
acts were beyond the scope of corporate power or that they
occurred with a transaction beyond the scope of such power. It
is to be kept in mind that all torts are necessarily ultra vires, since
if an act is legally authorized, it is lawful and not a tort. (Ibid.,
948.)

(d) In labor cases, the Supreme Court has held corporate
directors and officers solidarity liable with the corporation for
the termination of employment of employees done with malice
or in bad faith (Sunio vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
127 SCRA 390 [1984]; General Bank & Trust Co. vs. Court of
Appeals, 135 SCRA 569 [1985]; MAM Realty Development
Corp. vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 244 SCRA
797 [1995]; Uichico vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
273 SCRA 35 [1997]; Manarpus vs. Texan Philippines, Inc., 748
SCRA 511 [2015].) on the theory that the legal fiction of separate
corporate personality may be disregarded whenever it is used
as a means of committing an illegal act (see Acesite Corporation
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 449 SCRA 360 [2004].)
Any decision against the employer corporation can be
enforced against the officers in their personal capacities for

\

\

452

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 44

acting on behalf of the corporation should the corporation be
unable to satisfy the judgment in favor of an employee (as
where it is no longer existing). (A.C. Ransom Labor UnionCCLLJ vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 142 SCRA 269
[1986]; Camelcraft Corporation vs. National Labor Relations,
186 SCRA 393 [1990]; Valderrama vs. National Labor Relations
Commission, 256 SCRA 466 [1996].)
(e) Under the Labor Code (Arts. 288, 289 thereof.), when a
corporation violates a provision declared to be penal in nature,
the penalty shall be imposed upon the guilty officer or officers
of the corporation, disregarding the fiction of corporate entity.
(Reahs Corporation vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
271 SCRA 247 [1997].)
(f) Where an employment relationship exists, a corporation
may be held vicariously liable under Article 2176 (quasi-delict)
in relation to Article 2180 (principle of respondent superior) of the
Civil Code for damages caused by the negligence or fault of
its employees acting within the scope of their assigned tasks.
Absent, evidence of an employment relationship, a corporation
may be held liable under the principle of ostensible agency (see
Arts. 1431 and 1869, Civil Code.) for the negligence and pro hac
vice under the principle of corporate negligence for its failure or
negligence to follow established standards of conduct to which
it should conform as a corporation. (Professional Services, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 611 SCRA 282 [2010].)
(g) Even though a judgment or order is addressed to the
corporation, the officers as well as the corporation itself may
be punished for contempt for disobedience to its terms, at least
if they knowingly disobey the court's mandate, since a lawful
judicial commend to a corporation is, in effect, a command to
the officers. (Heirs of T. de Leon Vda. de Roxas vs. Court of
Appeals, 422 SCRA 101 [2004].)
(h) If the drawer of a check is an officer of a corporation,
the notice of dishonor to the said corporation is not notice to the
employee or officer who drew or issued the check for and in its
behalf. Responsibility under Batas Pambansa Big. 22 (Bouncing
Checks Law) is personal to the accused. The corporation has no
obligation to forward the notice addressed to it to the employee
concerned especially because the corporation itself incurs

\

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

453

\

\

no criminal liability under Batas Pambansa Big. 22. Personal
knowledge of the notice of dishonor is necessary. (Mangomen
vs. People, 459 SCRA 169 [2005].)
(2) Imputation of criminal intent. Although it has no mind, its
agent's intention to do wrong may be imputed to the corporation.
Accordingly, corporations may be held liable for libel and malicious
prosecution. But since a corporation as a person is mere legal fiction,
it cannot be proceeded against criminally because it cannot commit
a crime in which personal violence or malicious intent is required.
Criminal action is limited to the corporate agents guilty of an act
amounting to a crime and never against the corporation itself. (West
Coast Life Ins. Co. vs. V. Hurd, 27 Phil. 401 [1914]; Times, Inc. vs.
Reyes, 39 SCRA 303 [1971].)
(a) The existence of the corporate entity does not shield
from prosecution the corporate agent who knowingly and
intentionally causes the corporation to commit a crime (The
Executive Secretary vs. Court of Appeals, 429 SCRA 81 [2004].)
punishable under the Revised Penal Code. He cannot hide
behind the cloak of the separate corporate personality of the
corporation to escape criminal liability. (Republic Glass Corp,
vs. Petron Corporation, 698 SCRA 666 [2013].)
(b) It is the responsible officer or officers acting for the
corporation who must of necessity be the ones to assume the
criminal liability; otherwise, this liability as created by law would
be illusory, and the deterrent effect of the law, negated. The
corporate officer or employee must have actually participated
in the commission of the criminal offense or violation of law
attributed to the corporation, to be himself individually guilty
of the crime, (see Sia vs. People, 121 SCRA 655 [1983].)
(c) The principle applies to those corporate agents who, by
virtue of their managerial positions or other similar relation to
Hie corporation, could be deemed responsible for its commission,
if by virtue of their relationship to the corporation, they had the
power to prevent the act. Whether the officers or employees
are benefited by their delictual acts is not a touchstone of their
criminal liability. Benefit is not operative act. If through the
act, default, or omission of corporate officers or
employees,
the corporation commits a crime, they may themselves
be individually held accountable for the crime. (Ching
vs.

—

454

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 44

Secretary of Justice, 481 SCRA 609 [2006]; Espiritu, H. vs. Petron
Corporation, 605 SCRA 245 [2004].)
(d) Mere membership in the board or being president per se,
however does not mean knowledge, approval and participation
in the act alleged as criminal. There must be a showing of
active participation, not simply a constructive one. (ABS-CBN
Corporation vs. Gozon, 753 SCRA 1 [2015].)
(e) The Supreme Court has ruled that corporate officer and /
or agents may be held individually liable for a crime committed
through their act or default under the Intellectual Property
Code. In its current form, the Intellectual Property Code is
malum prohibitum and prescribes a strict liability for copyright
infringement. Good faith, lack of knowledge of the copyright,
or lack of intent to infringe is not a defense by the corporation
against copyright infringement. (Ibid.)
(3) Penalties imposable. While a corporation cannot be arrested,
imprisoned, or executed, it may be summoned, fined, or ousted by
quo warranto from the unlawful exercise of its powers. (10 Fletchec
p. 651; see Rules of Court, Rule 66, sec. l[c].)
The fine, however, is a mere consequence of the conviction of
the corporate agent found guilty of violating the law. For violations
of any of the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code or,
on grounds provided by existing laws, rules and regulations, a
corporation is subject to fine and/or dissolution without prejudice
to the institution of appropriate action against the guilty director,
trustee, or officer of the corporation, (see Secs. 137, 161; see also P.D.
No. 902-A, Sec. 6[i] thereof; see also R.A. No. 8791 [The General
Banking Law of 2000], Secs. 66, 70, 91.)
Again, the existence of the corporate entity does not shield from
prosecution the agent who knowingly and intentionally commits a
crime at the instance of a corporation. (Ong vs. Court of Appeals,
401 SCRA 648 [2003].)
(4) Liability for moral and exemplary damages. As a rule, moral
damages are not awarded to a corporation unless it enjoyed a
good reputation that the offender debased and besmirched by
his actuation. Moral damages are also not recoverable in culpa
contractual unless bad faith has been proved. In breach of contract,
the court may award exemplary damages if the defendant acted in

—

—

\

Sec. 44

TITLE IV. POWERS OF CORPORATION

455

a wanton, fraudulent, reckless, oppressive, or malevolent manner.
(Art. 7732, Civil Code.) Fees and expenses of litigation (Art. 2208,
ibid.) are proper only when exemplary damages are award. (San
Fernando Regala Trading, Inc. vs. Cargill Philippines, Inc., 707
SCRA 187 [2013].)

— oOo —

Sec. 45

Title V

BYLAWS
Sec. 45. Adoption Bylaws. — For the adoption of laws

by the corporation, the affirmative vote of the stockholders
representing at least a majority of the outstanding capital
stock, or of at least a majority of the members in case of
nonstock corporations, shall be necessary. The bylaws
shall be signed by the stockholders or members during
office hours. A copy thereof, duly certified by a majority of
the directors ortrustees and countersigned by the secretary
of the corporation, shall be filed with the Commission and
attached to the original articles of incorporation. (A)

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding
paragraph, bylaws may be adopted and filed prior to
incorporation; in such case, such bylaws shall be approved
and signed by all the incorporators and submitted to the
Commission, together with the articles of incorporation.
In all cases, bylaws shall be effective only upon the
Issuance by the Commission of a certification that the
bylaws are In accordance with this Code.
The Commission shall not accept for filing the
bylaws or any amendment thereto of any bank, banking
institution, building and loan association, trust company,
Insurance company, public utility, educational institution
or other special corporations governed by special laws,
unless accompanied by a certificate of the appropriate
government agency to the effect that such bylaws or
amendments are In accordance with law.

Meaning of bylaws.

Bylaws may be defined as the fundamental rules of action
adopted by a corporation (or association) for governing its internal
affairs and for the government of its stockholders (or member) and
456

TITLE V. BYLAWS

457

those having the direction, management and control of its affairs in
their relation to the corporation and as among themselves (see 18
C.J.S. 589, p. 344; 8 Fletcher, pp. 632-633), including rules for routine
matters such as calling meetings. (Ballantine Law Dictionary) [1990
Ed.[, p. 201.)
Power to adopt bylaws.
The corporate power to adopt bylaws is granted by Section 35(e)
and Section 45.
(1) The power is inherent in every corporation as one of its
necessary and inseparable legal incidents. This power is regarded
as of so much importance, being essential to enable the corporation
to accomplish the purposes of its creation, that it is ordinarily
conferred in express terms by the law. (Supreme Comandery K.G.R.
v. Ainsworth, 71 Ala. 436, 46 Am. Rep. 332.)
(2) Even holders of non-voting shares or non-voting members,
the
as case may be, are entitled to vote on the adoption of the bylaws,
(see Sec. 6, par. 3[e].)
(3) It has been held that where the statute under which a
corporation is formed authorizes it to make bylaws upon specifically
named subjects, there is an implied denial of authority to make
bylaws upon subjects not named. (Nicholson v. Franklin Brewing
Co., 91 N.E. 991.)

Function and nature of bylaws.
(1) Bylaws may be viewed as a contract between the
corporation
and its stockholders (or members) and among the stockholders

themselves. They supplement the articles of incorporation. They
provide the details not important enough to be in the articles.

(2) The function of bylaws is to define the rights
and duties
of corporate officers and directors or trustees, and of
stockholders
or members towards the corporation and among

themselves with
reference to the management of corporate affairs and to regulate
transaction of the business of the corporation in a particular way.
(see La Salle County From Bureau
v. Thompson, 245 HI. App. 413;
Ireland v. Globe Mill Co., 21 R.I. 9; 8 Fletcher, pp. 633-634.)
In that
sense, the bylaws are the private "statutes" by which a
corporation

458

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 45

Sec. 45

is regulated, and will function. (Chung vs. Quezon City Sports Club,
807 SCRA46 [2016].)

(1) According to Section 46 of the old Corporation Code, the
bylaws must be adopted "within one month after receipt of official
notice of the issuance of its certificate of incorporation by the SEC."
This requirement is deleted in Section 45. For the convenience of the
incorporators, bylaws may nevertheless be adopted and filed, before
incorporation, attached to the original articles of incorporation, (par.
2.)

(4) Primarily, bylaws look to the future. (8 Fletcher, p. 634.)

—

(1) A matter of practical and legal necessity. Upon the issuance
of the certificate of incorporation, the corporation comes into
existence. (Sec. 18.) But it is not yet prepared to do business.

The bylaws shall be effective only upon issuance by the SEC
of a certification that they are in accordance with the Revised
Corporation Code.' (par. 3; see Sec. 47, last par.)

(a) It must have the means or instrumentalities for the

accomplishment of its purposes. It must have executive officers
charged with actual management, and rules governing the
management of its affairs. The corporation exists but not
yet organized. A code of bylaws for the government of the
corporation, its officers and members must be adopted.
(b) The bylaws of a corporation are the rules of its life, and
that until bylaws have been adopted, the corporation may not
be able to act for the purposes of its creation, and that the first
and most important duty of the members is to adopt them. This
would seem follow as a matter of principle from the office and
function of bylaws. Viewed in this light, the adoption of bylaws
is a matter of practical, if not one of legal, necessity. (8 Fletcher,

p. 640.)

459

Time and procedure for the adoption
of bylaws.

(3) Bylaws are a source of authority for corporate officers and
agents of the corporation. (Citibank, N.A. vs. Chua, 220 SCRA 75
[1993]; see Secs. 25, 46.)

Necessity of adopting bylaws.

TITLE V. BYLAWS

-

(2) The procedure for the adoption of bylaws is likewise set
forth in Section 45. With respect to special corporations governed
by special laws, the -SEC shall not accept their bylaws or any
amendment thereto unless accompanied by a certificate of the
appropriate government agency to the effect that such bylaws or
amendments thereto are in accordance with law. (last par.)
The formal requisites such as the filing of a certified copy of the
entire bylaws for approval with the SEC is only for record purposes
and in order that said copy be attached to the original articles of
incorporation. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 2, 1977.)
The procedure for the amendment of bylaws or file adoption of
new bylaws is provided in Section 47.

—

(2) In the case of corporation sole. While an ordinary corporation
is governed by its bylaws, a corporation sole is governed by the
Rules, Regulations and Discipline of its religious denomination
which already contain the provisions embodied in the bylaws of

ordinary corporations.
Section 109 (par. 2.) expressly allows corporations sole to include
in their articles of incorporation any provision other that those
required under the section to regulate the affairs of corporations sole.
Hence, a corporation sole need not comply with Section 45 provided
that the provisions ordinarily embodied in the bylaws are already
provided for in the articles of incorporation or Rules, Regulations
and Discipline of its religious denomination. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 25,
1984.)

'In addition to the bylaws, a corporation may adopt other rules
and regulations
provided they are not contrary to the provisions of

the bylaws,
of incorporation,
the Corporation Code. While corporate bylaws are subject toarticles
the approval of the SEC,
other rules and regulations of the corporation do not need
such approval, unless they
m*olve matters where the law requires SEC approval. (SEC
Opinion.
Oct 16, 1995.) that
such bylaws or amendments thereto are in
accordance with law. (last pat) The formal
such as the filing of a certified copy of the entire bylaws for approval with
the
only for record purposes and in order that said copy be attached to
tire original
"tides of incorporation. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 2, 1977.)

o^uisites

460

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 45

Effect of failure to file bylaws.
The Revised Corporation Code2 does not provide the
consequences for the non-filing of bylaws.
Under Section 6(i,e) of Pres. Decree No. 902-A , the failure to file
the bylaws within one (1) month from the date of its incorporation
with the SEC shall render the corporation liable to the revocation of
its registration.
Construction, application, and effectivity
of bylaws.

—

(1) Generally.
Bylaws of a corporation should be construed
and given effect according to the general rules governing the
construction of contracts. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 699; see Arts. 1370-1377.)
(2) Provisions penal in character.
Those providing for
disenfranchisement of members of a corporation are penal in
character and must be strictly construed. Thus, under a provision
in the bylaws that a member on suspended accounts may not
use facilities or avail of the privileges of nonstock, non-profit
organization, such a member may still exercise his right to vote.
He does not lose his membership, ipso facto, because of an act of
default which is made a cause for expulsion or forfeiture unless it
is expressly so provided, but there must be a proper action by the
corporation expelling him. (SEC Opinion, March 10, 1987.)

—

—

(3) Prospective application.
Bylaws should be made to
apply prospectively, not retroactively. A bylaw may not operate
retrospectively if it disturbs or impairs any existing contract or
vested right. (18 C.J.S. 328.)

•Section 45 uses the word "must." Ordinarily, the word connotes an imperative act
or operates to impose a duty which may be enforced. It is synonymous with "ought"
which connotes compulsion or mandatoriness, though the word "must' in a statute, like
"shall," is not always imperative and may be consistent with an exercise of discretion.
The second paragraph of Sec. 46 allows the filing of the bylaws even prior to incorporation.
This provision rules out mandatory compliance with the requirement of filing the bylaws
in the first paragraph. (Loyola Grand Villas Homeowners Assoc, vs. Court of Appeals,

276SCRA681 [1997].)

TITLE V. BYLAWS

Sec. 45

461

—

(4) Effectivity.
Bylaws become effective only upon the
a certification that they are not inconsistent
SEC
the
of
issuance by
Revised
Code. (Sec. 45, par. 3.) It is only upon
Corporation
with the
the
should
be followed or observed. (SEC
that
bylaws
time
that
2005.)
24,
05-07,
No.
Opinion
June
(a) Section 45, insofar as it refers to the effectivity of
corporate bylaws (par. 3.), applies only to domestic corporations
and not to foreign corporations, (see Citibank, N.A. vs. Chua, 22
SCRA75 [1993].)
(b) In the case of foreign corporations licensed to transact
business in the Philippines (see Sec. 143.), matters relating to
their bylaws are governed by the law of their incorporation, (see
Sec. 146.)

Since the SEC will grant a license only when the foreign
corporation has complied with all the requirements of law, it
follows that when it decides to issue such license, it is satisfied
that the applicant's bylaws, among the other documents, meet
the legal requirements. This, in effect, is an approval of its
bylaws although it may not have been made in express terms.
Therefore, a foreign corporation's bylaws, though originating
from a foreign jurisdiction, are valid and effective in the
Philippines. (Citibank, N.A. vs. Chua, supra.)

Validity of bylaws.

These are the elements of valid bylaws:
(1) They must not be contrary to existing law and inconsistent
with the Revised Corporation Code (Sec. 35[e]; Sec. 45.);
(2) They must not be contrary to morals and public
policy (Sec.
35[e]; see Fletcher vs. Botica Nolasco Co., Inc., 47 Phil. 583 [1925].);
(3) They must not impair obligations of contract (Ibid.);
(4) They must be general and uniform in their
operation and
not directed against particular individuals (8 Fletcher, p. 734.),
i.e.,
not discriminatory;

(5) They must be consistent with the charter or
articles of
incorporation; and
(6) They must be reasonable.

462

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 45

Must be consistent with law.

Bylaws must not be contrary to the general law, and, therefore,
a bylaw is void if it is repugnant to the law of the land, whether
statutory or constitutional.
(1) This rule is declared by the Revised Corporation Code in
empowering corporations in Section 35(5) "to adopt bylaws not
contrary to law..."
(2) The legislature cannot delegate the power to enact bylaws
contravening general law. As the legislative power cannot be
delegated, it is not competent for the legislature to confer upon a
corporation power to enact bylaws contravening, repealing, or in
any wise changing any provision of the law of the land. (14 CJ. 364-

366.)

(3) A bylaw or provision thereof that is contrary to law cannot
attain validity through acquiescence or on the basis of long practice,
nor give rise to any vested right. (Grace Christian High School vs.

Court of Appeals, 281 SCRA 133 [1997].)

Must be consistent with public policy.

Public policy has been defined as "the governing policy within
a community as embodied in its legislative and judicial enactments
which serve as a basis for determining what acts are to be regarded
as contrary to the public good; the principle of law by virtue of
which acts contrary to the public good are held invalid." (Webster's
Third New Int. Diet., p. 1836.)
Bylaws must also be consistent with the public policy and not
in conflict with public welfare. If they conflict with either, they are
invalid and will not be sustained. (8 Fletcher, pp. 704-705.) Thus,
bylaws operating in restraint of trade by imposing unreasonable
restrictions on the right of stockholder to transfer his stock are
invalid.

Must not impair obligation of contracts.

The word "bylaw" ordinarily signifies a rule for future action,
and the power of a corporation to adopt bylaws does not extend to
the adoption of such as to impair rights, either of stockholders or
members or of third persons which have become vested by virtue of
the existing bylaws or otherwise, and bylaws which have such effect
will not be sustained, (see 8 Fletcher, pp. 715-721.)

Sec 45

TITLE V. BYLAWS

463

(1) Where a contract with a corporation is expressly or impliedly
made subject, not only to existing bylaws but also to future bylaws

and changes bylaws, for parties may contract with corporations
with reference to laws of future enactment, and may engage to be
bound and affected as they would be bound and affected if such
laws were existing and thus consent that such laws shall enter into
and form a part of their contracts, modifying or varying them.
(2) Where the other party to the contract surrenders his original
contact and accepts a new one after an amendment of the bylaws,
for he submits to the amended bylaws then in force. (Ibid.)
(3) The right to amend the bylaws lies solely in the discretion of
the employer corporation, this being in the exercise of management
prerogative or business judgment. However, this right, extensive
as it may be, cannot impair the obligation of existing contracts or
rights, such as the right to security of tenure as a regular employee
guaranteed under the Labor Code. (Silafrance vs. Philamlife Village
Homeowners Assoc., Inc., 300 SCRA 469 [1998].)

Must be general and not directed against
particular individuals.

A bylaw affecting stockholders or members must be general,
that is, it must operate equally to all stockholders or members under
the same circumstances, and not be directed against particular
stockholders or members.
It is plain that all corporation bylaws must stand on their own
validity, and not on any dispensation granted to members. They
cannot be subjected to any conditions which do not apply to all alike,
and cannot be compelled to receive, as a matter of grace, anything
which is a matter of right; neither, on the other hand, should there be
personal exemptions of a general nature from any valid regulations
that bind the mass of corporators.
(1) An order of certain directors that one
member of the board be
denied the right to inspect the corporate books cannot be sustained
as a valid bylaw.
(2) Not even a statute authorizing a
corporation to pass bylaws
for the sale of delinquent stock for unpaid assessments

authorizes a

464

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 45

bylaw or resolution dedaring a forfeiture of the stock of a particular

stockholder only, (see 8 Fletcher, pp. 734-735.)
(3) But a bylaw which disqualifies a person who is a director
in a corporation whose business competes with or is antagonistic
to another corporation, from election to the board of directors of
the latter corporation, is valid, it appearing that the bylaw, by its
terms, applies to all stockholders. If the bylaw was applied with one
stockholder but waived with another, then it could be reasonably
daimed that the bylaw was being applied in a discriminatory
manner. (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission,

89 SCRA 336 [1979].)

Must be consistent with the charter or articles
of incorporation.

Bylaws are subordinate to the charter of the corporation and
part of its charter is its artides of incorporation.
(1) For bylaws to be valid, they must be consistent with the
terms and spirit of the charter of the corporation - the word "charter"
being here used in its broadest sense and as having reference to the
statutory right to be a corporation without regard to whether such
right be obtained by spedal act or under general statutes.
A bylaw not consistent with the charter but conflicts with or
repugnant to it is void. Thus, where a corporation has been made
one of a stock character by the articles of incorporation, it cannot be
made one of a mutual character by a bylaw. Further applying such
rule, a corporation cannot by a bylaw vest the entire management of
its business in an executive committee, when the charter or enabling
act vests the management in the board of directors of trustees.
(2) A bylaw can neither enlarge the rights and powers conferred
by the charter nor restrict the duties and liabilities imposed, and if it
attempts to do so, the charter will prevail.
(3) A bylaw prohibiting acts within the powers conferred,
expressly or impliedly, by its charter, affects the authority of
its officers, but does not render such ads ultra vires. Bylaws of a
corporation are not enforced by avoiding contacts made in violation
of them.

Sec. 45

465

TITLE V. BYLAWS

(4) Bylaws must be consistent with the nature, purposes, and
objeds of the corporation; otherwise, they will be invalid. Thus,
where there is nothing in the articles of incorporation which suggests
power in the corporation to control, regulate, or interfere with its
stockholders in the conduct of their separate individual business,
bylaws which assume to do this are beyond the corporate purpose
and are void, (see 8 Fletcher, pp. 722-727; see also 17 C.J.S. 604-605.)

(5) When the bylaws of a corporation are inconsistent with the
articles of incorporation, the latter shall be controlling, as the bylaws
are subordinate to, and cannot contravene, the corporate charter.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 25-14, September 4, 2014.)

Must be reasonable.

Reasonableness is another essential of a valid bylaw. The
validity or reasonableness of a bylaw of a particular corporation
whether it conflicts with the law of the land, or with the charter of
the corporation or is in a legal sense unreasonable and, therefore,
unlawful - is purely a question of law rather than one of fad.
The rule is subject to the limitation that where the reasonableness
of a bylaw is a mere matter of judgment, and upon which reasonable
minds must necessarily differ, a court would not be warranted in
substituting its judgment instead of the judgment of those who are
authorized to make bylaws and who have exercised their authority
by adopting the one attacked. (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and
Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)
(1) A bylaw which disqualifies a competitor from election to
the board of diredors of another corporation has been held as valid
and reasonable. Absent any legal prohibition or overriding public
powers, wide latitude may be accorded to a corporation in adopting
measures to proted legitimate corporate interests. (Ibid.)
(2) On the other hand, a provision in the bylaws
granting
continuous compensation to directors even after the termination
of their employment for past services rendered
gratuitously is
unreasonable for to permit such bylaws would be to create an
obligation unknown to law, and to countenance a misapplication
of the funds of the corporation to the prejudice of the
stockholders.
(Barretto vs. La Provisora Filipina, 57 Phil.
[1932];

-

(1933].)

649

59 Phil 212

466

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 45

(3) A bylaw which the corporation was without power, under
the law, to adopt will not be validated, however, by the fact that
its provisions are reasonable. A bylaw may be reasonable as to the
corporation and as to third persons contracting after its adoption,
with the corporation, and yet be invalid as to third persons
sustaining, at the time of its adoption, contractual relations with the

corporations.
(4) When the stockholders alone are affected by the
unreasonableness of the bylaw, it can be attacked by them only and
not by a third person, (see 8 Fletcher, pp. 727-734.)
Binding effect of bylaws.

Until repealed or amended, a bylaw is a continuing rule for the
government of the corporation and the individuals composing it.
(1) As to the corporation and its officers.
Bylaws, as the
self-imposed private laws of a corporation, have, when valid,
substantially the same force and effect as laws of the corporation
as have insofar as the corporation and the persons within it are
concerned. They are in effect written into the charter and in this
sense, they become a part of the fundamental law of the corporation.
And the corporation and its directors (or trustees) and officers are
bound by and must comply with (8 Fletcher, pp. 750-751.) unless
and until they are changed, amended, or repealed in accordance
with Section 47. But subordinate employees without actual knowledge
of the bylaws are not bound.
(2) As to stockholders or members. As a rule, the stockholders or
members of a corporation are presumed to know the corporation's
bylaws.

—

—

(a) This presumption is ordinarily regarded as a legal
one, and hence, conclusive and incapable of being rebutted by
evidence of want of actual knowledge. A stockholder or member,
by the very fact of his being such, is charged with notice of the

bylaws and if he remains actually ignorant of their provisions,
he does so at his peril. (8 Fletcher, p. 753.)
(b) Under Section 45, the original bylaws must be approved
by at least a majority of the outstanding capital stock or of the
members, signed by the stockholders or members voting for
them, and kept in the principal office of the corporation, subject

Sec. 45

TITLE V. BYLAWS

467

to their inspection during office hours. Stockholders or members
cannot, therefore, claim lack of notice or knowledge.

—

(3) As to third persons. The weight of authority is that they are
not bound by the bylaws of a corporation since the bylaws operate
merely as internal rules among the stockholders. The exception
is when the third person knows its provisions either actually or
constructively at the time the transactions is question was entered
into, (see China Banking Corporation vs. Court of Appeals, 270
SCRA 503 [1997].)
(a) When a bylaw is intended to operate as to certain third
persons and is communicated to them to induce action by them
in reliance thereon, the corporation cannot defeat claim by one
of their number under such bylaw by asserting that bylaws are
rules for the internal government of the corporation and its
stockholders or members only and that third persons cannot
claim rights thereunder.
(b) If a person contacts with a corporation with reference to
a bylaw, as, for example, a bylaw by which the stockholders or
members bind themselves individually for all debts that may be
contracted by the corporation, the bylaw becomes a part of his
contract and he may enforce the same; but it is otherwise if he
does not contract with reference to or on the faith of the bylaw.
(Fletcher, pp. 762-765; Fletcher vs. Botica Nolasco Co., Inc., 47
Phil. 583 [1925].)

(c) A corporate contract cannot be held invalid just because
the signatory thereon was not the chairman of the board which
allegedly violated the corporation's bylaws. Since bylaw operate
merely as internal rules among the stockholders, they cannot
affect or prejudice third persons who deal with the corporation
unless they know of the same. (PMI Colleges vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 277 SCRA 462 [1997].)

Waiver of bylaws.
Knowledge of the facts rendering a bylaw applicable is essential
to its waiver. The question whether there has been a
waiver of a
bylaw is ordinarily one of fact.
(1) By the corporation. Bylaws which are not
required by the
charter or statute and which operate in favor of the corporation
are

—

468

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 45

subject to waiver, both express and implied, by the corporation,
considered as an entity separate and apart and having rights
distinct that the fact that a corporation does waive its bylaws cannot
be objected to by third persons.
(2) By the stockholders or members.— In like manner, a bylaw
may be waived by a stockholder or member when it is he whose
individual rights are advanced or protected by its provisions.
(a) If the corporation acts or contracts in disregard of a
bylaw with the consent or acquiescence of the stockholders or
members, there is a waiver of the bylaw, at least pro hac vice,
whether it is afterwards sought to set up the bylaw as against
strangers or as against its stockholders or members. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 22-03? May 15, 2004.)
(b) A corporation will not be permitted to assert in an action
to enforce liability against it that the liability was incurred in
contravention of its bylaws where there has been a continued
disregard of such bylaws acquiesced in by the stockholders or

members.
(c) When the power to make bylaws is vested in the
stockholders or members, and they have made bylaws for the
protection of the corporation, they cannot be waived by the
directors or trustees or other officers of the corporation. But the
stockholders or members may permit the directors or trustees
or other officers to act in disregard to such a bylaw, or they may
ratify their action, and in such a case, there is a waiver of the
bylaw by the stockholders or members, (see 8 Fletcher, pp. 768774; see also 18 C.J.S. 593-594.)
(d) It has been opined that a bylaw provision which allows
the waiver of any provision of the bylaws by the vote of certain
number of stockholders or members is not valid as such waiver
would be tantamount to an indirect amendment of the bylaws,
which can be amended only under the procedure outlined in
Section 48. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 19, 1989.)
*Gdng De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 354 [1989].

TITLE V. BYLAWS

Sec. 46

Sec. 46. Contents of Bylaws. — A private corporation
may provide the following In Its bylaws:

(a) The time, place and manner of calling and
conducting regular or special meetings of the directors or
trustees;

(b) The time and manner of calling and conducting
regular or special meetings and mode of notifying the
stockholders or members thereof;
(c) The required quorum In meetings of stockholders
or members and the manner of voting therein;
(d) The modes by which a stockholder, member,
director or trustee may attend meetings and cast their
votes; (N)
<

(e) The form for proxies of stockholders and members
and the manner of voting them;
(f) The directors’ or trustees qualifications, duties
and responsibilities, the guidelines for setting the
compensation of directors or trustees and officers, and
the maximum number of other board representations that
an Independent director or trustee may have which shall,
In no case, be more than the number prescribed by the
Commission; (N)
(g) The time for holding the annual election of
directors or trustees and the mode or manner of giving
notice thereof;

(h) The manner of election or appointment and the
term of office of all officers other than directors or trustees;

(I) The penalties for violation of the bylaws;
0) In the case of stock corporations, the manner of
Issuing stock certificates; and

(k) Such other matters as may be necessary for the
proper or convenient transaction of Its corporate affairs
far the promotion of good governance and antl-qraft and

Corruption measures.

An arbitration agreement may be funded in the bylaws

pursuant to Section 181 of this Code. (N)

469

470

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 46

Contents of bylaws.

A private corporation may provide in its bylaws for the matters
enumerated in Section 46. This means that as to matters already
regulated by the Revised Corporation Code, the bylaws cannot
provide otherwise. Thus:
(1) Place of meeting.— While the place of directors' or trustees'
meeting may be held at the place determined in the bylaws,
"anywhere in or outside of the Philippines" (Sec. 52, par. 3.), the
stockholders' or members' meeting must always "be held at the
dty or municipality where the principal office of the corporation is
located or if practicable in the principal office of the corporation."
(Sec. 50, par. 1; see, however, Sec. 91.)
(2) Quorum. Section 46 permits corporations to determine in
their bylaws "the required quorum in meetings of stockholders or
members..." that is, fix a specific number necessary to constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business, but such bylaws cannot
provide that a lesser number shall constitute a quorum in those
cases in which the law requires for the validity of certain corporate
acts the approval of a minimum number of votes, (see Sec. 51.) The
Revised Corporation Code gives the corporation also the power to
prescribe in the articles of incorporation of bylaws a number greater
than the majority of the members of the board of directors or trustees
to constitute a quorum, (see Secs. 51, 52.)
With respect to proxies of stockholders and
(3) Proxies.
members, the bylaws may provide for (a) the form of such proxies
and (b) the manner of voting them subject to Section 57. Thus, the
bylaws may validly provide that proxies be notarized and filed
with the corporate secretary, at least, say, two (2) days before the
date of the meeting, but they may not do away with the restrictions
imposed by Section 57 on voting by proxy.
(4) Qualifications of directors. The qualifications of directors
may be fixed in the bylaws, but such bylaws cannot dispense with
the minimum legal requirements that a director must be a registered
owner of at least one (1) share of stock. (Sec. 22.)

—

—

—

—

The bylaws may
(5) Disqualification for position of director.
of directors,
for
the
position
validly provide for disqualification
with or is
which
competes
e.g., being engaged in any business

Sec. 46

TITLE V. BYLAWS

471

antagonistic to that of the corporation.1 (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities
and Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)
(6) Compensation to stockholders or members.— Stockholders
or members as such do not render service for attendance at
corporate meetings but exercise rights personal to themselves in
the corporation. Hence, the bylaws may not compensate them, if
they are not "directors or trustees, officers and employees." (SEC
Opinion, June 30, 1971.)
(7) Election and term of office of directors or trustees. Neither can
the corporation provide in the bylaws for the manner of election
and the term of office of directors or trustees already provided by
law. (Secs. 22 and 23.)

—

The amendment to a corporation's bylaws limits the term to a
maximum of three (3) consecutive years as director, after which the
director has to wait for one (1) consecutive year before he can run
again for election in the board. The amendment takes prospective
effect upon its approval by the SEC. Therefore, those directors
who
at the time of the bylaws' effectivity have served for more
than
three
(3) years are not covered by the provision and may
seek reelection.
(SEC Opinion, Aug. 7, 1997.)

—

(8) Imposition of penalties or sanctions. While
a corporation has
not an uncontrollable discretion in the enforcement of
its bylaws, its
power to enforce its bylaws properly made, by
pecuniary
penalties
and corporate disabilities proportionate to the
violation, is not to be
doubted. For instance, bylaws as to the suspension or
expulsion of
members of a corporation for misconduct or non-payment
of dues
will be sustained. It has been held, however,
that
bylaws
cannot
be enforced by a forfeiture of property or
stock of the defaulting
member. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 703.)

Absent any provision in the bylaws
of penalties, a violation of bylaws authorizing the imposition
would merely
appropriate cases an actionable wrong for which constitute in
remedy resides in the courts. (SEC Opinion, March the ultimate
10, 1972.)
'The desired qualifications or disqualifications
must be specifically or
out in the bylaws without
the necessity of being subject to the judgment or clearly spelled
by the board. Such a
is dangerous and can cause possible determination
which may adversely requirement
affect the right of stockholders or members to future conflicts
management of the corporation. (SEC
participate in the
covered by the provision and may seek Opinion, April 23, 1993.) three (3) years are not
reelection. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 7, 1997.)

m.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

See 47

The remedy of mandamus is generally available to compel
officers of a corporation to perform the duties imposed on them by
the bylaws. The obligations imposed by the bylaws of a corporation
upon its officers are not such as rest wholly in contract for the
breach of which an adequate legal remedy prevents the issuance of
mandamus to compel compliance with them. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 703.)
(9) Issuance of certificates of stock. This matter is internal which
the law has left for the corporation to decide, (see Sec. 62.) However,
the authority granted to a corporation to regulate the transfer of its
stock does not empower it to restrict the right of a stockholder to
transfer his shares, but merely authorizes the adoption of regulations
as to the formalities and procedure to be followed in effecting
transfer. (Thomson vs. Court of Appeals, 298 SCRA 280 [1998].)
"The enumeration contained in Section 46 is merely directory.
Failure of the corporation to make provision for the matters
therein contained will not affect the validity of the bylaws nor of
the corporate act. This proposition is evidence by the fact, that
the Corporation Code itself contains particular provisions on
matters which may properly be contained in the bylaws." (C.G.
Alvendia, op. cit., p. 241.) In fact, the corporation may provide in its
bylaws "such other matters as may be necessary for the proper or
convenient transaction of its corporate affairs for the promotion of
good governance and anti-graft and corruption measures." It may
provide in its bylaws an agreement pursuant to Section 181 of the
Revised Corporation Code.

,
’

—

—

A majority of the
Sec. 47. Amendment to Bylaws.
board of directors, or trustees, and the owners of at least
a majority of the outstanding capital stock, or at least a
majority of the members of a nonstock corporation, at a
regular or special meeting duly called for the purpose,
may amend or repeal the bylaws or adopt new bylaws.
The owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital
stock or two-thirds (2/3) of the members in a nonstock
corporation may delegate to the board of directors or
trustees the power to amend or repeal the bylaws or
adopt new bylaws: Provided, That any power delegated
to the board of directors or trustees to amend or repeal

TITLE V. BYLAWS

Sec. 47

’

473

the bylaws or adopt new bylaws shall be considered as
revoked whenever stockholders owning or representing a
majority of the outstanding capital stock or majority of the
members shall so vote at a regular or special meeting.
Whenever the bylaws are amended, or new bylaws are
adopted, the corporation shall file with the Commission
such amended or new bylaws and, if applicable, the
stockholders’ or members’ resolution authorizing the
delegation of the power to amend and/or adopt new bylaws,
duly certified under oath by the corporate secretary and a
majority of the directors or trustees. (SA)
The amended or new bylaws shall only be effective
upon the issuance by the Commission of a certification
that the same is in accordance with this Code and other

relevant laws-

Amendment and repeal of bylaws and adoption
of new bylaws.

The bylaws may be amended in two-ways: (1) a majority vote
of the board of directors or trustees and at least a majority of
the
outstanding capital stock or members of a nonstock corporation;
and (b) by delegating this power to the board of directors or
trustees
by the vote of 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or of
members
in a nonstock corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-18,
Feb. 28,
2018.)

—

(1) Power implied.
The power to make bylaws
power to alter or repeal them and enact new ones, but implies the
the power to
alter bylaws or adopt new bylaws has the same
limits
as
the power
to make them.

—

(2) Formalities. If the charter or
statute
in which the by-laws may be amended, an prescribes the manner
in a different manner will fail. (SEC-OGC attempt to amend them
Opinion No. 12-08, April
29, 2008.)

Section 47 provides the formalities to be followed
amendment or repeal of bylaws or in adopting new in making
bylaws. The
articles of incorporation or bylaws of a
corporation
may
prescribe
votes higher than a simple majority
for this matter. (SEC-OGC

474

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 47

Opinion No. 25-14,' Sept. 4, 2014; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 12-08,2
April 29, 2008.) The power can always only be exercised at a regular
or special meeting duly called for the purpose. Even holders of
non-voting shares or non-voting members, as the case may be, are
entitled to vote on the matter, (see Sec. 6, par. 3[b].)
(a) Amendments to or repeal of bylaws cannot be done in
a "referendum." The rationale for the requirement of a meeting
is to give the stockholders /members a chance to deliberate on
the amendments or repeal to be voted upon. The inability of
a stockholder /member to attend such meeting personally is
not a problem as he can execute a written proxy (see Sec. 57.)
authorizing another person to exercise his rights in the meeting
as if he were personally present. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 13, 1997; see
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-18 dated Feb. 28, 2018.)
The power may be exercised by the
(3) Delegation of power.
or indirectly by delegating said
directly,
stockholders or members
trustees.3 However, it has been
or
directors
of
board
power to the
board of directors to alter or
the
to
authority
given
the
held that
to restrict it from altering or
as
so
be
construed
must
bylaws
amend
annulling a bylaw imposing a limitation on its powers. (Stevens v.
Davison, 18 Gratt [Vai.] 819 Am. Jur. 2d 702.)
The delegation to the board of directors of the power to amend,
alter or repeal bylaws or adopt new bylaws should not be embodied
in the bylaws, but merely in a resolution adopted by 2/3 of the

—

'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 478 [2006].
'Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp. 464-465
[2002],
alter,
’The delegation to the board of directors (or trustees) of the power to amend,
or repeal bylaws or adopt new bylaws should not be embodied merely in the bylaws,
but in a resolution adopted by 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or of the members
of the corporation. This is for the reason that the delegated authority is temporary in
is
nature and may be revoked any time by a majority vote. Accordingly, if the power
may
but
already,
revoked
have
been
may
delegated
provided in the bylaws, the power
SEC.
still appear therein until the corresponding amendment is made and filed with the
(SEC Opinion, Oct. 25, 1965 ; SEC Opinion, July 31, 2002, citing De Leon, The Corporation
Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 398 [1993].) If the rule were otherwise, it would
the
be making the delegation much easier that its revocation, which is inconsistent with
intent of the provision to make the delegation more difficult to obtain. (SEC Opinion,
simple
July 22, 1992.) In other words, the legal requirement is not complied with by the
of
Inclusion of the pertinent provision in Section 47. There must be an actual delegation
the power supported by a resolution spelling out the extent or limits of the delegated

authority.

Sea 47

475

TITLE V. BYLAWS

subscribed capital stock of the corporation. This is because the
delegated authority is temporary in nature and may be revoked
anytime by a majority vote of the stockholders. If the power is
provided in the bylaws, the authority may have been revoked
already, but may still appear therein until the corresponding
amendment is made and filed with the SEC. To operationalize the
delegation, owners of at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock
shall pass the appropriate resolution in a stockholder's meeting.
The resolution may spell out the extent or limits of the delegation,
including when it is considered 'functus officio.' (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 08-18, April 20, 2018.)
(4) Necessity of meeting.
Although there is no express
requirement of stockholders' or members' meeting for the
"delegation" of the power, such meeting is necessary.
The legislative intent appears to be that as the delegation of
the power is an unusual act, the law has properly made it more
difficult to do so that to revoke such a delegation which requires
only a majority. If the revocation of the delegated power requires
a meeting, there is no reason why a meeting is not also required in
the delegation of such power. If the rule were otherwise, it would
be making the delegation much easier that its revocation, which is
inconsistent with the intent of the provision to make the delegation
more difficult to obtain. (SEC Opinion, July 22, 1992.)
(5) Implied repeal or amendment of bylaw.
There may be an
implied repeal (or amendment) of a bylaw in the same manner and
to the same extent as there may be an implied repeal of
a statute,
although repeals by implication are no more favored with bylaws
than in the case of statutes. A bylaw is impliedly
repealed by a
subsequent bylaw inconsistent with it. (see SEC Opinion, Feb.
4,
1976, citing 8 Fletcher, p. 694.)

—

—

(6) Waiver of bylaw provision.

—

A bylaw

may not be amended
however, otherwise than as provided in Section
47. To allow the
waiver of any provision in the bylaws would be
tantamount
to an
indirect

amendment thereof, (see SEC Opinion, Oct. 10, 1989.) The
corporation, its directors, officers and members
are bound by and
must comply with the bylaws. (Supra.)
(7) Non-delegable power.— Unlike
bylaws, the power to amend the articlesthe power to amend the

of incorporation lies with

476

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 47

the stockholders or members and cannot be delegated to the board
of directors or trustees, (see Sec. 15.) Neither can the power to adopt
the original (not new) bylaws be delegated.
Revocation of delegated power of board
of directors or trustees.
(1) Lesser number of vote required. To revoke the delegated power
to amend or repeal the original bylaws or to adopt new bylaws, the
law merely requires the vote of stockholders representing a majority
of the outstanding capital stock or a majority of the members, as the
case may be, while the vote for the delegation is 2/3. The evident
purpose of the law is to make it easier to revoke the delegated power
as a safeguard against possible abuse of the power by the board of
directors or trustees.
Before, the vote for revocation was "majority of the stockholders."
In other words, the basis of the vote was the number of stockholders
themselves and not the shares held, which is normally the mode of
voting in stock corporations. This is, however, the only instance of
per capita voting by stockholders provided for in the old corporation
law.
(2) Previous notice of proposed revocation at meeting unnecessary.
While the amendment or repeal of any bylaws or adoption of new
bylaws by the stockholders or members must be made "at a regular
or special meeting duly called for the purpose," the italicized phrase
is omitted with reference to the revocation by the stockholders or
members of the delegated power of the board of directors or trustees
to amend, etc.

—

—

This means that the revocation is valid notwithstanding the
no previous notice was given to stockholders or members of the
intention to propose such revocation.
Bylaws and resolutions distinguished.

Besides the bylaws, a corporation may adopt other rules and
regulations for its government, which may be in the form of a board
resolution. (SEC Opinion, July 12, 1993.)

Generally, bylaws and resolutions are recognized and treated
by the courts as distinct and different, not merely in name, but with
regard to their respective offices, functions, and operations.

Sec. 47

TITLE V. BYLAWS

477

(1) Nature and subject matter.— A resolution is merely a
declaration of the will of the corporation in a given matter and in the
nature of a ministerial act. (Evans v. City of Jackson, 30 So. 2d 315,
317, 202 Miss. 9; 37-A Words and Phrases 3.) A bylaw, on the other
hand, is a permanent rule of action (except only insofar as it may
be repealed or amended) of the conduct of corporate affairs while
a resolution is ordinarily limited in its operation, applying usually
to a single act or transaction of the corporation or to some specific
person, situation or occasion.
(a) So-called election laws adopted by a corporation as
mere rules on motion and not by the procedure specified in the
bylaws for adoption of a bylaw, to meet a particular situation
then existing, without any intention to legislate for similar
future situations, partake of the nature of resolutions and are
not operative as bylaws. (Homady v. Goodman, 167 G.A. 555,
146 S.E. 713; 8 Fletcher, p. 646.)
(b) While the power to amend the bylaws may be delegated
to the board of directors or trustees, such delegated power is
temporary in nature and may be revoked at any time by the
vote of the majority of the outstanding capital stock or of the
members; hence, it cannot be permanently be embodied in the
bylaws but merely in a stockholders' or members' resolution.
(SEC Opinion, Feb. 9, 1994.)
(2) Rule in case of conflict. The bylaws of a
corporation are, in
effect, its constitution, and will prevail over a resolution of the
board
of directors /trustees. (SEC Opinion,
4, 1985, citing Fletcher, 1“
Jan.
Ed., Sec. 481.)

—

—

(3) Necessity of approval by SEC. While
corporate bylaws are
subject to the approval of the SEC, other rules and
regulations do
not need its approval, unless they involve
matters where the law
requires such approval. (SEC Opinion, July 13, 1993.)

Resolution adopted as a bylaw.
Although a bylaw may be in the form of a resolution, and in
such case, repeal a previous bylaw, a
resolution in favor of
some object which is inconsistent with simple
or forbidden by a bylaw does
not repeal or override the bylaw.

478

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 47

(1) By way of illustration, where the first resolution of the
members of a nonstock corporation disqualifies trustees who
have served for three (3) consecutive terms from running for re¬
election and the second resolution provides "that not more tha[n]
ten (10) members of the outgoing board shall be re-elected," the
first resolution was embodied as a provision in the bylaws, does
not have the force and effect of bylaws and cannot be considered
as an amendment to the same, and since the second resolution was
embodied in the bylaws, trustees who have served for three (3)
consecutive terms are eligible for re-election if they are included in
the first ten (10) re-electionists. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 10, 1976.)
(2) Similarly, the additional qualifications that a member of a
nonstock corporation would have before he could be elected to the
board should be provided for in the bylaws by amending the same
pursuant to Section 47; otherwise, the same cannot be enforced.
(SEC Opinion, July 4, 1984.) But the resolution of the stockholders or
members of a corporation not inconsistent with the bylaws should
be given effect, (see SEC Opinion, Oct. 5, 1976.)

Articles of incorporation and bylaws distinguished.
A clear distinction exists between the two:
(1) The former constitutes the charter or fundamental law of

the corporation/ while the latter are merely rules and regulations
adopted by the corporation;
(2) The former is executed before incorporation by the
incorporators, while the latter, usually after incorporation by the
stockholders or members; and
(3) The filing of the former is a condition precedent to corporate
existence, while the filing of the latter is a condition subsequent.

•The word "constitution” is sometimes used with reference to corporations in its
true sense, that is, descriptive of the fundamental or supreme laws of the corporation, or
as a synonym or equivalent for charter. More frequently, however, the constitution of a
corporation particularly one of a fraternal or mutual benefit charter, is considered nothing
more than a bylaw or bylaws under an inappropriate name. A so-called "constitution"
adopted by a fraternal benefit corporation is of no higher dignity that bylaws adopted by
it; both are creations of the corporation and have, in large measure, a common purpose
or object, to wit: to regulate or govern in its internal affairs. (SEC Opinion, Oct 5, 1984,
citing 8 Fletcher, Sec. 4167.)

47

TITLE V. BYLAWS

479

Filing and effectivity of amended or new bylaws.

Section 47 governs the filing of the amended or new bylaws.
(1) Under Section 45, a certificate of the appropriate government
agency that the amendments are in accordance with law is required
in case of amended bylaws of any corporation governed by special
laws. Without such certificate, the SEC shall not accept them for
filing.
(2) Hie amended bylaws or adopted new bylaws, and if
applicable, the stockholders' or members' resolution authorizing
the delegation of the power to amend or adopt new bylaws duly
certified under oath by the corporate secretary and majority of the
directors or trustees, oath shall be filed with the SEC.
(3) As in the case of the original bylaws (Sec. 45, par. 3.),
the
amended or new bylaws shall be effective only upon the issuance
by the SEC of a certification that the same are in accordance with the
Revised Corporation Code. (Sec. 47, last par.)
(a) The amendment in the by-laws must be
applied
prospectively, not retroactively and should become effective
only upon the issuance by the SEC of the certification that the
same are in accordance with the Revised Corporation Code.
(SEC Opinion No. 10-04/ February 26, 2004)
(b) It is a general rule of substantially universal
acceptance
that a bylaw will be given prospective and not retrospective
construction and effect, unless the intent that it shall operate
retroactively clearly and strongly appears, and the same rule
applies to resolutions which may have the effect of by-laws;
and it is not limited to bylaws originally adopted,
but
equally in the case of amendments. (SEC Opinion No.applies
10-04,
February 26, 2004.)
(c) If the special corporation is governed
by a special law,
the amended or new bylaws be effective only upon
approval by
both the appropriate government agency and the SEC.
(4) The rules applicable to filing the
amended bylaws of foreign
corporations and the effectivity of the
amendments are found in
Sections 147 and 148 of the Revised Corporation
Code.

’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines

Annotated, p. 386 [2002],

Secs. 48-49

,J>

'

f

.

• ' • to

t- )

Title VI

MEETINGS
Sec. 48. Kinds of Meetings.

— Meetings of directors,

trustees, stockholders, or members may be regular or

special.
Sec. 49. Regular and Special Meetings of Stockholders or
Members. Regular meetings of stockholders or members
shall be held annually on a date fixed In the bylaws, or if
not so fixed, on any date after April 15 of every year as
determined by the board of directors or trustees: Provided,
That written notice of regular meetings shall be sent to all
stockholders or members of record at least twenty-one
(21) davs prior to the meeting, unless a different period
is required by the bylaws, law, or regulation: Provided.
further. That written notice of regular meetings may be
sent to all stockholders of record through electronic mail
or such other manner as the Commission shall allow under
its guidelines

—

At each regular meeting of stockholders or members.

the board of directors or trustees shall endeavor to present
to stockholders or members the following:

(a) The minutes of the most recent regular meeting
which shall include, among others;
(1) A description of the voting and vote tabulation
procedures used in the previous meeting;

(2) A description of the opportunity given to
stockholders or members to ask questions and a
record of the questions asked and answers given;
(3) The matters discussed and resolutions
reached;

(4) A record of the voting results for each agenda
Item;

(5) A list of the directors or trustees, officers and
stockholders or members who attended the meetings;
and
(6) Such other item that the Commission may
require in the interest of good corporate governance
and the protection of minority stockholders;
(b) A members’ list for nonstock corporation and, for
stock corporations, material Information on the current
stockholders, and their voting rights;
(c) A
detailed,
descriptive,
balanced
and
comprehensible assessment of the corporation’s
performance, which shall include information on any
material change in the corporation’s business, strategy,
and other affairs;
(d) A financial report for the preceding year, which
shall include financial statements duly signed and
certified in accordance with this Code and the rules the
Commission may prescribe, a statement on the adequacy
of the corporation’s internal controls or risk management
systems, and a statement of all external audit and
non-audlt fees;

(e) An explanation of the dividend policy and the fact
of payment of dividends or the reasons for nonpayment
thereof;

(f) Director or trustee profiles which shall
include,
others, their qualifications and relevant
experience, length of service In the corporation,
trainings
and continuing education attended, and
their board
representations In other corporations;
(g) A director or trustee attendance report,
the attendance of each director or trustee at indicating
each of the
meetings of the board and its committees and In
regular or
special stockholder meetings;
(h) Appraisals and performance reports
for the board
and the criteria and procedure for
assessment;
(I) A director or trustee compensation
report prepared
in accordance with this Code and
the rules the Commission

among

may prescribe;
480

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

481

482

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 48-49

(j) Director disclosures on self-dealings and related
party transactions; and/or
(k) The profiles of directors nominated or seeking
election or reelection. (N from a to k)

A director, trustee, stockholder, or member may
propose any other matter for inclusion in the agenda at
any regular meeting of stockholders or members. (N)
Special meetings of stockholders or members shall
be held at any time deemed necessary or as provided in
the bylaws: Provided, however, That at least one (1) week
written notice shall be sent to all stockholders or members,
unless a different period is provided in the bylaws, law or
regulation.
A stockholder or member may propose the holding of
a special meeting and items to be included in the agenda.
(N)
Notice of any meeting may be waived, expressly or
impliedly, by any stockholder or member; Provided, That
general waivers of notice in the articles of incorporation
or the bylaws shall not be allowed; Provided, further. That
attendance at a meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice
of such meeting, except when the person attends a meeting
for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of
anv business because the meeting is not lawfully called or

convened,
Whenever authorized for any cause, there is no person
authorized or the person authorized uniustlv refuses to call
a meeting, the Commission, upon petition of a stockholder
or member on a showing of good cause therefor, may issue
an order directing the petitioning stockholder or member
to call a meeting of the corporation by giving proper
notice required by this Code or the bylaws. The petitioning
stockholder or member shall preside thereat until at least
a majority of the stockholders or members present have
chosen from among themselves, a presiding officer.

Unless the bylaws provide for longer period, the stock
and transfer book or membership book shall be closed at
least twenty (20) days for regular meetings and seven (7)
days for special meetings before the scheduled date of the
meeting. (N)

Secs. 4849

'

483

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

In case of postponement of stockholders’ or members’
regular meetings, written notice thereof and the reason
therefor shall be sent to all stockholders or members
of record at least two (2) weeks prior to the date of the
meeting, unless a different period is required under the
bylaws, law or regulation. (N)

The right to vote of stockholders or members may
be exercised in person, through a proxy, or when so
authorized in the bylaws, through remote communication
or in absentia. The Commission shall issue the rules and
regulations governing participation and voting through
remote communication or In absentia, taking into account
the company’s scale, number of shareholders or members,
structure, and other factors consistent with the protection
and promotion of shareholders’ or members’ meetings. (N)

Kinds of meetings.
(1) Meetings of stockholders or members. Meetings may be:
(a) Regular or those held annually on a date fixed in the
bylaws, or if not so fixed, on any date after April 15, of every
year as determined by the board of directors or trustees. It is
held principally to elect another set of directors or trustees; or
(b) Special or those held at any time deemed necessary
or as
provided in the bylaws. (Secs. 48-49.)
(2) Meetings of director or trustees. They may be:
(a) Regular or those held by the board
monthly, unless the
bylaws provide otherwise; or
(b) Special or those held by the board at any time
upon the
call of the president or as provided in the bylaws. (Sec. 52.)

—

—

Necessity of meetings.
The corporate powers are vested in the board of

or
trustees and / or the stockholders or members as a bodydirectors
and not as
individuals.
(1) Meetings of stockholders or members.
"It is a fundamental
rule of corporation law that unless the
statue otherwise provides,

—

stockholders (or members] can act only in meetings properly
convened and assembled. The written assent of

majority of the
shareholders [or member] without a meeting to aamatter
requiring

484

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 48-49

Secs. 48-49

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

485

action by them is not sufficient." (Fisher, op, cit., p. 191.) Astockholder
or member may propose the holding of a special meeting and the
items to be included in the agenda.1 He may exercise the right to
vote or through a proxy, or when so authorized in the bylaws,
through remote communication, or in absentia taking into account
certain factors. (Sec. 49.)

(2) The corporation will be bound by the unanimous act or
agreement of its stockholders or members although expressed
elsewhere than at a formal meeting.

The reason for the rule lies in the protection to the stockholders
(or members) by notice and the opportunity to attend, discuss,
and vote at a meeting. Individual assents, however, given by the
shareholders separately, may preclude or estop those who assent
from complaining of what they have consented to. (SEC Opinion,
Sept. 22, 1972, citing Ballantine, p. 390.)

bylaws.3

The board of directors or trustees shall endeavor to present
to stockholders or members at each regular or special meetings
the matters, documents and reports enumerated in the second
paragraph of Section 49.

—

(2) Meetings of directors or trustees. Similarly, as agents of the
corporation managing its affairs, the directors or trustees can only
exercise their powers as a board, not individually or separately. The
law proceeds upon the theory that directors or trustees shall meet
and counsel with each other, and that any determination affecting the
corporation shall only be arrived at after a consultation at a meeting
of the board upon notice to all, attended by at least a quorum of its
members. (SEC Opinion, March 10, 1972, citing Ballantine, p. 123.)

Exceptions to the rule.

Where the law expressly requires a meeting for a particular
transaction, any action taken by the corporation without a meeting
properly held for such purpose is void.
(1) Under Section 15, any corporation may amend its articles
of incorporation "by a majority vote of the board of directors or
trustees and the vote or written assent two-thirds of the stockholders
representing at least two-thirds of the outstanding capital stock,
xxx or xxx of the members..." Thus, a meeting of stockholders or
members is unnecessary.
'See Appendix E: SEC Memorandum Circular No. 14-20, April 28, 2020 (Shareholders
Right to Put Items in the Agenda for Regular /Special Stockholders' Meetings). The
guidelines apply to publicly-listed companies.

(3) In any of the cases mentioned in Section 100, any action
taken by the directors of a close corporation without a meeting shall
nevertheless be deemed valid, unless otherwise provided in the

Requisites for a valid meeting of stockholders
or members.

These requisites must be complied with in order that there will
be a valid meeting of stockholders or members:
(1) It must be held at proper place (Sec. 50.)
(2) It must be held at the stated date and at the appointed time
or at a reasonable time thereafter (Ibid.);
(3) It must be called by the proper person3 (Sec. 49.);
(4) There must be previous notice (Secs. 49, 50.); and
(5) There must be a quorum. (Sec. 51.)

Notice of meetings.
(1) Regular meetings.
These are the rules on the period for
sending notices for regular meetings:
(a) Under Section 49, a corporation must send written
notice of regular meetings at least 21 calendar days before the
date of the meeting, unless a different period is required in the
bylaws, law, or regulation, (b) Under SEC regulations, written
notice of regular meetings must be sent to all stockholders/
members of record at least twenty-one (21) calendar days before
the date of the meeting. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 03-20, Feb. 21,
2020.) Thus, the minimum notice period for regular meetings of
stockholders would be 21 days (notwithstanding the fact that

—

the bylaws provide a shorter period).

’For other exceptions to the requirement that the board must act
as a body see
comments under Sec. 22.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has the power "to
compel the officers
of any corporation or
association registered by it to call meetings of stockholders or
members thereof under its supervision." (RD. No. 902-A, Sec.
6[f); see Bemas vs. Cinco,
Znl SI VA 1 AA
\
*

486

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 48^49

(b) In case of postponement of stockholders'/ members'
regular meetings, written notice thereof and the reason therefor
shall be sent to all stockholders/ members of record at least two
(2) weeks before the date of the meeting as originally scheduled.
The stockholders /members of record shall be notified of the
new schedule of the regular meeting in accordance with the
immediately preceding paragraph. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 03-20,

Feb. 21, 2020.)

—

(2) Special meetings.
These are the rules on the period for
sending notices for special meetings:

(a) In case of a special meeting, at least one (1) week written
notice must be sent unless a different period is "provided in the
bylaws, law or regulation."

Other matters on notices
(1) Section 49 only requires the sending /mailing of the notice
to the stockholders, which differs from filing or service under the
Rules of Court. It speaks of when the notice must be sent and does
not speak of receipt by the stockholders of the notice.
(2) Written notice of regular meetings may be sent to all
stockholders or members of record through electronic mail or such
other manner as the SEC shall allow under its guidelines.
(3) Notice of any meeting may be waived, expressly or impliedly.
The general waiver of notice in the articles of incorporation or the
bylaws is not allowed by Section 49.
(4) Where the corporate bylaws provide that notices of meetings
shall be by ordinary mail or personal delivery, it is not valid to notify
the stockholders by mere publication.
The SEC opined that since the notice was simply posted in the
common areas of the project, the same is not compliant with the
bylaws, and the meetings were improperly called or held.
However, even if the meetings were improperly called or held,
proceedings and any business transacted at such meetings shall
valid provided that such proceedings and business transacted
within the powers or the authority of the corporation, and that
the members of the corporation are present or duly represented

Secs. 48-49

487

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

at the meeting and not one of them expressly states at the beginning
of the meeting that the purpose of their attendance is to object to
the transaction of any business because the meeting is not lawfully
called or convened. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 36-19, Sept. 13, 2019.)
Meeting via remote communications.

Although the Revised Corporation Code now allows voting via
remote communication or in absentia in stockholders' or members'
meeting provided that the same is allowed in the corporation's
bylaws, said provision is not self-executory as it requires the SEC to
issue rules and regulations for same. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 56-19,
Nov. 28, 2019).
When so provided in the bylaws or by majority of the board of
directors, stockholders or members who cannot physically attend
at stockholders' or members' meetings may participate in such
meetings through remote communications or other alternative
modes of communication, (see SEC Memo. Circ. No. 06-20, March
12, 2020.)

If the election or meeting was conducted through teleconferen¬
cing or any other similar means, a visual and audio recording of
the election or meeting should be secured. The corporate secretary
is duty bound to safe-keep and perpetuate in updated data storage
equipment or facility the visual and audio recordings. (SEC Memo.
Circ. No. 06-20, March 12, 2020./

Non-holding of meeting.
The SEC has opined that the non-holding of an annual meeting
violates Section 49 of the Revised Corporation Code and subject to a
corresponding penalty pursuant to Section 170. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 43-19, Sept. 19, 2019].)

‘See Appendix F: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 06-20, March 12,

(Guidelines

2020
on the
Attendance and Participation of Directors, Trustees, Stockholders,
Members, and Other
Persons of Corporations in Regular and Special Meetings through
Teleconferencing,
Video Conferencing and

Other Remote or Electronic Means of Communication).

488

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 50

Sec. 50. Place and Time of Meetings of Stockholders or
Members. — Stockholders’ or members’ meetings, whether
regular or special, shall be held in the principal office of
the corporation as set forth in the articles of Incorporation,
or. If not practicable, in the city or municipality where the
principal office of the corporation is located: Provided, That
anv citv or municipality in Metro Manila, Metro Cebu, Metro
Davao, and other metropolitan areas shall, for purposes of
this section, be considered a city or municipality.

Notice of meetings shall be sent through the means of
communication provided in the bylaws, which notice shall
state the time, place and purpose of the meetings. (SA)
Each notice of meeting shall further be accompanied

bv the following:
(a) The agenda for the meeting;
(b) A proxy form which shall be submitted to the
corporate secretary within a reasonable time prior to the

meeting;
(c) When attendance, participation, and voting are
allowed by remote communication or in absentia, the
requirements and procedures to be followed when a
stockholder or member elects either option; and
(d) When the meeting is for the election of directors or
trustees, the requirements and procedure for nomination
and election. (N, from [a] to [d].)

All proceedings and any business transacted at any
meeting of the stockholders or members, if within the
powers or authority of the corporation, shall be valid even
if the meeting be improperly held or called: Provided, That
all the stockholders or members of the corporation are
present or duly represented at the meeting and not one

of them expressly states at the beginning of the meeting
that the purpose of their attendance is to object to the
transaction of anv business because the meeting Is not
lawfully, called or concerned-

Sec 50

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

489

Place and time of meetings of stockholders
or members
(1) The proper place for the holding of stockholders' or
members' meeting is that provided in Section 50. (par. 1.) This is
mandatory.1 Consequently, the bylaws cannot provide otherwise,
except as allowed by Section 92 with respect to meetings of members
of a nonstock corporation.
(a) Directors' or trustees' meetings, on the other hand, may
be held at any place beyond the bounds of the State where the
corporation exists unless the bylaws provide otherwise. (Sec. 52,
par. 4.)
(b) If the meeting is held at an unauthorized place or
without proper notice and not all the stockholders or members
are present, those who have a right to complain may take steps
to set aside any action taken at such meetings even though a
majority of the stockholders or members were present (Fisher,
op. cit., p. 196.) absent waiver, estoppel, or ratification. (5 Fletcher,
p. 25.)
(c) The rule as the place of meetings of stockholders or
members is subject to the exception provided in the second
paragraph of Section 50.
(d) Any city or municipality in Metro Manila, Metro Cebu,
Metro Davao, and other metropolitan areas shall, for purposes of
the place of meeting of stockholders or members, be considered
a city or municipality. (Sec. 50, par. 1.)
(2) Section 46(b) empowers corporations to provide in their
bylaw for the time and manner of calling and conducting regular
and special meetings of stockholders or members.

Proper person to call meeting.

The "call" for a meeting is exercised by the person with the
power to call the meeting.
'Th®
has opined that proviso of the first paragraph of Section 51 applies only
u the corporate by-laws are silent as
to the venue of stockholders' meetings. Where the
by-laws expressly provide for a specific place of
stockholders meetings, the provisions of
<he by-laws shall prevail. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 02-15, July 2, 2015)

490

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 50

(1) The person or persons designated in the bylaws have
authority to call meeting, (see Sec. 46[a].)
(2) Absent such provision in the bylaws, the meeting may be
called by a director or trustee or by an officer entrusted with the
management of the corporation unless otherwise provided by law.
(3) Under Section 49 (par. 6.), a stockholder or member may
make the call on order of the SEC. Section 49 (last par.) applies
only where there is no person authorized or the person authorized
unjustly refuses to call a corporate meeting.2 Any interested
stockholder or member may petition the SEC to authorize him to
call a meeting or to compel the officers of the corporation to call a

meeting.
(4) The special meeting for the removal of directors or trustees
may be called by the secretary of the corporation or by a stockholder
or member as provided by Section 27. The purpose of Sections 27
and 49 is to prevent the indefinite existence of holdover boards.

Notice of every meeting required.
As distinguished from "call," "notice" is the writing informing
the stockholders or members of the meeting.
The corporate bylaws govern the procedure of sending
notices of meetings. (Sec. 46[b].) It the bylaws is silent, the manner
prescribed in Section 50 shall be followed. (SEC Opinion, June 9,
1994). However, notice of any meeting may be waived, expressly or
impliedly, by any stockholder or member. (Sec. 49, par. 6.)
(1) It is customary and convenient to provide in the bylaws for
notice of all meetings both regular and special (7 R.C.L. Corps, par.

314.)
(2) A special meeting may not consider business other than
those listed in the notice of meeting unless there is unanimous

waiver.
(3) In meetings ordered by the SEC under Section 49 (par. 7.), it
is evident that notice is necessary.
'P.D. No. 902-A empowers the SEC, among others, "to compel the officers of any
corporation or association registered by it to call meetings of stockholders or members
thereof under its supervision." (Sec. 6|f] thereof.)

Sec 50

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

491

Requisites of notice of meeting.

The requisites of proper notice are:
(1) It must be issued by one with authority to issue it;
(2) It must be in writing (Sec. 49, par. 1, Sec. 50, par. 2, and Sec
52, par. 4.);

(3) It must state the date, time, and place of the meetings, unless

otherwise provided in the bylaws (Ibid.);
(4) It must state the business to be transacted;’
(5) It must be sent at a certain time before the scheduled meeting
as fixed by law, unless a different period is required by the bylaws

(Ibid.); and

(6) The notice must comply with any other requirements
prescribed by the law or by the bylaws of the corporation.
(a) For instance, Section 76 requires that the notice of
meeting for the approval of merger or consolidation "shall
state the purpose of the meeting and shall include a copy or as
summary of the plan of merger or consolidation, as the case may
be."
(b) Section 134 prescribes that the notice of meetings for
voluntary dissolution shall be made by publication, in addition
to written notice which shall be sent by registered mail or
personal delivery.

’Shareholders, who alone or together with other shareholders,
the outstanding capital stock of a publicly-listed comparing (PLC) hold at least 5% of
shall have the right to
include items on the agenda prior to the regular /special stodcholders'
meeting. All items
added on the agenda by qualified shareholderfs) pursuant to
after the Definitive Information Statement (DIS) has been filedthis Memorandum Circular
the SEC shall be filed
under "Other Matters." In this regard, the reporting PLC shallwith
no longer be required to
amend its DIS.
Any officer or agent of the corporation who shall
unjustly refuse to allow a
shareholder or group of shareholders, duly qualified
and holding the required
percentage of outstanding shares of the corporation, to exercise
his/her right to put
items on the agenda shall be liable under Section 158 of
the RCC:
Provided, that, if such refusal is made pursuant to a resolution or
order of the board
directors, the liability under this section for such action shall
°directors
be imposed upon the
who voted for such refusal: Provided, further, that it shall be a defense
to any
action under this Memorandum Circular
that the shareholder exercising any of these
001 actin8 in good faith or for a legitimate
purpose. (SEC Memo. Circ. No
14-2020, April 30, 2020.)

492

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. SO

Substantial compliance with requirement
A substantial compliance with the requirements as to notice will

be sufficient.

If general and special statutory provisions relating to notice are
conflicting, the special statutes control for matters covered by them.
Notice should be in language which may be readily understood and
should be construed in a sense in which businessmen to whom they
are addressed should understand them. (18 C.J.S. 1230.)
Statement of purpose of meeting.

There are certain matters of importance which the law requires
to be taken up at meetings of stockholders or members called
expressly for the purpose. It is, therefore, necessary that the notice
should state the purpose for which the meeting is called. These are:
(1) Election of directors or trustees (see Sec. 23.);
(2) Removal of directors of trustees (Sec. 27.);
(3) Filling of vacancies in the office of director or trustee (Sea
28, last par.);
(4) Ratification of contract of the corporation with a director or
trustee (Sec. 31, par. 2.);
(5) Extension or reduction of corporate term (Sec. 36.);
(6) Increase or decrease of capital stock (Sec. 37, par. 1.);
(7) Creation or increase of bonded indebtedness (Ibid.);
(8) Sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the
corporate assets (Sec. 39, par. 2.);
(9) Investment of corporate funds in another corporation or
business or for any other purpose (Sec. 41.);
(10) Declaration of stock dividends (Sec. 42.);
(11) Entering into a management contract with another
corporation (Sec. 43.);
(12) Amendment to, or repeal of, any bylaws or adoption of
new bylaws (Sec. 47, par. 1.);
(13) Fixing the issued price of no-par value shares (Sec. 61, last
par.);
(14) Plan of merger or consolidation (Sec. 76, par. 1.);

Sec. 50

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

493

(15) Amendment of the articles of incorporation of a close
corporation (Sec. 102.);
(16) Voluntary dissolution of the corporation where no creditors
are affected (Sec. 134.);
(17) Voluntary dissolution of the corporation where creditors

are affected (Sec. 135.); and
(18) Dissolution by shortening corporate term. (Sec. 136.)
The above matters may be transacted during the annual
stockholders' or members' meeting of the corporation as long as the
required notice is complied with.
The objection that no notice was given or that the notice given
was defective, cannot be raised by third persons who have not been
injured. (5 Fletcher, pp. 68-69.)

Effect of failure to comply with requisites
for meeting.
(1) Proceedings valid. Under Section 50 (par. 3.), all proceedings
had and any business transacted at any meeting of stockholders or
members shall be valid even if the meeting be improperly held or
called, provided the following two (2) requisites are present:
(a) The proceedings had and the business transacted are
within the power or authority of the corporation, that is they are
not ultra vires (see Sec. 44.); and
(b) All the stockholders or members of the corporation are
present or duly represented at the meeting.
Since the meeting is called for the benefit of stockholders or
members, they impliedly waive any irregularity of the meeting by
being present or represented at such meeting.
(2) Proceeding invalid.
If the two (2) requisites mentioned
are not present, any action taken at the meeting shall not be valid.
Note that Section 50 refers to "all proceeding had and any business

—

—

transacted."

Without the signature of the secretary of the meeting, an
alleged minute taken by a mere clerk has neither probative value
nor credibility. (Union of Supervisors [R.BJ-NATU vs. Secretary
of
Labor, 109 SCRA 139 [1981].)

494

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 51

Sec. 51. Quorum in Meetings. — Unless otherwise
provided in this Code or in the bylaws, a quorum shall
consist of the stockholders representing a majority of the
outstanding capital stock or a majority of the members in
the case of nonstock corporations.

Quorum required in stockholders’
and members’ meetings.

Section 51 lay down the rule on quorum for meetings Section 23
specifically applies to the election of directors or trustees.
(1) A majority of outstanding capital stock or members.
Under
Section 51, a majority of the outstanding capital stock as defined in
Section 173, or in case of nonstock corporations, a majority of the
members, shall constitute a quorum "unless otherwise provided in
this Code or in the bylaws."
Unissued stocks may not be voted or considered in determining
the presence of a quorum in stockholders' meeting. Only stocks
actually issued and outstanding may be voted. Thus, for stock
corporations, the quorum is based on the number of outstanding
voting stocks. (Vdlongco vs. Yabut, 854 SCRA 132 [2018].)
(2) Number not less than that required by law.
In cases where
the law determines the number of shareholders or members whose
concurring votes are necessary to make their action binding on the
corporation, not less than such number is necessary to constitute a
quorum at a meeting called to transact such business, (infra.)
(3) Number provided in the bylaws.
Section 46(c) permits
corporations to determine in their bylaws, "the required quorum
in meetings of stockholders or members" for the transaction of
business at such meetings subject to the Revised Corporation Code
or applicable special law.
A stockholder or member who participates through remote
communication such as videoconferencing and teleconferencing or
in absentia shall be deemed present for purposes of quorum. (Sec. 57,
par. 3.) So, a stockholder or member need not be physically present
or represented by the traditional proxies in meetings as required
before. The aim is to ensure optimal stockholder or member
participation in meetings.

—

—

—

।

Sec 51

TITLE VI . MEETINGS

495

—

(4) Any number but at least two (2).
In other cases, the bylaws
may validly provide for the holding of meetings with the presence of
any number of stockholders or members, even less than a majority,
provided that there are at least two (2). It is customary, however, to
provide in the bylaws that the presence of the registered holders
of a majority of the outstanding shares is necessary to constitute a
quorum, but that a smaller number may meet and adjourn to a late
date, and that at such adjourned meeting the shareholders attending
shall constitute a quorum.1
Thus, the SEC has opined that a nonstock, non-profit corporation
can amend its bylaws to change the quorum for members' meeting
from majority of the relevant units to 30% of the relevant units, (see
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 04-21 dated March 30, 2021.)
(5) Nonstock corporations
For nonstock corporations, the
basis for determining the quorum is the total number of registered
members. Only those who are actual, living members with voting
rights shall be counted in determining the existence of a quorum
during members' meetings. Dead members shall not be counted.
(Tan vs. Sydp, 499 SCRA 216 [2006].)
Stated differently, the basis in determining quorum in nonstock
corporations is the numerical equivalent of all members entitled
to vote, unless some other basis is provided by the bylaws of
the corporation. The qualification "with voting rights" simply
recognizes the power of a nonstock corporation to limit or deny
the right to vote of any of its members. To include these members
without voting rights in the total number of members for purposes
of quorum would be superfluous for although they may attend
a particular meeting, they cannot cast their vote on any matter
discussed. (Lim vs Moldex, Inc., 815 SCRA 619 [2017]; SEC Opinion
No. 31-19, Sept. 9, 2019; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 25-19, July 22
7

—

2019.)

The best evidence of who are the present members of a nonstock
corporation is the "membership book." In the case of a stock
’Where there is an unsuccessful attempt by the corporation or if it would
be
impossible for the corporation to get the required quorum of
stockholders necessary
to transact business, the
corporation may petition the SEC for the appointment of a
management committee, board or body to undertake the management of
the corporation
pursuant to Sec. 6(d) of Pres. Decree
No. 902-A. (SEC Opinion, April 11, 1994.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

496

Sec 51

corporation, it is the stock and transfer book. (Lim vs. Moldex, Inc.,
815 SCRA 619 [2017], citing R. Lopez, The Corporation Code of the
Philippines, 1994, Vol. 1, p. 973.)
(6) Where withdrawal leaves less than a quorum previously declared.
Once a quorum is present, the affirmative vote of the majority
(absent express provision in the bylaws to the contrary and unless
the vote of a greater number is required by law) is sufficient to
decide any question properly presented. All the stockholders (or
members) are bound by the result of such a vote and, this, even
notwithstanding the withdrawal (after the existence of quorum has
been determined or declared) of enough shareholders (or members)
to leave less than a quorum.2 (Hill v. Town, 1722 Mich. 508; 138 N.W.
344, and other cases.)

—

A minority group cannot prevent corporate action by walking

out.
(7) Effect of death of a stockholder or member.

—

In stock
their
shares.
transfer
may
generally
corporations, shareholders
Thus, on the death of a shareholder, the executor or administrator
duly appointed by the court is vested with the legal title to the stock
and entitled to vote it. Until a settlement and division of the estate is
effected, the stocks of the decedent are held by the administrator or
executor.
On the other hand, membership in and all rights arising from a
nonstock corporation are personal and nontransferable, unless the
articles of incorporation or the bylaws of the corporation provide
otherwise. The determination of whether "dead members" are
entitled to exercise their voting rights (through their executor
or administrator), depends on those articles of incorporation or
bylaws. (Tan vs. Sycip, supra.)

497

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec. 51

date so as to lengthen their term of office. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.
68-03,3 December 11, 2003.)

"An annual meeting, required and slated for the year, cannot be
dispensed with by the corporate officers, and the directors cannot
by law or otherwise, so change the time of annual election as to
continue themselves in office more than a year against the wishes of
the owners of a majority of the stock." (5 Fletcher, p. 25.)
Unless and until the bylaw provision is changed, modified or
repealed, the meeting cannot be postponed or suspended unless for
some valid and meritorious reasons. (SEC Opinion No. 13-05, Oct.
10, 2005.)

—

(2) Postponement of meeting to a later date when allowed.
The
rule, however, admits of exceptions, such as when the reason for the
postponement is justifiable. (SEC Opinion No. 19-05, Dec. 6, 2005).
Thus, where the annual meeting cannot be held on the date fixed
by the bylaws for some valid reason, such as an erroneous date for
holding the meeting stated in the notice sent out to members, the

meeting can be postponed. In such case, the annual meeting may
be postponed to a date later than that fixed by the bylaws, provided
proper notice of the change of date is given to the members. (SEC

Opinion, March 8, 1995.)

—

(3) Holding of meeting within a reasonable time after fixed date. It
is the duty of the board of directors or trustees to call the annual
meeting without necessary delay or within a reasonable time,
particularly when a demand there for is made on them by the
stockholders or members, because they can continue to hold over
only as long as their successors have not been elected; hence, it is not
within their power to delay such election as to prolong their stay in
office. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 21, 1968; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-03 4
April 30, 2003.)

Postponement of stockholders’ or members’
annual meeting.
(1) Change of date of meeting fixed in bylaws not allowed. The rule
is that where the date of the annual meeting is fixed in the bylaws of
the corporation, the board of directors or trustees cannot change the

Payment of compensation for attendance at
stockholders’ or members’ meeting.
There is nothing in the Revised Corporation Code which
expressly or impliedly authorizes the payment of per diems to

In case the stockholders remaining constitute less than a quorum, the meeting
should be adjourned unless the withdrawal was made purposely to break the quorum.

De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated,
^Citing
p. 413 120021.
*Citing De Leon,

—

The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 413 [2002).

498

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 51

stockholders or members for their attendance at stockholders' or
members' meetings.

The reason for this silence seems to be simple. The term per
diem, as used in connection with compensation, wages, or salary,
means pay for a day's services. (32 Words and Phrases, p. 17.) It
connotes payment for services rendered which cannot be ascribed
to the exercise of the right by a stockholder or member when he
attends a corporate meeting. As a matter of fact, Section 46(f) of the
Revised Corporation Code, which authorizes the bylaws to provide
the "compensation of directors or trustees and officers" excludes
stockholders and members in the enumeration, and this simply
underscores the fact that stockholders or members, as such, do not
render services but exercise rights personal to themselves in the
corporation (SEC Opinion, June 30, 1971.)
Matters in which the law requires minimum
number of votes.

The Revised Corporation Code requires a minimum number of
votes for these acts:
(1) to amend the articles of incorporation
a majority of the
or
and
trustees
assent
board of directors or
of 2 /3 of the
vote written
(Sec.
15;
stock,
or of the members
see Sec. 136.);
outstanding capital
(2) to elect directors or trustees a majority of the outstanding
capital stock or of the members entitled to vote (Sec. 23.);
(3) to remove directors or trustees
at least 2/3 of the
outstanding capital stock or of the members entitled to vote (Sec
27.);
(4) to call a special meeting to remove directors or trustees a
majority of the outstanding capital stock or of the members entitled
to vote (Sec. 27.);
(5) to ratify a contract of a director/ trustee or officer with
corporation at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or of the
members (Sec. 31.);
(6) to extend or shorten corporate term
a majority of the
board of directors or trustees and at least 2/3 of the outstanding
capital stock or of the members (Sec. 36.);

—

—

—

—

—

—

Sec 51

499

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

—

(7) to increase or decrease the capital stock a majority of the
board of directors and 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock (Sec. 37.);

—

a
(8) to incur, create or increase bonded indebtedness
the
board
of
the
directors
of
capital
outstanding
of
and
majority
2/3

stock (Ibid.);
(9) to sell, lease, exchange, mortgage, pledge or otherwise
a
dispose of all or substantially all of the corporate assets
majority of the board of directors or trustees and at least 2/3 of the
outstanding capital stock or of the members (Sec. 39.);
(10) to invest corporate funds in another corporation or
business or for any purpose other than the primary purpose
a
majority of the board of directors or trustees and at least 2/3 of the
outstanding capital stock or of the members (Sec. 41.);
(11) to issue stock dividends
a majority of the quorum of the
board of directors and at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock.
(Sec. 42.) Note: The approval of the stockholders is not required with
respect to other dividends such as cash dividends. They may be
declared by a majority of the quorum of the board;
(12) to enter into management contract
a majority of
the board of directors or trustees and at least a majority of the
outstanding capital stock or of the members of both the managing
and the managed corporations, and in some cases at least 2/3 of the
total outstanding capital stock entitled to vote or of the members
with respect to the managed corporation (Sec. 43.);
(13) to adopt bylaws
a majority of the outstanding capital
stock or of the members (Sec. 45.);
(14) to amend or repeal the bylaws or adopt new bylaws
a
majority of the board of directors or trustees and at least a majority
of the outstanding capital stock or of the members (Sec. 47.);
(15) to delegate to the board of directors or trustees the
power
to amend or repeal the bylaws or adopt new bylaws
2/3 of the
outstanding capital stock or of the members (Ibid.);
(16) to revoke the preceding power delegated to the
board of
directors or trustees - a majority of the outstanding capital stock or
of the members (Ibid.);

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

I

500

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 51

—

(17) to fix the issued price of no-par value shares a majority
of the board of directors if authorized by the articles of incorporation
or in the absence of such authority, at least by a majority of the
outstanding capital stock (Sec. 61, last par.);
(18) to effect or amend a plan of merger or consolidation
a majority of the board of directors or trustees and at least 2/3 of
the outstanding capital stock or of the members of the constituent
corporation (Sec. 76.);
(19) to dissolve the corporation a majority vote of the board
of directors or trustees and at least a majority (or at least 2/3, if
creditors will be affected) of the outstanding capital stock or of the
members (Secs. 134, 135.); and
(20) to adopt a plan of distribution of assets of a nonstock
corporation a majority vote of the board of trustees and at least
2/3 of the members having voting rights. (Sec. 94.)

—

—

—

Greater voting requirement.
A corporation may prescribe a greater voting requirement
for the approval of any of the above corporate acts in its articles
of incorporation and/or bylaws in order to protect the rights of
minority stockholders or members. Such higher number is also the
number necessary to constitute a quorum.
Any matter or transaction must necessarily fail if the number of
votes attained or cast is less than what is prescribes for the particular
transaction. If an issue to be resolved requires a majority for it to be
passed and there is a tie, the issue or proposition simply loses. There
is, therefore, no need to break the deadlock. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 23,
1991; Aug. 4, 1995.)

Waiver of right to vote.
The right to vote is a stockholder's most basic and fundamental
right inherent in and incidental to the ownership of corporate
shares of stock. It is an incident of ownership or of the property in
the stock of which the stockholder cannot be deprived without his
consent. It is through the right to vote that stockholders participate
in the management of the corporation. The right to vote, unlike the
right to receive dividends and liquidating distributions, is not a

Sec 52

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

501

passive thing because management or administration is vested in
the board of directors, with certain reserved powers residing in the
stockholders directly. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 56-19, Nov. 28, 2019.)
Since the right to vote in a corporation is fundamental, the
same may only be waived personally upon the initiative of the
stockholder /member. In the case of Marsh Thompson vs. Court
of Appeals (G.R. No. 116631, 28 October 1998), the Supreme Court
held that:
"Settled is the rule that a waiver to be valid and effective
must, in the first place, be couched in clear and unequivocal
terms which leave no doubt as to the intention of a party to give
up a right or benefit which legally pertains to him. A waiver
may not be attributed to a person when the terms thereof do
not explicitly and clearly evidence an intent to abandon a right
vested in such person."
Sec. 52. Regular and Special Meetings of Directors or
Trustees; Quorum. — Unless the articles of incorporation
or the bylaws provides for a greater majority, a majority
of the directors or trustees as stated in the articles of
incorporation shall constitute a quorum to transact
corporate business, and every decision reached by at
least a majority of the director or trustees constituting
a quorum, except for the election of officers which shall
require the vote of a majority of all the members of the
board, shall be valid as a corporate act. (N)
Regular meetings of the board of directors or trustees
of every corporation shall be held monthly, unless the
bylaws, provide otherwise.

Special meetings of the board of directors or trustees
may be held at any time upon the call of the president or as
provided In the bylaws.
Meetings of directors or trustees of corporations may
be held anywhere In or outside of the Philippines, unless
the bylaws provide otherwise. Notice of regular or special
meetings stating the date, time and place of the meeting
must be sent to every director or trustee at least two (2)
days prior to the scheduled meeting, unless a longer time
provided In the bylaws. A director or trustee may
waive
this requirement, either expressly or impliedly.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

502

Sec. 52

Directors or trustees who cannot physically attend or
vote at board meetings can participate and vote through
remote communication such as videoconferencing,
teleconferencing, or other alternative modes of

communication that allow them reasonable opportunities
to participate. (N)
Directors or trustees cannot attend or vote by proxy at
board meeting? (N)
A director or trustee who has a potential Interest in any
related party transaction must recuse from voting on the
approval of the related party transaction without prejudice
to compliance with the requirements of Section 31 of this
Code. (N)

Place and time of meetings of directors
or trustees
(1) Regular or special meetings of directors or trustees may be

held anywhere in or outside of the Philippines, unless the bylaws
provide otherwise.2
(2) Regular meetings "shall be held monthly, unless the bylaws
provide otherwise," while special meetings "may be held at any
time upon the call of the president or as provided in the bylaws."

Sec 52

> it

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

503

be sent to every director or trustee at least two (2) days before the
scheduled meeting, unless a longer time is provided in the bylaws.
Nevertheless, notice of a regular meeting need not be given if the
articles of incorporation or bylaws specify the time of the meeting
(unless it is to be held at another place). A director or trustee may
waive the notice requirement, either expressly or impliedly.
(2) A meeting held in the absence of some of the directors (or
trustees) and with no notice to them is illegal.
(a) The action at such meeting although by a majority of
the directors is invalid unless subsequently ratified or waived,
expressly or impliedly, by the absent directors or unless rights
have been acquired by innocent third persons, as against whom
the corporation must be estopped to set up the failure to observe
formalities. (Ballantine, p. 127.)
(b) All the resolutions and acts approved in the
meeting
cannot be considered valid and may be questioned by any
objecting director or stockholder unless subsequently ratified
expressly by the board of directors (or trustees) in a duly
convened meeting or impliedly by the corporation's subsequent
course of conduct. (Lopez Realty, Inc. vs. Fontecha, 247 SCRA
183 [1995].)

(Sec. 52.)

Requisites for board meeting.

Notice of every meeting required.
(1) Section 52’ requires that notice of every meeting, whether
regular or special, stating the date, time and place of the same must

Under Section 52, the validity of a corporate act is predicated
on
the presence of these requisites:

'Transferred from last paragraph of Section 25.
Tn our age of modem technology, the courts may take judicial notice that business
transactions may be through teleconferencing among people in two (2) or more locations
through an electronic medium. A teleconference represents a unique alternative to
face-to-face (H F) meetings. In the Philippines, teleconferencing and video conferencing
of members of board of directors of private corporations is a reality, given R.A. No. 8792,
otherwise known as the "Electronic Commerce Act." (Expertravel & Tours, Inc. vs. Court
of Appeals, 459 SCRA [2005].) provides the guidelines for board meetings done through
tele- or video conferencing where the participants who are not physically present are
located in different places, both here and abroad. General membership meetings are
subject to the limitations provided in the Corporation Code, (see Secs. 50, 92.)
’There is no criminal liability resulting from non-compliance with Section 52
regarding the holding or regular meetings of the board of directors. A statutory provision
a
must expressly declare that non-compliance therewith is a criminal offense in order that
violator can be held criminally liable. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 43-11, Oct 20, 2011.)

(1) Meeting of the directors or trustees
duly assembled as a
board, i.e., as a body in a lawful meeting;

(2) Presence of the required quorum;
(3) Decision of the majority of the
quorum or, in other cases, a
majority of the entire board; and
(4) Meeting at the place (see Sec. 52,
par. 4.), time, and manner
provided in the bylaws? (see Sec. 46[1].)
‘The board of directors or
Its meetings provided that the trustees may adopt its own internal rules in the conduct of
will not run counter to the provisions of the
Corporation Code, the articles same
of incorporation, and bylaws of the corporation. Revised
an individual director may
Whether
have a lawyer, accountant, or adviser present a meeting
of

504

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 52

A majority of the directors or trustees as stated in the
articles of incorporation or bylaws shall candidate a quorum to
transact corporate business. The exception is when the articles
of incorporation or bylaws provide for a greater quorum. Every
decision reached by at least a majority of the directors or trustees
constituting a quorum shall be valid as a corporate act except for the
election of officers which shall require a majority of all the members
of the board. (Sec. 52.)

Quorum.
Quorum is such number of the membership of a collective body
as is competent to transact its business or do any other corporate act.

—

(1) Number required for presence of quorum. Section 52 provides
that "unless the articles of incorporation or the bylaws provide for
a greater majority, a majority of die directors or trustees as stated in
the articles of incorporation shall constitute a quorum to transact
corporate business."
The majority means the number greater than half or more than
half of any total. It would be at least one-half plus one of the number
of directors as fixed in the articles and such quorum remains the
same even though there may be vacancies.
A director disqualified by reason of personal interest (see Secs.
32, 33.) in the matter before a director's meeting, loses, pro hac vice,
his capacity as a director and he cannot be counted for the purpose
of making a quorum, nor can the vote such director be counted for
the purpose of determining whether passed by majority vote. (SEC
Opinion, July 21, 1994.)
As a rule, a
(2) Number required for approval of corporate acts.
majority of the quorum of the board (as distinguished from majority
of the full board) will be sufficient to adopt a proposal where the
Revised Corporation Code requires approval of certain corporate
acts such as the declaration of dividends (Sec. 42.), or entering into
a management contract (Sec. 43.) without stating that it shall be by
majority vote of the board, but if the word "majority" is used, the
number of votes required to approve such acts shall be at least onehalf plus one of the entire membership of the board.

—

the board is a matter of internal corporate management upon which the courts properly
decline to rule. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 25, 1990.)

Sec. 52

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

t

505

—

(3) Number provided greater than majority.
Unlike the old
Corporation Law which sets the quorum at "a majority of directors"
without giving the corporation the power to require a number
greater than that to transact business, the Revised Corporation Code
allows the bylaws to provide a higher quorum.
Thus, given a corporation with nine (9) directors, five (5) members
will be sufficient to hold a board meeting and a vote of three (3) will
generally be enough to pass a board resolution. However, the same
corporation can provide in its articles of incorporation or bylaws,
that the required quorum shall be seven (7) members. Here, a vote
of at least four (4) members is necessary for the approval of any
board action or at least five (5) members of the board with nine (9)
directors shall be required for the election of officers, (see Sec. 96,
par. l(c].)

—

(4) Number provided less than majority.
The articles of
incorporation or the bylaws cannot provide for a lesser number
than the majority provided in Section 52 of the Revised Corporation
Code. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 07-16, April 4, 2016.)
(5) Absence of quorum. Less than the number to
constitute the
required quorum cannot meet and bind the corporation by any act
or resolution. All that the directors or trustees present can do is to
adjourn. (Ballantine, p. 130; SEC Opinion No. 13-02,5 November 27,

—

2002.)

ILLUSTRATIONS:

a

(1) The bylaws of X Corporation provide for 11
directors.
Only nine (9) directors were elected with two seats remaining
vacant. During a special meeting of the board where only
five directors were present (no quorum), the board
passed a

resolution.

Under the law, the required quorum of the board is a
majority of the entire board as it would be constituted if all the
vacancies were filled, i.e., six (6) directors. Consequently,
the
resolution is irregular.

Suppose the absent director signed the minutes of the
meeting. Will the signature cure the defect of the first
meeting?
No.
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines

Annotated, p. 130 [2002],

506

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 52

507

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

assign his duties to another director, or to a corporate officer, or to

But if the board subsequently met with six directors
present and they voted unanimously to approve and ratify said
resolution, such action would cure the defect and give effect to

any person.7
Board meeting through tele/video conferencing.
In relation to Section 52 of the Revised Corporation Code, SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 06-20 (March 12, 2020) prescribes the guidelines on
the attendance and participation of directors and trustees in regular
and special meetings through teleconferencing, video conferencing,
and other remote or electronic means of communication.

the resolution.
(2) The bylaws of X Corporation provide for seven (7)
directors and the required number of directors to constitute a
quorum and to carry a vote or approve any resolution in all its
meetings shall be at least 3/4 of all the directors.

Is the presence of five (5) directors sufficient compliance
with bylaws?
Yes. By mathematical computation, 3/4 of all the directors
would require the presence and concurrent votes of at least 5.25
directors. Under the rule on rounding numbers, the decimal
figure or figures to the right are dropped after increasing the
final remaining figure by 1, if the first digit is 0.5 or greater, (see
Webster, 3rd Int. Dictionary, p. 1979 [1976].) Considering that
0.25 cannot be rounded off into one, the same should be treated
as negligible and need not be considered in the computation
(5)
of the required number to constitute a quorum. Hence, five
(see
directors would substantially comply with the bylaws,
SEC Opinion, Nov. 7, 1989.)
In short, 0.5 or greater is considered 1, and 0.49 or less is

Sec. 53. Who Shall Preside at Meetings. — The chairman
or in his absence, the president shall preside at all meetings

of the directors or trustees as well as of the stockholders
or members, unless the bylaws provide otherwise.

Presiding officer at meetings.

—

(1) President/Chairman/Vice-chairman.
The chairman
shall preside at all meetings of directors or trustees and of the
stockholders or members, unless otherwise provided in the bylaws
(Sec. 53.) and subject to Section 49, par. 7.

The president shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the
chairman.

disregarded.
Proxy in board meetings not allowed.

(1) Because of their fiduciary responsibility to the corporation
(see Sec. 22.) and their being voted into office presumably because
of their personal qualifications, directors or trustees are not allowed
to "attend or vote by proxy at board meetings" (Sec. 52.)

or

(2) They must attend the meeting of the board of directors
by
trustees and act* as a body. Each director or trustee is required
running
law to exercise his personal judgment and discretion in

the affairs of the corporation and he cannot delegate his powers

Sec. 53

or

the chairman
‘A bylaw provision allowing the director whohappens to be elected as would defeat
one
create
or
to
tie
of
case
in
only
officer,
vote
to
of the board or presiding
will not be
the very purpose to participate in the management of the corporation. Heto vote. (SEC
able to participate in major corporate decisions unless he is given the right
Opinion, Aug. 4, 1995.)

’The members of the board of directors are required to exercise their judgment
and discretion in running the affairs of the corporation and they cannot be substituted
by others. No one can be elected to replace an incumbent director, even as an alternate
absent any vacancy. To allow such alternate would be to have two (2) directors for the
same position, one permanent and the other temporary, a situation that the law does not
permit. (SEC Opinion, May 27, 1970.)
Unless allowed by statue, the bylaws cannot provide for the position of “ex-officio
director." The term means a person who becomes a director of the corporation because of
his title to an office, and not because of an election by the stockholders or members. The
Corporation Code does not provide for the office. Since an “ex-officio director" will have
the rights and privileges of a director except the manner of coining office, such position
cannot be provided for in the bylaws. (SEC Opinion, Sept 1, 1987.) The SEC, however;
allows as an exception, a provision in the bylaws appointing an “ex-officio" member of
the board, provided there is an express provision that the appointee shall have no voting
right. The status of an “ex-officio" member of the board, therefore, is only for an honorary
member whose role would be act as adviser during board meetings. (SEC Opinion, Dea

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

508

Sec 54

—

Sec 54

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

509

(2) Stockholders or member in a temporary capacity.
Where the
officer entitled to preside is not present at the time for a meeting
to convene, it has been recognized that a stockholder or member
who takes the floor may temporarily preside at the meeting of
stockholders or members pending the selection of the presiding

stockholder participates in the management of the corporation. The
right to vote, unlike the rights to receive dividends and liquidating
distributions, is not a passive theory because management or

officer.

vs. Roxas, 195 SCRA 794 [1991].)
(a) The right has been described as the stockholder's
"supreme right and main protection." (Stokes v. Continental
Trust Co., 78 N.E. 1090.)

Unless the contrary is provided by the bylaws, the presiding
officer may be selected by viva voce vote of the stockholders or
members present, (see 19 Am. Jur. 2d 138.)

—

Where for any cause no
(3) Stockholders or member chosen.
person is authorized to call a meeting, the petitioning stockholder or
member authorized by the SEC to call a meeting of the corporation
"shall preside thereat until at least a majority of the stockholders or
members present have chosen from among themselves, a presiding

officer." (Sec. 49.)

That a director is at the same time the presiding officer of the
meeting does not deprive him of the right to vote as such director.
He cannot be deprived of the right by a majority vote of its board
without his consent. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 25, 1990.)
Sec. 54. Right to Vote of Secured Creditors end
Administrators. — In case a stockholder grants security
Interest In his or her shares In stock corporations, Iha
stockholder-grantor shall have the right to attend and vote
at meetings of stockholders, unless the secured creditor
Is expressly given by the stockholder-grantor such right
In writing which Is recorded In the appropriate corporate
books.
Executors, administrators, receivers, and other legal
representatives duly appointed by the court may attend
and vote In behalf of the stockholders or members without
need of any written proxy.

Right to vote In stock corporations.
It is through the right to vote that the
(1) In general.'

—

'Under the proviaions of the old Corporation Law, voting privileges ofthe
stockholders are always determined and based on their ownership of the subscribed

administration is, under the Revised Corporation Code, vested in
the board of directors (or trustees), with certain reserved powers
residing in the stockholders (or members) directly. (Cojuangco, Jr.

(b) The right is inherent in, and incidental to, the ownership
or the property in the stock of which the stockholder cannot be
deprived without his consent, and he may vote is as he chooses,
whether it be with the minority or majority, although not in
the manner or for a purpose contrary to law or public policy or
fraudulently. (5 Fletcher. P 99.)
(c) A court will not deprive a stockholder of his right to
vote his shares, except upon a clear showing of its lawful denial
under the articles of incorporation or bylaws of the corporation,
as it is a right inherent in stock ownership. (Sales vs. Securities
and Exchange Commission, 169 SCRA 109 [1989].)
(d) One who is actually a stockholder cannot be denied his
right to vote by the corporation merely because the corporate
officers failed to keep its records accurately. A corporation's
records are not the only evidence of the ownership of stock in a
corporation. (Lanuza vs. Court of Appeals, 454 SCRA 54 [2005].)

(e) The right to vote stock imposes no legal duty on the
holders to vote it. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 149.) Neither does it guarantee
that the vote of the stockholder will prevail. (Phil. Coconut
Producers Federation, Inc. vs. Republic, 612 SCRA 255 [2010].)
(f) The vote is based on the number of shares
represented
(Sec. 51.) and not on the number of stockholders
present which

shares must always be a part of the outstanding capital stock as
capital stock. In the new Corporation Code, the same rule
applies. However,
word
outstanding'' is used in lieu of the word "subscribed" so as not to includethe
treasury
nares in voting. In short, voting is based on the number of shares of stock
standing at
me fixed in the bylaws in the stockholder's name in the books
of the corporation,
erwise known as "outstanding capital stock." (SEC Opinion,
May 21, 1982.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

510

Sec 54

defined in Section 173. It is not legally feasible to provide that
certain shares shall be entitled to more than one (1) vote per
share (see Secs. 23, 46[g].) Section 6 applies only where certain
classes of shares, particularly shares classified as preferred, are
denied voting rights ordinarily enjoyed by a stockholder.

(g) Owners of shares are under no disability to vote at a
stockholder's meeting from the fact that they are also directors
of the corporation. They do not vote in their fiduciary capacity,
but like other stockholders, in the right of the shares held by
them. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 1159.)
(h) There is a "record date" (see note 25 under Sec. 42.)
fixed by the board of directors for determination of stockholders
entitled to vote; if it does not do so, such date shall be the date of
the notice of the meeting.
(2) Voting shares.
Ordinarily, only legal owners of shares of
a stock corporation have the right to be present and vote in any
corporate meeting. Their voting rights vary depending upon the
class of their stock. The control of the corporation, exercised by the
voting power of the stockholders, is in the hands of the holders of
common stock.
(a) A corporation holding shares in another corporation
may, like any owner, vote said shares in all meetings of the
stockholders by the corporate officer duly authorized by the
board of directors and as directed by it.
(b) Except as provided is Section 54, one who does not
appear to be a stockholder upon the books of the corporation
is not eligible to vote a stock although he may be entitled to the
legal title to the stock voted. (Re Argust Printing Co., 48 N.W.

—

347.)
(c) A transferee of stock cannot vote upon it if his transfer
is not registered in the books of the corporation. (Sec. 62.) A
registered stockholder must be allowed to vote irrespective of
any question of bona fides. (SEC Opinion, April 11, 1985.)

(d) The registered owners of shares sequestered by the
government (PCGG), or their duly authorized representatives
or proxies, may vote said shares. The government may not vote
the shares and elect the members of the board of directors. It

Sec. 54

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

511

cannot perform acts of ownership of sequestered property as
it does not become the stockholder of record by virtue of such
sequestration, it is a mere conservator.
The only conceivable exceptions under which the government is
granted the authority to vote the shares are: (1) where government
shares are taken over by private persons or entities who /which
registered them in their own names; and (2) where the capitalization
or shares that were acquired with public funds somehow landed
in private hands. (Cojuangco, Jr. vs. Roxas, supra; see Republic vs.
Sandiganbayan, 199 SCRA 39 [1991]; Trans Middle East [Phils.] vs.
Sandiganbayan, 490 SCRA 455 [2006].)
This "two-tiered test" does not apply but the public character
of the acquisition of the sequestered shares where the shares have
been conclusively shown to have been purchased with public funds,
or funds that are prima facie public in character or, at the very least,
are clearly affected with public interest as in the case of the coconut
levy funds which partake of the nature of taxes. (Republic vs.
COCOFED,2 372 SCRA 462 [2001]; see Republic vs. Sandiganbayan,
402 SCRA 84 [2003].)

—

(3) Non-voting shares. They may vote in certain cases. Where
the law provides 2/3 or majority of the outstanding capital stock
"entitled to vote" (see Secs. 23, 27, 43.) only shares with voting rights
may participate and vote in the deliberation of the corporation.
However, holders of stock without voting rights may vote in the
cases provided in Section 6. (par. 3, [a-h.].) In all other corporate
acts, only voting shares are entitled to be voted. (Ibid., last
par.)
(4) Disqualified shares.
Whenever the law disqualifies shares
from voting on any matter, they are not considered outstanding for
determining quorum at any meeting to act upon, or the required
vote to approve action upon that matter under any other
provision

—

V0,e
shares of stock registered in the names
.
individuals or entities and alleged to have been acquired with ill-gotten of private
wealth shall,
M a rule, be exercised by the
registered owner. The Presidential Commission on Good
(PCGG) may however, be granted such voting right provided
government
it can: (1)
wow pnma fade evidence that the wealth
and/or the shares are indeed ill-gotten; and
‘mminent danger of dissipation of the assets, thus necessitating their
nued sequestration and voting by the government until
a decision, ruling with
^611,
is promulgated by the proper court. (Ibid.) In this case the
ownershiPpublic °r
character" test was applied to the controversy.

“7

512

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 54

of the law or articles of incorporation or bylaws of the corporation. '
Accordingly, treasury shares (Infra.) are not so considered because
they are denied voting rights by the law. (SEC Opinion, April 11,
1985.)

—

(5) Preferred and redeemable shares.
Except as otherwise
provided by the articles of incorporation and stated in the certificate
of stock, holders of preferred shares have the right to vote. Common
shares may not be deprived of voting rights, but preferred and
redeemable shares may be deprived of the right to vote, unless
otherwise provided in the Revised Corporation Code. (Sec. 6, par. 3,
[a-h]; see Sec. 80[a].)
(6) Delinquent shares.
Holders of stock declared delinquent
by the board of directors for unpaid subscription (Sec. 66.) are not
entitled to vote or to representation at any stockholders' meeting.

—

(Sec. 70.)

—

(7) Treasury shares. Treasury shares have no voting rights as
long as such shares remain in the treasury. (Sec. 56.) Fractional shares
of stock (see Sec. 40.) cannot also be voted unless they constitute at
least one (1) full share.
(8) Shares not fully paid.
Holders of subscribed shares not
fully paid which are not delinquent are entitled to vote. (Sec. 71.)

—

Right to vote in nonstock corporation.

"The right of the members of any class or classes to vote may be
limited, broadened or denied to the extent specified in the articles
of incorporation or the bylaws. Unless so limited, broadened or
denied, each member, regardless of class, shall be entitled to one [1]
vote." (Sec. 88, par. 1.) Thus, the rule is one vote to each member. In
stock corporations, voting is based on the number of shares owned
and not on the number of stockholders or per capita.

Controversies involving the right to vote and "the election
or appointment of directors, trustees, officer or managers of
corporations, partnership or associates" were formerly under the
original and exclusive jurisdiction of the SEC. (P.D. No. 902-A, Sec.
5[b. cj.) The Securities Regulation Code (R.A. No. 8799.) transferred
jurisdiction to decide intra-corporate disputes to the regional trial
courts. (Sec. 5.2 thereof.)

?

513

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec. 54

Manner of voting.
A stockholder or member may vote:

!

(1) directly (in person), or
<

. (2) indirectly, through a representative;
(a) by means of a proxy (Secs. 23, 49, 50, 57, and 88, par. 2,
84.), or
(b) by a trustee under a voting trust agreement (Sec. 58.), or

(c) by executors, administrator, receivers, or other legal
representatives duly appointed by the court. (Sec. 54, par. 2.)
Voting may be straight or cumulative, (see Sec. 23.)
Representative voting.

A stockholder or member may vote, directly or indirectly,
through a representative a stated above.

—

(1) Legal representative of stockholder or member.

Section 54

authorizes executors, administrators, receivers, or other legal
representatives duly appointed by the court to attend and vote
in behalf of the stockholders or members on shares under their
administration without need of any written proxy (see Sec. 57.). This
is an exception to the rule in Section 23 that only stockholders of
record may vote.
Besides the above statutory provision, however, it is clear that
by virtue of their position as legal representatives, they have the
power to vote the stocks in the name of the stockholders (Schmidt
v. Mitchell, 101 Ky.570.) and this even if the shares still
stand on the
books of the corporation in the name of the stockholders, or without
a formal transfer of the shares on the books of the
to
them (Market St. RR. V. Hellman, 109 Cal, 541; 42corporation
P. 225.) Their
signature can create a legal and valid proxy. (SEC Opinion,
Jan. 28,

1963.)

(2) Parents of minor.

—

Under Article 225 of the Family Code
father and the mother shall jointly exercise legal
guardianship over the property of their unemandpated common
child without the necessity of a court appointment.
case of
disagreement, the father's decision shall prevail, unlessInthere
is a
judidal order to the contrary. The
parents may, therefore, represent
(E.O. No. 209.), the

514

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 54

and vote for their minor child in a stockholders' meeting inasmuch
as said acts are embraced in the administration of the child's
property.

—

(3) Grantees of security interest in stockholder's shares.
As
to secured creditors with a security interest over shares in stock
corporations, they shall have the right to attend and vote at meetings
of stockholders only when expressly given such right in writing by
the stockholder-grantor as the latter remains the owner of the stock
secured. The authorization must be recorded in the appropriate
corporate books. (Sec. 54, par. 1.)

If the stockholder-grantor of the shares of stock is disqualified to
vote it, the disqualification extends as well to the secured creditor.

—

(4) Officer or agent of corporation owning share. Shares standing
in the name of another corporation, whether domestic or foreign,
may be voted by such officer, agent or proxy as the bylaws of such
other corporation may prescribe or, absent a provision in the bylaws,
as its board of directors may determine, or they may be voted by the
chairman of the board, president, or any vice-president but always
under the ultimate direction of the board.

Thus, where the bylaws of the corporation contain no provision
on the matter, the board of directors may authorize the stockholders
of the company to vote for and in behalf of the corporation but the
authority granted would in no way qualify any of the stockholders as
eligible for membership in the board because of the stock ownership
requirements under Section 23. (SEC Opinions, July 26, 1988 and
March 13, 1991.)
Voting rights for shares of stock
of a deceased stockholder.

—

(1) Where a legal representative has been appointed. On the death
of a stockholder, his administrator or executor becomes vested
with the legal title to the stock and entitled to vote the same at all
meetings, and until a settlement and division of the estate is effected,
the stock of the decedent belongs to said administrator or executor
as his personal representative. This is true even if the shares stand in
the books of the corporation in the name of the decedent, or without
a formal transfer of the stock in the books of the corporation.
However, the administrator or executor should present proof or
evidence of his judicial appointment. (SEC Opinion, May 12, 1988.)

Sec 54

1

’

515

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

—

(2) Where no legal representative has been appointed.
Where the
estate of a deceased stockholder is still undivided and there is no
administrator or other legal representative duly appointed by the
court nor an executor designated in a will to administer said estate,
no person can vote the shares of the deceased since nobody can
legally represent his state under the second paragraph of Section 54.
(SEC Opinion, Feb. 28, 1967 and April 11, 1988.)
(a) Absent a judicial appointment, a person has no right to
vote a proxy signed by his mother in connection with the shares
of his deceased father. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 16, 1987.)
(b) An heir of a deceased stockholder whose stock still
remains pro indiviso among the heirs, cannot be considered a
stockholder of a stock corporation in his own right until the
shares registered his own name on books of corporation. (SEC
Opinion, March 1, 1976.)
(c) To transfer the shares of stock in favor of the heirs of
the deceased stockholder, judicial or extrajudicial partition
of the estate is necessary if he died intestate; otherwise it will
be necessary to wait for the termination of the testamentary
proceedings and the final adjudication of the shares of stock in
accordance with the will of the decedent.
In the light of the above, an agreement between a
corporation and a stockholder which provides that the former
shall provide a life insurance policy for the latter, whereby an
insurance company shall pay the insured stockholder, his heirs,
and assigns, the sum insured corresponding to the approximate
value of his shares upon his death, is not valid for purposes of
transfer of stocks and said deceased stockholder in favor of the
corporation. This scheme, if allowed, would be tantamount
to reacquisition by the corporation of its own shares.
Under
Section 40, a corporation cannot purchase its own shares unless
the conditions provided are complied with. (SEC Opinion, Nov
r
25, 1991.)
(3) Where partition has been executed by the
heirs.
Where a
judicial or extrajudicial settlement has been
executed by the heirs
^accordance with law and registered in the proper register of
deeds, dividing among themselves the shares of
the deceased, the
presentation thereof will entitle the
heirs to vote the shares allotted
in their respective
names at the meeting. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 28,

—

516

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 55-56

—

Sec. 55. Voting in Case of Joint Ownership of Stock. The
consent of all the co-owners shall be necessary in voting
shares of stock owned jointly by two (2) or more persons,
unless there is a written proxy, signed by all the co-owners,
authorizing one (1) or some of them or any other person to
vote such share or shares: Provided, That when the shares
are owned in an “and/or” capacity by the holders thereof,
any one of the joint owners can vote said shares or appoint
a proxy thereof. (A)

Voting where share owned by two (2)
or more persons.
(1) In case of shares of stock owned jointly by two or more
person {i.e., "and" shares), Section 55 requires the consent of all the
co-owners in order to vote such stock. Such consent is unnecessary
where:
(a) There is a written proxy executed by the joint owners
authorizing one or some of them or any other person to vote for
all; and

(b) The shares are owned in an "and / or" capacity by the
holders hereof, in which case any of the joint owners can vote
said shares or appoint a proxy thereof, (see Sec. 57.)

(2) Where the property relation between husband and wife is

governed by the system of absolute community of property, the
same shall be governed by the rules on co-ownership, (see Arts. 75,
90, Family Code.)

—

Treasury
Sec. 56. Voting Right for Treasury Shares.
shares shall have no voting right as long as such shares
remain In the Treasury.

Voting right for treasury shares.

Section 56 denies any voting rights to treasury shares as long
as such shares remains in the treasury (see Sec. 9.), i.e., they are
not formally cancelled, and are, therefore, subject to reissue by the
corporation at some future time. To give voting rights to treasury
shares could enable the directors to prolong their stay in office
against the wishes of the holders of the majority of the stock Such
shares are also not entitled to dividends.

Secs. 56-57

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

517

The only right which a corporation has over treasury shares is
to reissue the same for a valuable consideration. In case of sale or
reissue, treasury shares regain whatever voting rights and dividends
to which they were originally entitled.
Sec. 57. Manner of Voting; Proxies. — Stockholders and
members may vote in person or by proxy in all meetings of
stockholders or members.

When so authorized in the bylaws or by a majority of
the board of directors, the stockholders or members of
corporations may also vote through remote communication
or in absentia: Provided, That the votes are received before
the corporation finishes the tally of votes. (N)

A stockholder or member who participates through

remote communication or In absentia shall be deemed
present for purposes of quorum. (N)

The corporation shall establish the appropriate
requirements and procedures for voting through remote
communication and in absentia, taking Into account the
company’s scale, number of shareholders or members,
structure and other factors consistent with the basic right
of corporate suffrage. (N)

Proxies shall be in writing, signed and filed by the
stockholder or member In any form authorized In the
bylaws and received bv the corporate secretary
within a
reasonable time before the scheduled meeting. Unless
otherwise provided In the proxy form. It shall be valid only
for the meeting for which It Is Intended. No proxy shall be
valid and effective for a period longer than five (5) years at
any one time.

Meaning of proxy.
The term "proxy" may interchangeably be used to designate or
apply to one of three (3) meanings:
(1) It designates the formal written authority
given by the
owner or holder of the stock, who has a right to vote
it, or by a
member, as principal, to another person, as agent, to exercise
the
voting rights of the former. In short, it refers to the grant of authority

518

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 57

(2) It is also used to apply to the holder of the authority or
person authorized by an absent stockholder or member to vote for
him at a stockholders' or members' meeting.
(3) The term is also applied to refer to the instrument which
creates and evidences the authority of the agent.
A proxy is thus a special form of agency. The relationship is one
of principal and agent. The proxy holder is in the eye of the law
an agent and as such, a fiduciary. (Ballantine, p. 412; SEC Opinion,1

Nov. 15, 2001.)

tr

Purpose and use of proxies.

.

*।

•

The advantages derived from their use cannot be disregarded.
(1) Presence of quorum in meeting. The system of proxy voting
is not a mere convenience or favor to the distant and indifferent
stockholders. It also assures the presence of a quorum in meetings
of stockholders of larger corporations, (see Ballantine, p. 411.?
(2) Exercise of right to vote through absent.
At the same time,
proxy voting enables those who do not wish to attend a stockholders'
or members' meeting to protect their interest by exercising their
right to vote though a representative.
(3) Voting and management control. The solicitation and use of
proxies is also one device of securing voting control or management
control in the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 6, 1976.)

—

—

—

Voting by proxy.

(1) As a rule, the stockholders or members may vote by proxy.
(Sec. 57; see Sec. 49, last.)
(2) The right to vote by proxy is specifically provided in the
election of the board of directors or trustees (Sec. 23.), in voting in
case joint ownership of stock (Sec. 55.), in voting by trustee under
'Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 428 [1993].
’"Proxy voting is a development which necessarily accompanied the increase on
the size and geographical dispersion of corporate membership. Without this device, the
inability of the stockholders [or members] to attend in person might make it impossible
to secure the quorum necessary to take corporate action." (SEC Opinion, Feb. 6, 1976,
citing 111 A. Agbayani, Commentaries and Jurisprudence on the Commercial Laws of the
Phils., p. 470.)

Sec 57

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

519

voting trust agreement (Sec. 58, last par.), in voting by members in
nonstock corporations (Sec. 88, par. 2.), and in voting on the plan of
distribution of assets of a nonstock corporation. (Sec. 94[c].)
(3) Section 46(e) provides that a corporation may provide in its
bylaws the "form for proxies of members or stockholders and the
manner of voting them."

(4) The stockholder may deliver, in person or by mail, his
proxy vote directly to the corporation. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4,
Series of 2004.) The right to vote by proxy necessarily includes the
right to solicit proxies and, the right to have access to the list of the
corporation's stockholders or members needed to be able to solicit
proxies, (see Sec. 73.)

Voting by proxy is not allowed in board meetings (see Sec. 52,

par. 5.)

Who may be a proxy.
Section 57 imposes no limitation as to the persons who may be
appointed as proxy. Hence, a stockholder or member may appoint
any person he sees fit to represent him?
(1) Since a proxy acts for another, he may act as such although
he himself is disqualified to vote his shares. Thus, a stockholder
disqualified to vote because his stock has been declared delinquent
(see Sec. 70.), may vote the stock of his principal who
is not
delinquent. A stockholder or member who himself is not entitled to
vote cannot, vote by proxy.
(2) The same person may act as proxy for one
or several
stockholders or members.
(3) While directors or trustees cannot attend or
vote by proxy
at board meetings (Sec. 52, par. 5.), they may
act as proxies in

stockholders' meetings.

Nature of proxies.
Proxies shall be in writing, signed and filed by the stockholder
or member. (Sec. 57.) The appointment of
proxy is, therefore, purely
, Ab’*nt sucil designation, the chairman of the meeting shall be
hereby directed to cast the vote as indicated to cast the vote as deemed authorized
stockholder or this proxy." (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4, Series of 2004.)indicated by the voting
nA

520

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 57

personal and to be valid, a proxy to vote stock must have been given
by the person who is the legal owner of the stock entitled to vote the
same at the time it is be voted. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 3, 1993, citing 5
Fletcher, Sec. 2053; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 37-19, Sept. 13, 2019.)
A proxy who is not a stockholder or member is not qualified to
be a candidate as director. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 27-09, Sept. 9,
2009.)

Unless the stockholders or member who executed a proxy
gives his consent in writing, a designated proxy may not further re¬
designate another under the same proxy. An alternate proxy can only
act as proxy in case of non-attendance of the other designated proxy.

A proxy who is not a stockholder or member is not qualified to
be a candidate as director. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 27-09, Sept. 9,
2009.)
Limitation on proxies of stockholders
or members.
Under Section 57, the limitations are:
(1) Proxies must be in writing signed and filed by the stockholder
or member and received by the corporate secretary within a reasonable
time before the scheduled meeting. Oral proxies are not, therefore,
valid, but the written proxies may be in any form authorized in the
bylaws.
(2) Unless otherwise provided in the proxy form, it is valid
only for the meeting for which it is intended. The authority may be
general or limited; and
(3) A continuing proxy must be for a period not exceeding
five (5) years at any one time; otherwise, it shall not be valid and
effective after such period.

Pres. Decree No. 902-A empowers the SEC, among others, "to
pass upon the validity of the issuance and use of proxies and voting
trust agreement s for absent stockholders or members." (Sec. 6[g]
thereof.)
i

Form and execution of proxies.

*

—

1

'

(1) Generally, no particular form required.
The Revised
Corporation Code does not contain express provisions, other than

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec. 57

521

that provided in Section 58, on the "form of proxies of stockholders
and members and the manner of voting them." leaving the matter
to be provided in the corporate bylaws, (see Sec. 46[e].)
(a) Absent bylaws provision to the contrary, no particular
form or words are necessary to constitute a proxy or extend
the authority thereof. All that is necessary is that it shall be in
writing and signed by the stockholder or member (Sec. 57.),
and shall show an intention to empower the person to whom
it is given to act as agent in voting the stock so as to enable the
election officers to know who is authorized. (5 Fletcher p. 176.)
(b) Absent a provision on the articles of incorporation
or bylaws, the board of directors cannot prescribe die form
of proxies other than as provided for under Section 57. (SEC
Opinion, Oct. 4, 1987; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 09-08, March 27,
2008.) The imposition of a particular form would be void; it is
valid for any stockholder or member to use any form of proxy if
it complies with the minimum requirements of Section 57. (SECOGC Opinion No. 16-07, August 13, 2007.) Unless expressly so
provided, a written proxy even if not notarized, or is without
documentary stamps,4 or is unattested by witnesses, will suffice,
as long as it authorizes the person to whom it is given to act as
agent for and in behalf of the stockholder or member executing
the same. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 16-07, August 13, 2007.)
(c) The proxy should be dated. If a duly accomplished
and
executed proxy is indicated, the postmark or date of dispatches
stated in the election mail, or if not mailed, its actual date of
presentation, shall be the date of the proxy. (SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 41, Series of 2004.)
(d)

Neither is a proxy instrument rendered invalid by
it being undated, or the holder's name is in blank,5
or the
The adverse

effect of failing to affix the required documentary stamps is that the
proxy cannot be recorded as a public documents
and cannot be admitted or used as evi¬
dence in court until such stamps are fixed and cancelled. (Sec.
201, National Internal
Revenue Code.)
name °f Proxy lcft blank< the corporation receiving the proxy
is at liberty
to fill m any name it
chooses. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 4, 1968, citing 1 Corporate Secretary's
eye., p. 84.) By returning the proxy form unfilled,
a stockholder or member deemed
° have constituted the corporation itself as proxy, and, therefore, the latter ismay
fill it
f°
authority given by stockbolder member. (SEC Opinion,
11,

’*/

TO?1)™0311*

**

Jan

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

522

Sec. 57

authority was written in ink of different color from that used irj
the signature of the proxy. (SEC Opinion, July 9, 1975.)
(e) For corporate members, a board resolution authorizing
the signatory of the proxy should be submitted. Being a juridical
person, a corporation can only act through its board of directors.
In the case of a stock corporation, it would be in execute it in
a formal corporate manner. (SEC Opinion No. 07-16, Aug. 18,
2007.)
(2) Regularity in execution presumed.
regularity in the execution of proxies.

—

Sec 57

523

a fundamental change in the corporate charter or other unusual
transactions, such as merger or consolidation. (Title IX.)
(2) A limited proxy, as the name implies, limits the power
conferred, it may restrict the authority to vote to specified matters
only and may direct the manner in which the vote shall be cast.
(Ballantine, pp. 407-408.)

I

There is a presumption of

Denial of right to vote by proxy
In the bylaws.
(1) In stock corporations, the appointment of proxy is purely
personal and an incident of ownership and, therefore, a bylaws
provision prohibiting the use of proxy by stockholders is contrary
to law and hence, null and void.
(2) In nonstock corporations, however, the right to vote by
proxy, or even the right to vote itself may be denied to members in
the articles of incorporation or the bylaws (Sec. 88,) as long as the
denial is not discriminatory. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 6, 1989.)

(a) As a rule, they should be accepted if they have the
appearance of prima facie authenticity in the absence of timely
and valid challenge and are signed as the names appear in the

record of the corporation.
(b) Rules and procedure relating to execution of proxies
should be decided before each meeting and stockholders or
members should be informed of them for their guidance. Better
still, the same should be provided for in the bylaws. Lacking
extraordinary circumstances, the trend in court decisions has
been toward upholding the ruling of inspectors of election. (SEC
Opinion, Jan 4, 1968, citing Black, modem Corp. Law, pp. 573-

Restrictions on right to vote by proxy

In the bylaws.
(1) The bylaws of a stock corporation(see Sec. 88, as to nonstock.)
may impose reasonable restriction on the right to vote by proxy, so
long as the restrictions do not conflict with the law or deprive the
stockholders of the right thereby given them.

574.)

Extent of authority of proxy.
The proxy holder is an agent whose authority may be general
or limited.
(1) A general proxy confers a general discretionary power of
attorney to attend and vote at an annual meeting "with all the
powers the undersigned would possess if personally present," to
vote for directors and all ordinary matters that may properly come
before a regular meeting.6 It is no authority, however, to vote for

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Thus, the bylaws may provide:
i

(a) A deadline for the submission of proxies
before the
scheduled meeting7 (SEC Opinion, Nov. 13, 1972.); or
at any all regular and special

meetings of stockholders of the corporation and adjourn¬
ments thereof, as fully to all intents and purposes as
I might do if present and acting in
person.
Hf there is no deadline for the submission of
proxies provided for in the bylaws, the
corporation may not fix a deadline for their submission;
any time before the meeting. (SEC Opinion, July 3, 1990.) hence, they may be submitted
In case of the non-attendance of my
above-named proxy at any particular meeting,
1 authorize and empower the
chairman of the meeting to fully exercise all rights
as my
proxy at such meeting. This proxy
by me through notice in writing shall continue until such time as the same is withdrawn
delivered to the corporate secretary, but shall not apply
in instances where I
personally attend the meeting.

of

To insure a quorum, corporations usually provide in the proxy form that in case
the non-attendance of the proxy named, the stodcholder authorizes the chairman or any
officer of the corporation to exercise all the rights as the proxy of the stockholder.
‘A customary form of general proxy may be:
That, I the undersigned, a shareholder of ABC Corporation, do hereby nominate,
constitute and appoint Mr. D, or in his absence, Mr. E or Mr. F my proxy to represent me
and vote all shares registered in my name in the books of the corporation or owned by me

I

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

524

Sec 57

(b) That no proxy shall be valid or voted on after a certain
length of time from this date; or
(c) That no person shall vote at any meeting by virtue of
any proxy executed within a certain period of time before such

meeting; or
(d) That no such proxy shall be used at more than one
annual meeting of the corporation. (5 Fletcher, p. 190; Sept. 4,

1995.)
(2) Restriction on the right to vote by proxy shall be void only
where they operate unjustly, unreasonable, and oppressively so as
to work the disenfranchisement of a majority of the legal voter. (SEC
Opinion, July 16, 1974, citing 5 Fletcher, p. 211.)

(3) It is illegal for a corporation to adopt a rule that a stockholder
who fails to attend the meeting or appoint a proxy is deemed to
have appointed the chairman of the meeting as his proxy. (SECOGC Opinion No. 37-19, Sept. 13, 2019.)
Proxy given to two (2) or more persons.

—

(1) Action of the majority. A proxy in favor of several persons
is presumed by the action of the majority to represent the giver's
will.
(a) The dissenting minority cannot withdraw and break
up the quorum and meeting to effectuate their dissent. It is
customary in proxies to three (3) or more persons to authorize
a majority of those who attend or, if only one attends, then that
one, to exercise the power given him. If it be given to two (2)

525

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec 57

case of conflict, the rule of the majority of the three governs. A
proxy, however, may be revoked when it runs to several proxies
who cannot agree on a vote. (Ibid., citing 5 Fletcher , p. 275.)
(2) Rule where all proxies undated.
Where the corporation
receives more than one (1) proxy from the same stockholder and
they are all undated, the postmark or electronic dates shall be
considered.
(a) If the proxies are mailed on the same date, the one
bearing the latest time of a day indicated in the postmark or
latest time of dispatch appearing in the electronic mail, shall
prevail.
(b) If the proxies are not mailed, then the time of their actual
presentation is considered, That which is presented last will be
recognized.
(3) Number of shares to be represented by each proxy.
If the
stockholder intends to designate several proxies, the number of
shares of stock to be represented by each proxy shall be specifically
indicated in the proxy form.
(a) If some of the proxy forms do not indicate the number of
shares, the total shareholding of the stockholder shall be tallied
and the balance thereof, if any, shall be allotted to the holder of
the proxy form without the number of shares.
(b) If all are blank, the stocks shall be distributed equally
among the proxies. The number of persons to be designated as
proxies may be limited by the bylaws. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4,
Series of 2004.)

—

—

persons, they or either of them are usually authorized to exercise
the power. (SEC Opinion, April 10, 1987, citing 5 Fletcher, p.

Revocation of proxies.

232.)

have always been considered as revocable, unless coupled with an
interest (e.g., proxy appointment given to a pledgee under a valid
pledge of shares) and their revocation may be by formal notice,
orally or by conduct as by the issuance of a subsequent proxy, or the
sale of shares. (Ballantine, p. 409.) The revocability of an
proxy appointment takes into account the possibility ofirrevocable
abuse of
voting power to the detriment of the shareholder.
(2) Last proxy given revokes all previous proxies.
The last proxy
given is deemed a revocation of all
previous proxies.

(b) Where a proxy is given to three (3) persons in one (1)
instrument, the three of them must agree upon the vote and in
In witness thereof, the undersigned stockholder has executed this proxy
.
, 20
day of
Signed in the presence of.
Witness

Printed name and signature

(1) Generally.

—

Proxies, even those with irrevocable terms,

—

526

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 57

(a) When two (2) proxies are offered bearing the same
name, then the proxy that appears from the evidence to have
been last executed will be accepted and counted under the
theory that the latter, being the more recent proxy, constitutes a
revocation of the former (SEC Opinion, Oct. 14, 1991; 5 Fletcher,
p. 343.), without the necessity of informing the former attorneyin-fact of the revocation of his authority. However, to prevent

embarrassment on the part of the first appointee, the revocation
should be communicated to him. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 7, 1961.)
(b) Where a corporation receives more than one proxy from
the same stockholders and they are all undated, the postmark
or electronic dates, or the time of their actual presentation shall
determine the proxy to be counted. (Supra.)

However, should there be no sufficient time to verify
the proxies, the corporate secretary must refer the matter to
the presiding officer whose decisions will be binding or to a
special committee of inspectors which is empowered to pass
on the validity of proxies. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 13, 1972, dting 1
Corporate Secretary's Encyc., pp. 85, 88.)

Sec. 58

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

(2) Continuing proxy.

—

A continuing proxy authorizes the
the
thereof
vote
for
to
absent stockholders or member at
holder
any meeting of stockholders or members for a fixed or an indefinite

period time.
(a) If the proxy authorizes the holder to vote "at any and all
regular and special meetings," without providing any limitation
with respect to the period of activity, it shall be valid only for
five (5) years from its date, whether or not it is coupled with an

interest.
(b) If the stockholder or member does not revoke a
continuing proxy, or does not appear at any meeting nor give
another proxy to another person, it shall continue to be effective
until its expiration. As a matter of policy, the SEC is against the
use of continuing proxies without specific periods of time. (SEC
Opinion, Nov. 17, 1975.)

—

(3) Renewal of proxy.
A proxy may be renewed for not more
than five (5) years for each renewal. It can be both specific and
continuing. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 26, 1985.)

—

Duration of proxy.
Proxies expire either by their own terms or at a statutory time
after date. A proxy may be specific or continuing depending on the
extent of authority given in die instrument.

—

(1) Limited and specific proxy.
If the proxy is specific, then
the authority granted the proxy holder is merely for a particular
meeting on a specific date. Stated differently, if the proxy does not
expressly state the duration of its validity, it is understood that it is
only valid for a particular meeting after which it is deemed to have
expired. Corollary thereto, if the proxy instrument states its validity
period then the instrument shall be valid for the stated period;
provided, however, that the validity period of the proxy does not
exceed five (5) years from the date of the instrument. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 16-06, March 6, 2006; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-11/

Jan. 10, 2011.)
A specific proxy cannot be exceeded or extended if given,
cannot be implied. (SEC Opinion, May 21, 1985, citing 5 Fletcher
1952 replacement Vol., p. 236, infra.)

527

Sec. 58. Voting Trusts. One or more stockholders of a
stock corporation may create a voting trust for the purpose
of conferring upon a trustee or trustees the right to vote
and other rights pertaining to the shares for a period not
exceeding five (5) years at any time: Provided, That in the
case of voting trust specifically required as a condition In
a loan agreement, said voting trust may be for a period
exceeding five (5) years but shall automatically expire
upon full payment of the loan. A voting trust agreement
must be in writing and notarized, and shall specify the
terms and conditions thereof.

A certified copy of such agreement shall be filed with
the corporation and with the Commission:
otherwise,
the agreement is ineffective and unenforceable. The
certificate or certificates of stock covered by the voting
trust agreement shall be cancelled and new ones shall be
Issued In the name of the trustee or trustees stating that
they are issued pursuant to said agreement The
books of
the corporation, shall state that the transfer in the
name of
the trustee or trustees Is made pursuant to the
voting trust
agreement.

528

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 58

The trustee or trustees shall execute and deliver to
the transferors voting trust certificates, which shall be
transferable in the same manner and with the same effect
as certificates of stock.

The voting trust agreement filed with the corporation
shall be subject to examination by any stockholder of the
corporation in the same manner as any other corporate
book or record: Provided, That both the trustor and the
trustee or trustees may exercise the right of inspection of
all corporate books and records in accordance with the
provisions of this Code.
Any other stockholders may transfer the shares to the
same trustee or trustees upon the terms and conditions
stated in the voting trust agreement, and thereupon shall
be bound by all the provisions of said agreement.
No voting trust agreement shall be entered into
for purposes of circumventing the laws against anti¬
competitive agreements, abuse of dominant position,
anti-comoetitive mergers and acguisitions. violation of
nationality and capital requirements, orfor the perpetuation
of fraud.
Unless expressly renewed, all rights granted in a voting
trust agreement shall automatically expire at the end of the
agreed period. The voting trust certificates as well as the
certificates of stock in the name of the trustee or trustees
shall thereby be deemed cancelled and new certificates of
stock shall be reissued in the name of the trustors.

The voting trustee or trustees may vote by proxy Q[
in any manner authorized under the bylaws unless the
agreement provides otherwise.

Corporate control devices.

—

(1) Management control. A corporation not affected by control
devices, such as a voting trust, has its management determined
by the votes of stockholders cast in person or proxy at the annual
election. Very often the control may lie with the management in
office who can obtain proxies from the scattered stockholders to
vote for directors selected by management.

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec 58

529

This results in what is sometimes called "management control."
(2) Control over management.
Various expedients have been
devised to obtain control with little or no investment. Among the
principal control devices by which groups may seek to gain or retain
control over the management by a combination of voting power or
otherwise are:

—

(a) Voting agreement;
(b) Voting trusts;

(c) The classification of common shares into voting and
non-voting, with the voting power vested in a small class of
"management stock";
(d) Management contract, often with a parent or affiliated

corporation; and

(e) Pyramiding.' (Ballantine, pp. 416-417.)

Combination and pooling agreements
among stockholders.
(1) Validity and legality.
It is not in violation of any rule or
principle of law nor contrary to public policy for stockholders who
own a majority of the stock of a corporation to cause its affairs to be
managed in such a way as they may think best calculated to further
the ends of the corporation, and for this purpose, to appoint one or
more proxies who shall vote in such a way as will carry out their

—

plan.

Nor is it against public policy or unlawful per se for stockholders
to agree or combine for the election of directors or other officers, so
as to secure or retain control of the corporation, at least where the
object is to carry out a particular policy with a view to promote the
best interest of the stockholders and the agreement is fair to all the
stockholders. And they may do this either by themselves or through
their proxies, or they may unite in the appointment of a single
proxy
to effect their purpose.
Pyramiding is the use of holding companies or a series

of holding companies piled
In hers, one on top of another,
with the former holding controlling shares of the latter. The
e ect of such series, each
controlling a bare

of
as a subsidiary, is to give to the holder of a majority the shares of the one preceding it
majority of the shares of the last corporation,
aving perhaps only a small capital investment, the control
of the entire or series with a
capital of any millions. (Ibid.)

530

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 58

—

Sec. 58

531

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

(2) Test.
According to the weight of authority, the validity
and legality of such combination and pooling agreements2 depend
rather upon the objects sought to be attained and the acts done
under them, and the other circumstances.

(c) agreement by the property owner to pay a shareholder
a commission if by vote of himself and others he caused
corporation to purchase the property (Dieckmann v. Robyn, 141
S.W. 717.);

(a) Such combinations or agreements are invalid if in con¬
travention of statutes providing that no proxy shall be voted on
after a certain length of time form its date, or if they operate as
an illegal restraint on the alienation of the stock, (see 5 Fletcher,
pp. 249-267; see also 18 CJ. 1255-1256.)

(d) agreement to give the defendants control of corporation
in consideration of their agreement to vote for directors who
would secure to one plaintiff a corporate office at a stated salary.
(Cone v. Russel & Mason, 48 N.J. Eq. 208; see W.L Cary supra, pp.
375-380.)

(b) It is the duty of a stockholder of corporation, in
attendance at meetings of stockholders, to act fairly and in good
faith. He is not justified in entering into any agreement to vote so
as to perpetrate a fraud upon any other stockholder. (Palmbaum
v. Magulsky, 104 N.E. 746; see W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on
Corporations, p. 380 [ 1969].)

—

(3) Where consideration for pooling agreement gives private benefit
There is authority for holding pooling agreements
to be invalid if the consideration for entering into the same gives a

to stockholder.

private benefit to the stockholder.
Typical cases of this sort include:
(a) agreement by the defendant to vote in a certain manner
in consideration of a promise to cancel his promissory note
(Stott v. Stott, 242 N.W. 747.);
(b) agreement by the creditor to give a shareholder a part of
amount he expected to receive as creditor after sale of the corpo¬
rate assets, if the shareholder would withdraw his opposition to
the sale (Brady v. Bean, 221 Ill App. 279.);
’Pooling or voting agreements are agreements by which two or more stockholders
agree that their shares shall be voted as a pooled unit. They are usually concerned with
the election of directors to gain control of the management. In close corporations, the
validity of stockholders' agreements is expressly recognized in the Revised Corporation
Code. (Sec. 99.) There is no reason, however, for denying stockholders of widely-held
corporations the right to enter into pooling or voting agreements if these are otherwise
valid. In such agreements, the parties thereto remain the legal owners of their stocks is
vested in a trustee and the shares are registered in the name of the trustee who exercises
the voting rights of the beneficial owners for the duration of the trust. In a pooling
agreement, the shareholders retain all the indicia of ownership. It is less formal and easier
to establish.

Voting and other rights under a voting
trust agreement

—

(1) Control in one (1) person or a few persons.
Sometimes, it is
desired to place the control of all or part of the stock in the hands of
one person or a few persons. This may be done through a voting trust
agreement. It may be defined as an agreement in writing whereby one
or more stockholders of a stock corporation3 transfer their shares to
any person or persons or to a corporation having authority to act
as a trustee for the purpose of vesting in such person or persons or
corporation as trustee or trustees voting or other rights pertaining to
the shares for a period not exceeding five (5) years at any time, or in
case of a voting trust specifically required as a condition for a loan
agreement, for a period to expire upon full payment of the loan.
The voting trust agreement must be writing and notarized and
shall specify the terms and conditions thereof in the agreement.

(Sec. 58, par. 1.)

—

(2) Status of voting trustee. A voting trust agreement
transfers
only voting or other rights pertaining to the shares subject of the
agreement, or control over the stock, not the properties or assets of
the corporation. (National Investment & Dev. Corp. vs. Aquino,
163
SCRA 153 [1988].)

It would seem that Sec. 58 applies only to stock
corporations. As a matter of
policy, the SEC may allow members of a nonstock corporation to
execute and deliver a
voting agreement in favor of one (1) of its members. (SEC
Opinion, July 27, 1964.) The
applicability of Sec. 59 to non-stock corporation may be inferred from Sec. 6(g) of P.D.
No.
*«-A, which empowers the SEC "to
pass upon the validity of the issuance and use of
proxies and voting trust
agreement for absent stockholders or members."

532

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Under such agreement, title to the shares conveyed is transferred
to the trustee in the books of the corporation. The certificates of
stock covering the shares are surrendered and cancelled and new
certificates are issued in the name of the voting trustee. (Ibid.)
(3) Status of transferring stockholder.— By its very nature, a
voting trust agreement results in the separation of the voting rights
of a stockholder from his other rights. (Lee vs. Court of Appeals, 205
SCRA 752 [1992].)
(a) In such agreement, the transferring stockholder of a
stock corporation parts with the voting power only but retains
the equitable or beneficial ownership of the stock. A voting
trustee is only a share-owner vested with colorable and fictitious
title for the sole purpose of voting upon stocks he does not own.
(SEC Opinion, Aug. 17, 1979, citing cases.)

(b) Consequently, the transferring stockholder, although
he has ceased to be a stockholder of record, retains the right of
inspection of corporate books which he can exercise concurrently
with the voting trustee (see Sec. 73, par. 2.), to receive the
dividends when collected by the trustee, and to recover his stock
at the expiration of the trust, and other rights a stockholder may
be entitled until liquidation of the corporation.
But a stockholder whose shares are covered by a voting trust
agreement is disqualified from being elected as director unless
he retains at least one (1) share in his name on the books of die
corporation, (see Sec. 22, par. 2.)

Voting trust certificates.

—

(1) Execution and delivery. In return for the certificate of stock,
the voting trustee executes and delivers to the stockholders voting
trust certificates to show that the latter are, in reality, the owners

of the shares held by the voting trustees. The owners are thus
enabled to claim their rights as stockholders. They continue in their
ownership of the stock transferred for all but voting purposes.

—

(2) Transfer and effect thereof.
The voting trust certificates
are intended to be and are transferable in much the same way as
stock certificates, subject, however, to the trust agreement. (Sec. 59,
par. 2.) In other words, a subsequent purchaser of stock with full

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

Sec. 58

533

knowledge of the agreement takes it impressed with the trust and
is bound. (Boyer v. Nesbitt, 227 Pa. 398;76 A. 103; see Palting vs. San
Jose Petroleum, Inc., 18 SCRA 924 [1966].)
But a voting trust agreement made without complying with
the statutory requirement does not affect the right of a subsequent
transferee, to whom the stock has been transferred on the books of
the corporation, to vote the stock himself. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 197.)
(3) Cancellation. Upon the expiration of the agreed period, the
voting trust certificates and the certificates of stock in the name of
the trustee or trustees shall be deemed cancelled and new certificates
of stock shall be reissued in the name of the trustors. (Sec. 58, par. 6.)
Unless expressly renewed, all rights granted in a voting trust
agreement shall automatically expire at the end of the agreed period.

—

Powers or rights of voting trustees.

Under Section 58:
(1) The trustee or trustees shall possess the right to vote and
other rights pertaining to the shares so transferred and registered on
his or their names subject to the terms and conditions of and for the
period specified in the agreement (see par. 1.);
(2) The trustee or trustees may vote in person or by proxy
unless
the agreement provides otherwise (last par.); or in any manner
authorized under the bylaws;
(3) They may exercise, like the transferor, the rights
of inspection
of all corporate hooks and records (par. 3.); and
(4) The trustee is the legal title-holder or
owner of
shares
so transferred under the agreement, (see par. 1.) He is, the
therefore,
qualified to be a director. (Sec. 22.)

Purpose of voting agreement
The ultimate control of a stock corporation depends
upon the
vote of the stockholders. Voting trust agreements
are
devices
that
may be used to control these votes.
(1) Principal purpose.
Such an agreement makes possible
a unified control of the affairs
of the corporation and a consistent
policy by binding stockholders to vote as a unit, (see
Fletcher, on
at-, pp. 209-210.)

—

534

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

(2) Purposes held valid.

Sec 58

—

Under Section 58, a voting trust
a
trustee not only the stockholder's
may
upon
confer
agreement
voting rights but also other rights pertaining to his shares. But the
principal purpose of the grant of voting rights is to acquire control
of the corporation.
These purposes of voting trust have been sustained:
(a) To assure continuity of policy and management
especially of a new corporation desirous of attracting investor;
(b) To enable the owners of the majority of the stock of the

corporation to control the corporation;

(c) To vest and retain the management of the corporation in
the persons originally promoting it;
(d) To prevent a rival concern from acquiring control of the
corporation;
(e) To carry out a proposed sale of the corporation's assets
and to facilitate its dissolution;
(f) To enable two (2) holding companies to operate jointly a
corporation controlled by them;

(g) To effect a plan for reorganization of a corporation in
financial difficulty or in bankruptcy proceedings,-4 and
(h) To aid a financially embarrassed corporation to obtain a
loan and protect its creditors. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 196.)

—

(3) Purposes held invalid. Where the purpose of the voting trust
agreement was illegal or improper, it is invalid. Among purposes
held to render voting trusts invalid are:
(a) to make a profit for participating stockholders through
contracts with the corporation;
(b) to interrupt the harmonious conduct of the corporate
business;

(c) to secure employment and salaries for the contracting
parties; or
‘See Ramos vs. Central Bank, 41 SCRA 565 (1971); Central Bank vs. Court of Appeal
106 SCRA 143 (1981).

Sec 58

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

535

(d) to force minority stockholders out of a corporation
unless they surrender their stock for voting trust certificates
which would result in depriving them of their substantial rights
in addition to the loss of their right to vote their stock. (Ibid., 196197.)

Limitations on voting trust agreement
To prevent or minimize the commission of possible abuses
because of the transfer of the legal ownership of the shares to the
trustee, Section 58 imposes these limitations;
(1) No voting trust agreement shall be entered into:
(a) For a period exceeding five (5) years at any time (i.e., for
every voting trust) except in the case of a voting trust specifically
requiring a longer period as a condition in a loan agreement,
in which case, the period may exceed five (5) years but shall
automatically expire upon full payment of the loan (par. 1.);
(b) To circumvent the laws against anti-competitive
abuse of
dominant position, anti-competitive mergers, and acquisitions,
and violation of nationality and capital requirements, (par. 5.)
Thus, the 60% Filipino stockholders of a corporation
engaged
in mass media (which must be 100% Filipino-owned)
cannot
enter into a voting trust agreement with the 40% non-Filipino
stockholder. (SEC Opinion, June 23, 1986.);
(2) The agreement must not be used for
purposes of fraud
(Ibid.)-,
(3) The agreement must be in writing

the terms and conditions thereof;

and notarized and specify

(4) A certified copy of the
agreement must be filed with the
corporation and with the SEC; otherwise, it is
ineffective and
unenforceable (par. 1; see SEC Opinion, April 11, 1988.);
(5) The agreement shall be
subject to examination by any
stockholder of the corporation in the same manner
as any other
corporate book or record (par. 3.); and
(6) Unless expressly

renewed, all rights granted in the
agreement shall automatically
(par. 6.), but in the case of a expire at the end of the agreed period
voting trust required as a condition in

536

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 58

a loan agreement, it shall continue until full payment of the loan.
(Supra.)
Pres. Decree No. 902-A empowers the SEC, among others, "to
pass upon the validity of the issuance and use of proxies and voting
trust agreements for absent stockholders or members." (Sec. 6[g]
thereof.)

Proxy and voting trust distinguished.
Proxies and voting trust may be distinguished in this manner:

(1) A proxy has no legal title to the shares of the stockholder
giving the agency, while a trustee acquires legal title to the shares of
the transferring stockholder;5
(2) A proxy, unless coupled with interest,* is revocable at any
time,7 while a voting trust agreement, if validly executed, is intended
to be irrevocable for a definite and limited period of time,-*
(3) A proxy can only act at the specified stockholders' or
members' meeting (if the proxy is not continuing in nature), while a
trustee is not limited to any particular meeting;
(4) A proxy votes only in the absence of the owner of the stock,
while a trustee can vote and exercise all the rights of the transferring
stockholder even when the latter is present;
(5) A proxy is usually of shorter duration than a voting trust
agreement, although under the law, the maximum duration of both
cannot exceed five (5) years at any time, except in case of a voting
’So, the proxy votes as a mete agent while the trustee, as owner.
‘An agency (proxy) is coupled with interest where the agent (proxy) has parted
with value of incurred liability at the principal's (stockholder's) request looking to the
exercise of the power (proxy) as the means of reimbursement or indemnity. (Merchem on
Agency, p. 407.) Thus, where D borrows money from C and D pledges his certificates of
stock to C for the debt, giving C a written continuing proxy to attend and vote the shares
at meetings of stockholders (see Sec. 57.) until the debt is paid (see Sec 58.), it is clear that
D cannot revoke the proxy unless he first pays C
’Even though it may in terms be irrevocable. Therefore, proxies constituting an
agreement between stockholders to vote their stock in a special manner or for a
purpose not supported by any consideration other than a mutual agreement of
stockholders to vote as stated in the proxy would be revocable. (SEC Opinion, Oct. <
1988, citing 5 Fletcher ( 1976 Ed), p. 256.)
’The voting trust has been developed precisely to achieve irrevocable proxies. I
Rohrich. Law and Practice in Corporate Control, p. 69.)

Sec 58

TITLE VI. MEETINGS

537

trust specifically required as a condition of a loan agreement until
full payment of the loan;
(6) A proxy need not be notarized nor a copy filed with the SEC,
while a voting trust must be notarized and certified copy filed with
the SEC; and
(7) A proxy does not have a right of inspection of corporate
books, while a trustee has such right.

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec. 59

»39

according to the charter and bylaws of the particular corporation.2
(12 Fletcher, p. 978.)

Title VII

Subscription contract

STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

—

Any contract
Sec. 59. Subscription Contract.
for the acquisition of unissued stock in an existing
corporation or a corporation still to be formed shall be
deemed a subscription within the meaning of this Title,
notwithstanding the fact that the parties refer to it as a
purchase or some other contract

How participation in a corporation
acquired.

(1) In a stock corporation, a person may become a shareholder;
(a) by subscription contract with an existing corporation
for the acquisition of unissued shares;1
(b) by purchase from the corporation of treasury shares; or
(c) by acquisition from a stockholder of the outstanding
shares or an existing subscription to shares.
A corporator in a stock corporation must be a stockholder. (See
Secs. 5, 10.) Honorary membership in a business corporation is an
incongruity and finds no sanction in law or custom. (Wolfson vs.
Manila Stock Exchange, 72 Phil. 492 (1941J.)
(2) In a nonstock corporation, membership is acquired by
contract with the corporation, the modes of entering into which vary

'Warrant is a type of security which entitles the holder the right to subscribe to a
predetermined number of the unissued capital stock of a corporation (subscription
warrant) or to purchase a predetermined number of issued or existing shares in the future
(covered warrant). It is detachable if the warrant may be sold, transferred or assigned to
any person by the warrant holder separate from and independent of the corresponding
beneficiary securities. The latter are shares of stock or other securities of the issuer which
form the basis of the entitlement in a warrant. The warrant is non-detachable, if it may not
be sold, etc. (see SEC Rules, Sept. 15, 1993.)
538

Section 59 lays down the rule of what shall be deemed a
subscription.
(1) Subject matter.
There can be a subscription only with
reference to stock never issued, i.e., to an original issue of stock, or
to an increase of capital stock. The subscription in case of the former
may be made before or after incorporation but in case of the latter, it
is always made after incorporation.
(2) Form.
The law does not require that the subscription
contract be in writing although it is usual and convenient for it to be
in writing.
(3) Absence of express contract.
A person who accepts a
certificate of stock from a corporation or who acts as stockholder
by participating in stockholders' meetings, making payment, or
otherwise, thereby becomes a stockholder, and becomes liable as
such not only to creditors, but also to the corporation although there
may have been no express contract of subscription. (Spielberger vs.
Nelson, 72 Phil. 396 [1941]; SEC Opinion, Aug. 19, 1992.)
(4) Subscriptions under several contracts.
There is no law
prohibiting a person from subscribing to the capital stock of a
corporation under several subscription agreements. On the
contrary,
it is common practice for a person to enter into several
subscription
contracts with the same corporation. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 24, 1963.)
(5) Subscription upon any special terms. A
corporation, under
its general power to contract, has the power to
accept subscriptions
upon any special terms not prohibited by law or
contrary to
policy, provided they do not require the performance of acts public
beyond
the powers of the corporation and do not constitute
a fraud upon
other subscribers or stockholders, or upon persons who
are or may
become creditors of the corporation. (National Exchange
Co., Inc
vs. Dexter, 51 Phil. 601 [1928].)

—

—

—

—

—

’Ownership of a unit in a condominium is a condition precedent to being a
shareholder
or member in the condominium
corporation, the presumption is that holders of duly issued
Condominium Certificate of Title (CCT) are considered shareholders or members of
the
Condominium Corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 35-11, Aug. 12, 2011.)

I
THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

540

Sec 59

i
A subscription contract is to be distinguished from a share

contract, (see comments under Sec. 61.)

Kinds of subscription.
A subscription is an offer to acquire a specified number of
unissued shares of an existing corporation or one still to be formed.

It may be:
(1) Pre-incorporation subscription or one entered into before
incorporation. It constitutes a contract among the subscribers
(Sec. 60.);
(2) Post incorporation subscription* or one entered into after the

incorporation of the corporation for the acquisition of unissued
stock.
(a) It shall be deemed a subscription notwithstanding
the fact that the parties refer to it as a purchase or some other

contract. (Sec. 59.)
(b) The subscriber becomes a stockholder upon acceptance
by the corporation of the subscriber's offer or by the subscriber
of the corporation's offer even though he has not paid for his
shares unless the subscription agreement otherwise provides, or
when there is a constitutional, statutory, or charter provision to
the contrary, except in instances of increase in authorized capital
stock (see SEC Opinion, April 20, 1988.);
(3) Conditional subscription or one subject to a condition, which
may be a past event unknown to the parties or a future, uncertain
event, that is, an event which may or may not happen, (see Art. 1179,
par. 1, Civil Code.)
(a) The subscriber does not become a stockholder until the
condition is fulfilled.
(b) The subscription is void if the condition is void (Art
1183, ibid.);
’A subsequent subscription should be distinguished from pre-incorporation
subscription (Sec. 13.) and subscriptlori to an increase in capital stock (sec. jo./
initial payment is explicitly required, Except in the two (2) Instances, the board of
directors has the authority to determine the amount and the time and manner of payment
of such subscription. (SEC Opinion, April 20, 1988.)

gee. 59

TITLE VIL STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

541

(4) Absolute subscription or one not subject to any condition and,
therefore, the subscriber becomes liable on the subscription and
acquires the rights of a stockholder from the time it is accepted; and

(5) Subscription with a special term or one where the corporation
agrees to do something, the fulfillment of which not being a
condition precedent to the accrual of liability of the subscriber
or the acquisition of the rights of a stockholder. It is an absolute

subscription.
Thus, if X enters into a subscription contract with Y Corporation
subject to the special term that the corporation will amend its
primary purpose, the non-fulfillment of the stipulation does not
entitle X to rescind the subscription; his remedy will be an action for
damages against the corporation.
Subscription and purchase of stock.

Under the former Corporation Law (Act No. 1459.), if the
acquisition of unissued shares from a corporation is made after its
incorporation, the contract is either a subscription or a purchase of
stock depending upon its terms and the intention of the parties.
The Revised Corporation Code, under Section 60 (Sec. 59, old
Corporation Code.), in defining subscription, does not distinguish
between subscription and purchase of shares4 from an existing

—
4A

subscriber becomes a stockholder immediately upon acceptance of
his
subscription even before full payment (unless the subscription contact is subject
to
a suspensive condition) and may not legally be released by the
corporation from the
obligation to pay for his shares (under the former law), full payment
is necessary before
a purchaser becomes a stockholder and the purchaser
maybe released by the corporation
from his obligation, corporate creditors not being a privy to the
contract. The corporation
can enforce the contract or rescind It for non-payment
of the purchase price. These
distinctions will now apply only to purchase of treasury shares.
It la generally held that a parol subscription for shares is
not within the Statute
of Frauds as an agreement for the sale of
or choses in action. It is submitted,
however, that oral subscription contracts aregoods
subject to the Statute of Frauds. Where the
amount involved is P500 or more and no partial
performance has been made, an oral
subscription agreement, in the absence of some written
note or memorandum thereof,
will be unenforceable, (see Art. 1403(2, d],
Civil Code.) For purposes of the civil law,
subscription contract for the acquisition of shares in a corporation la,
•purchase
in essence, a
which creates a creditor-debtor relationship between the corporation
and the
•ubscriber Involving the delivery of personal
and the payment of its price,
although the effects of the contract are governedproperty
by the Corporation Code. However, to
constitute a sale, there must be a transfer of actual
ownership interests.

542

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 59

, > (2) In consonance with the trust fund doctrine (see Sec. 41.),
stocks subscriptions are in the nature of a trust fund in the sense that
they are to be maintained unimpaired for the protection of corporate
creditors. Subscribers who have not paid in full, unless they have
been validly released from their undertaking, are the debtors of the
corporation for the balance, and if the corporation does not enforce
the liability, its creditors may do so. (see Edward A. Keller & Co.,
Ltd. vs. COB Group Marketing, Inc., 141 SCRA 86 [1986]; Vda. de
Salvatierra vs. Garlitos, 103 Phil. 757 [1958]; 18 C.J.S. 1311-1312.)

Stock option.

A stock option is a privilege granted to a party to subscribe to a
certain portion of the unissued capital stock of a corporation within
a certain period and under the terms and conditions of the grant
exercisable by the grantee at any time within the period granted.
(SEC Rules Governing the Grant of Stock Options, Sec. 1, February
25, 1977.)

'

Liability of stockholders on unpaid subscriptions
to corporate creditors.

But to have a cause of action against a stockholder for his
unpaid subscription, a corporate creditor must first exhaust his legal
remedies against the corporation unless the corporation is insolvent
for in such case recourse against the corporation would be useless
and a waste of time.

j

•

Corporations trade upon the credit of the fund created by the
issue of their shares and the accretions to that fund.
(1) Persons dealing with corporations are presumed to know
that they can have recourse only to the property of the corporation and that
if the corporation is unable to meet its obligations, its shareholders
cannot be compelled to make good the deficiency.
But this exemption depends upon the full discharge of the
subscription contract.
In a case, where X exchanged his real properties for original unissued shares of a
corporation as a result of which X became the majority stockholder of the said corporation,
it was held that X became a stockholder by subscription. The deed of exchange cannot be
considered a contract of sale because there was no transfer of actual ownership by X to
a third party. X merely changed his ownership from one form to another, the owne P
nge
remaining in the same hands. What X really did was to invest his properties and
ng
organ
by
form
to
the nature of his ownership from unincorporated incorporated
the corporation to take control of his properties and at the same time save on inheritance
taxes. (Delpher Trades Corporation vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 157 SCRA .
[1988].) In other words, if there was a transfer of actual ownership interests to a
party, the transaction can be considered a contract of sale.

543

I

corporation by making all such acquisitions a subscription
notwithstanding that the parties denominate it as a purchase or sale
or some other contract. However, Section 35(f) speaks of the power
"to issue or sell stocks to subscribers" as one of die powers of stock
corporations. This will embrace the sale of treasury shares.

Companies offer stock option plans to their employees, (see, e.g.,
SEC Opinion, March 20, 2000.) Non-resident foreign companies may
also offer stock options to employees of their Philippine affiliates
(see e.g., SEC Opinion, December 4, 1988.)

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec 59

I

(3) The liability of a subscriber for unpaid subscription cannot be
compensated or set-off with the value of his shares nor can stock dividends
declared be applied as payment for the same. The reason is that there is
no relationship of debtor and creditor between a stockholder and
the corporation with respect to his shares of stock. The corporation,
however, may apply cash dividends due on delinquent stock to the
unpaid balance on the subscription plus costs and expenses and
withhold stock dividends from the delinquent stockholder until his
stock subscription is fully paid. (Sec. 42, par. 1.)

Release of subscriber from liability
for unpaid subscription.

An unpaid subscription is an asset to which corporate
creditors
may look for payment and they are entitled to insist that
it be
collected (7 R.C.L.Corp., par. 337.) since the unpaid shares are as
much a part of the capital stock as the sums which have
been paid.
(SEC Opinion, Sept. 1, 1971.)
(1) Trust fund doctrine.
A subscription contract is a contract
not only between the immediate parties
the subscriber and
corporation
but also among all the subscribers or stockholders
and the corporate creditors by reason of the
nature of a subscription
contract as a trust fund. (Supra.) The doctrine considers
subscribed capital as a fund, which is held in trust as security the
for
satisfaction to creditors in case of corporate liquidation.

—

—

—

544

THE REVISED CORPORATION OODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 59

Sec. 59

I
(a) Hence, a stock corporation has no power to release an
original subscriber from paying for his shares without valuable
consideration for such release (see PNB vs. Bitulok Sawmill, 23
SCRA 1366 [1968]; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 50-19, Oct. 11, 2019.)
or without the unanimous consent of the stockholders and except
upon a showing that creditors of the corporation would not be
prejudiced.5 (Lingayen Gulf Electric Power Co. vs. Baltazar, 93
Phil. 504 [1953].)

Any agreement to do so is void and will not constitute a
defense to an action to enforce liability. (Phil. Trust Co. vs.
Rivera, 44 Phil. 469 [1923].)
(b) A stock subscription is a subsisting liability from the
time it is made. The subscriber is as much bound to pay his
subscription as he would be pay any other debt. The right of the
corporation to demand payment is no less incontestable (Nava
vs. Peer Marketing Corp., 74 SCRA 65 [1976].), and this is true
even absent an express promise to pay the amount subscribed.
That another subscriber fails to pay his subscription or that
it is impossible to collect from some of them is not a valid de¬
fense to discharge a subscriber from his obligation. (Brown v.
Allebach, 166 Fed. 488.)
(c) Until the liquidation of the corporation, no part of the
subscribed capital may generally be returned or released to the
stockholder without violating the trust fund doctrine, (see Sec.
139, par. 3.) Thus, dividends must never impair the subscribed
capital. Subscription commitments cannot be condoned or
remitted nor can the corporation buy its own shares using the
subscribed capital as the consideration thereof. (Phil. Long
’Where the rights of creditors are not involved, a contract of subscription is, at least,
in the sense which creates an estoppel, a contract among the several subscribers. For this
reason, a subscriber cannot withdraw from the contract without the consent of all the
others and thereby diminish without their consent the common fund in which all have
acquired an interest. (Lingayen Cuff Electric Power Co. vs. Baltazar case.) Be that as it may,
a corporation is now authorized under Sec. 41 to purchase its own shares with unpaid
subscriptions, including delinquent shares, provided they are paid out of its unrestricted
retained earnings, even without the consent of the stockholders.
The release of an unpaid subscription is very similar to a purchase by the corporation
of its own shares, i.e., in both cases, the subscriber or stockholder surrenders his interest
of
in the corporation to the extent of the portion of the subscription released, or his

shareholdings purchased.

,

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

545

. Distance Telephone
Company vs. National Telecommunications
539 SCRA
iCommission,

365 [2007].)

(d) A subscription contract involves the corporation as
one of the contracting parties since the subject matter of the
transaction is property owned by the corporation
its shares
of stock.

—

An action for rescission for alleged breach of contract is
not one of the remedies or instances allowed by the Revised
Corporation Code for the distribution of capital assets and
property of the corporation since it will violate the trust
fund doctrine (see Sec. 40.), and the procedures for the valid
distribution of assets of the corporation, (see Sec. 139.) A contrary
rule will allow just any stockholder, for just about any real or
imagined offense, to demand rescission of his subscription and
call for the distribution of some part of the corporate assets to
him without complying with the requirements of the Revised
Corporation Code. (Ong Yong vs. Tiu, 401 SCRA 1 [2003].)
(2) Release through reduction of capital stock.
The release of a
subscriber from the payment of his unpaid subscription may be
effected through a reduction of the capital stock, but as against
creditors, such reduction can take place only in the manner and
under the conditions prescribed by Section 37. (Sec. 139, par. 3.)
(3) Amount of liability deducted from value of shares
of stockholder
with appraisal right. A stockholder with appraisal right (see
Sec.
80.) may be relieved from liability to pay his
unpaid subscription
the amount of which shall be deducted from the fair value of
his

—

—

shares.

—

(4) Consent to subscription vitiated.
A subscriber who was
induced to take subscription through fraudulent misrepresentation
as to vitiate his consent thereto is entitled to annul
his subscription
(see Arts. 1390-1391, Civil Code.),
as where, prior to his subscription,
the authorized capital stock has been increased
without notice to
him for the increase would dilute his proportionate
interest and
influence in the corporation without his consent. (National
Exchange
Co. vs. Dexter, 51 Phil. 610 [1928]; Salmon, Dexter &
Co.
vs.
Unson,
47 Phil. 649 [1925].)
(5) Payment to come from dividends not
allowed. A subscription
agreement whereby the subscriber
shall pay the shares subscribed

—

546

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 59

by him from the dividends that may be declared thereon until the
full amount of the subscription has been paid is invalid.
It is contrary to the manner of payment prescribed by the
Revised Corporation Code (see Sec. 61.); the agreement imposes
no obligation on the subscriber to pay for the shares except as
dividends may accrue upon the shares and in the contingency that
no dividends are paid, there is no liability. (National Exchange Co.
vs. Dexter, supra.)
Refund of subscription payments In excess
of that stated in call.

The rule on subscription is that unpaid subscriptions are debts
owning to the corporation and constitute a portion of its assets
to which creditors have a right to look for the satisfaction of their
claims. A subscriber remains a debtor to the corporation for the
unpaid balance of his subscription and continues to be charged
with the obligation of remitting payment thereon, either voluntarily
or upon call (see Sec. 66.) until the payment of his subscription is
satisfied.
A stockholder who voluntarily remits an amount in excess of
that stated in the call (but not the amount of his subscription) is
estopped from claiming such excess because once payment is
accepted by the corporation, it becomes a part of the assets of the
corporation and any reduction thereof would necessarily constitute
a violation of the third paragraph of Section 139.

Nor has the corporation the power to grant such refund. (SEC
Opinion, March 20, 1972.)
Refund where proposed increase in capital
stock abandoned.

A stockholders' meeting authorizing the increase of the capital
stock of a corporation is merely one step in the process of legally
effecting such increase. Other steps must be taken, such as the
securing of the minimum amounts of subscriptions and payments
to carry out the increase, and getting the government's approval of
the increase. Unless all such steps are accomplished, there would be
no valid increase in capital stock.

Sec 60

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

547

Where only the first step has been taken, and the board of
directors manifests that it cannot carry out the other steps necessary
to effectuate the proposed increase, and it appears that the
corporation cannot hold indefinitely or for an unreasonable period
of time the payment on subscriptions to the proposed increase, the
board of directors, acting in good faith, may authorize the refund of
the same to the subscribers.
Here, board authorization would be sufficient to make the
refund since it is the board of directors and not the body of
stockholders that approves and authorizes the entering into
contracts, like subscription agreements, in behalf of the corporation.
All matters involving the contract, such as its acceptance or rejection,
modification or termination, are decided by the board of directors,
not by the stockholders, for it is the former and not the latter that
represents the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 3, 1971.)

—

Sec. 60. Pre-incorporation Subscription. A subscription
of shares in a corporation still to be formed shall be
irrevocable for a period of at least six (6) months from the
date of subscription, unless all of the other subscribers
consent to the revocation, or the corporation fails to
Incorporate within the same period or within a longer
period stipulated in the contract of subscription. No pre¬
Incorporation subscription may be revoked after the
articles of incorporation is submitted to the Commission.

Revocability of pre-incorporation

subscription contract.
(1) Conditions for revocation.
Section 60 prescribes the
conditions for the revocation of a pre-incorporation subscription
contract by the subscriber of the corporation.
(2) When irrevocable.
The subscription is irrevocable for
a period of at least six (6) months from
the date of subscription,
notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, except
in the two
(2) instances mentioned. In
any case, it cannot be revoked after the
submission of the articles of incorporation to the SEC, although
beyond the six-month period.
(3) Reason for irrevocability.
The
of
pre-incorporation subscription contracts preventsirrevocability
a subscriber from
speculating on the stocks of a proposed corporation.

—

—

-

548

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 61

Furthermore, it is to the interest of each subscriber that the others
are bound by their subscriptions and the new corporation should
have, as operating capital, enforceable subscriptions. Thus, the rule
protects the corporation from financially irresponsible subscribers.

Effect of filing of articles of incorporation.
(1) The subscriber is not bound indefinitely, as the period
of irrevocability is limited. After submission of the articles of
incorporation to the SEC, a pre-incorporation subscription may no
longer be revoked although the period of six (6) months has elapsed.
(2) Upon incorporation of a corporation (see Sec. 18.), both the
incorporators (who are signatories of the articles of incorporation)
and subscribers automatically become stockholders;1 the
subscription, which until that time was merely an offer, becomes a
binding contract from which the subscriber cannot withdraw, except
in the case of fraud or other matters which may operate to discharge
him from liability on his subscription.2 (18 Am. Jur. 2d 826.)

—

Sec. 61. Consideration for stocks. Stocks shall not be
issued for a consideration less than the par or issued price
thereof. Consideration for the issuance of stock may be:
(a) Actual cash paid to the corporation;

(b) Property, tangible or Intangible, actually received
by the corporation and necessary or convenient for Its use
and lawful purposes at a fair valuation equal to the par or
issued value of the stock Issued;

'It has been said that "the subscribers to the stock of a proposed corporation before
the incorporation is accomplished are partners in the business which they have in hand."

(31 Words and Phrases 271 [1957 Ed.].) In view of the proviso in Sec. 61, acceptance by
the corporation (when it comes into existence) of a pie-incorporation subscription is not
necessary.
Thus, a person who subscribes for a stock In a corporation to be formed and who
does not consent to any change in the subscription is not liable If the corporation which is
afterwards formed, is a different corporation from that contemplated by the subscription.
Accordingly, where the authorized capital stock of a corporation was increased (from
P250.000 to P500,000) after the subscription contract was entered into without the
knowledge and consent of the subscriber, It was held that the subscriber (for ten shares
at the par value of P10.00 each) was not liable thereon as the change would make him a
member of an association in which he never consented to become such. It would change
the relative influence and profit (from 1/2,500 to 1/5,000 part of the capital stock for the
ten shares) of each member. (Salmon, Dexter & Co. vs. Unson, 47 Phil. 649 [1925].)

Sec. 61

r

TITLE VO. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

549

(c) Labor performed for or services actually rendered
to the corporation;
(d) Previously incurred indebtedness by the

.corporation;
(e) Amounts transferred from unrestricted retained
earnings to stated capital;
(f) Outstanding shares exchanged for stocks in the
event of reclassification or conversion;
(g) Shares or stock In another corporation; and/or
(h) Other generally accepted form of consideration.
Where the consideration is other than actual cash,
or consists of intangible property such as patents
or copyrights, the valuation thereof shall initially be
determined by the stockholders or the board of directors,
subject to the approval of the Commission.
Shares of stock shall not be issued in exchange
for promissory notes or future service. The same
considerations provided in this section, insofar as
applicable, may be used for the issuance of bonds by the
corporation.
The issued price of no*par value shares may be
fixed in the articles of incorporation or by the board of
directors pursuant to authority conferred by the articles
of incorporation or the bylaws, or If not so fixed, by the
stockholders representing at least a majority of the
outstanding capital stock at a meeting duly called for the

purpose.

Sources of corporate capital.
Section 61 lists the forms of consideration that may be given for
the issuance of shares of stocks.
(1) Funds furnished by shareholders.
Every corporation must
issue stock, also called equity securities, to persons who want to
invest capital in it, for money, property, or services. (Sec. 61.)
(a) Equity securities represent ownership rights which,
in varying degrees, depending upon the type of the stock,
entitle the holder to a right to participate in the earnings of the

—

550

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

See 61

corporation and upon dissolution, those assets which remain
after all corporate debts have been paid. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 12,
1991, citing Fletcher, Sec. 2635.)
(b) The capital contributed by stockholders in exchange for
shares of stock is often called equity capital.
(c) The value the corporation receives for stock issued
appears in the capital account section of the corporation's
balance sheet.
(2) Borrowings.
The capital of a corporation may be derived
not only from contributions of shareholders received by it as
consideration for the issuance of stock
(a) The corporation may also raise capital to finance its
business from loans or advances by creditors (stockholders and/
or third persons) in return for which the latter get debt securities
called bonds for long-term debts. A corporate bond may be defined
as a written promise by a corporation to pay a definite sum of
money at some future date, at a fixed rate of interest, given in
return for money or its equivalent received by the corporation,
sometimes secured and sometimes not. Bonds issued by a
corporation are generally issued for money borrowed, which
is necessary, in addition to its capital stock to support the
operations of the company. (9-A Words and Phrases [1960] 381.)
The Revised Corporation Code expressly empowers a
corporation to incur, create, or increase any bonded indebtedness.
The corporation can create numerous classes of debt securities
giving different creditors different rights depending on the
agreement it makes with its creditors, (see Sec. 37.)
(b) Debt securities are liabilities of the issuer. They require
the issuer to pay the holders the principal amount loaned to
the corporation at a fixed maturity date and at a stated rate of
interest.3

—

The option given to bondholders to convert their bonds to equity is not an assurance
that they will opt for conversion. Hence, the convertibility feature of the bonds to shares
of stock does not make them equity securities. Unless actually converted into shares,
bonds cannot be classified as capital to form part of the equity portion in the balance
sheet. Furthermore, such conversion takes the nature of issuance of shares by way of
offset of liabilities which requires prior approval of the SEG (SEC Opinion, Sept. 12, 199 1 - )

Sec 61

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

551

(3) In view of its capital deficiency and other liabilities, a
corporation through its board of directors, may approve the
creation of additional paid-in capital (APIC) to be infused by its
stockholders without the issuance for corresponding shares, to
eliminate the negative equity and liquidate its liabilities.
(a) It is not mandatory for corporation to seek prior SEC
approval before they may recognize APIC in their financial
statements. (SEC Opinion No. 34-10, Dec. 22, 2010.) In other
words, the creation of APIC is a matter within the business
judgment of the corporation; it does not require the prior
approval of the SEC. However, if the consideration is in
property, it is subject to the SEC's confirmation of valuation, as
mandated by Section 61 of the Revised Corporation Code. (SECOGC Opinion No. 14-19, March 28, 2019.)
(b) Additional paid-in surplus may be applied to reduce
or wipe out deficits of the corporation provided that after
such restructuring process has been effected, the same shall
be disclosed in all subsequent financial statements of the
corporation for a period of at least three (3) years. (SEC Opinion
No. 01-05, January 4, 2005)
(c) However, the application of the APIC already reflected as
such in the audited financial statements to wipe out the capital
deficit of the corporation requires the approval of the SEC upon
the filing of a request for equity restructuring and upon payment
of the corresponding filing fee. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-18,
March 19, 2018.)

—

(4) Profits and stock dividends. A corporation also gets internally
generated funds from its profits or earnings which are reinvested in
the business. Sometimes a corporation issues stock to represent the
reinvested earnings, that is, stock dividends are declared by means
of which the corporation retains part of the corporate earnings.
(a) In the balance sheet of a corporation (see Sec. 74.), that
portion of the reinvested profits against which no stock has been
issued is represented by the "surplus item," while the original

investment of the stockholders and that portion of the reinvested
earnings against which stock dividends have been declared are
represented by the "capital stock item."

552

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 61

(b) The effect of the declaration of stock dividends is to
convert the surplus assets into a permanent account forming
part of its capital stock. (Sec. 61[e]; see Sec. 42.)

Power to Issue stock.

Stock corporations have the express and inherent power to issue
or sell stocks. (Sec. 35[f].)
The word "issue" is generally employed to indicate the making
of a share contract* that is, transactions by which a person becomes
the owner of shares and by which new share contracts are created.
The word "issue" is often associated with the execution and delivery
of a share certificate but the issue of the shares is not dependent
on the delivery of a certificate for the shares. (Ballantine, p. 467.) In
other words, one can be an owner of shares in a corporation even
without any certificate of shares being issued to him.
A corporation can issue shares from the unsubscribed portion
of its capital stock before the original subscriptions are fully paid.
It cannot issue shares of stock beyond its authorized capital stock
Power lodged In board of directors.

The power to issue share of stock in a corporation is not one of
those expressly granted to stockholders under the law. It is lodged
in the board of directors and no stockholders' meeting or approval
is necessary to consider the issuance of shares (see Datu Tagoranao
Benito vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 123 SCRA 722
[1983].) including the unsubscribed portion of the capital stock*5
*The terms thereof are found in the articles of incorporation and in the certificate of
stock, (see Sec. 6, pars, a, e.) In case of preferred shares, the terms and conditions of the

share contract may be fixed by resoludon of the board of directors, where authorized in
the articles of incorporation. (Ibid., par. b.)
SA corporation desiring "to issue or sell stocks" (see Secs. 35[fl 59.) out of its
unissued or unsubscribed shares of the original or increased capital stock must file with
the SEC certain documents or papers as per its regulations, (see SEC Opinion, Oct. 27,
1975.) The sale of treasury shares (see Sec. 9.) by the corporation is not subject to the
requirements relative to the filing of application for registration of securities or their
exemption from registration and for its approval by the SEC under Sections 8-10 of the
Securities Regulation Code.
The Securities Regulation Code (SRC) prohibits the sale or offer for sale of any

security except an exempt security or one sold in an exempt transaction, unless such
security shall have been registered and permitted to be sold by the SEC. (Ibid.)

553

TITLE VIL STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

See 61

unless explicitly required under the bylaws. It is only necessary that
resolution of the board of directors (see Sec. 22, par. 1.) approving
the issuance be secured.
But stockholders' approval is necessary to effect an increase of
stock. (Sec. 37.)
capital
the

Approval of the SEC for issue of shares.
(1) Issuance taken out of an increase of capital stock. Acorporation
may issue shares out of the remaining unissued shares provided
that such shares have been registered with the SEC.
If the issuance will be taken out of an increase of the capital
stock prior approval must be secured from the SEC. In all cases,
unless denied in the articles of incorporation, or the issuance falls
under the exceptions mentioned in Section 39, all the existing
stockholders of record are entitled to exercise their preemptive right
to subscribe to proposed issuance of shares in proportion to their
existing shareholdings. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 17, 1991.)
(2) Issuance done in course of and as part of process of increasing
capital stock. The issuance of shares of stock done in the course of
and as part of the process of increasing the authorized capital stock is
an exempt transaction not subject to the requirement of registration
under Section 10(i) of the Securities Regulation Code, there having
been previous examination by the SEC of the financial condition of
the corporation when the proposed increase was submitted to it for
approval under Section 37.
Authorized and unissued shares must first be registered with
the SEC or declared exempt from registration by the SEC before
they can be issued. (Nestle Philippines, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
203 SCRA 504 [1991].)

—

—

Different modes by which shares may
be Issued.

Admittedly, there can be no issuance of stock in any physical
sense since as an incorporeal property, it is not capable of manual
delivery.

554

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 61

.

A corporation may issue shares of stock through these modes:
(1) By subscription before and after incorporation, to original,
unissued stock.
(2) By sale of treasury stock after incorporation for money,
property, or service;
(3) By subscription to new issues of stock,6 when all the original
stock has been issued and the amount of the capital stock increased;
and
(4) By declaring a stock dividend.

Sec 61

TITLE VO. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

555

payment has yet to take place. They may, however, be considered as
property payment subject to verification by the SEC of its existence

and collectability and the condition that the same shall be held in
escrow until actual payment of the amount. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 17,
1993.)

(2) Declaration of stock dividends involves issuance of stocks
directly paid from amounts transferred from unrestricted retained
earnings to stated capital. (Sec. 61[e].) Since the retained earnings
have been applied as payment to the issuance of shares covering the
stock dividend declaration, the same can no longer be reapplied as
payment to subsequent subscription rights. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 7,

Original Issue of stock contemplated.

1989.)

The word "issue," as used in Section 61 refers to original issue,
that is, when the stock first passes from the corporation to the hands
of the stockholder. The stock cannot be sold below par or issued
price at the original issue.
Treasury shares may be sold for reasonable price fixed by the
board of directors even for less than the par or issued value thereof.

(3) Shares of stock shall not be issued in exchange for promissory
notes or future services.
(4) When the consideration is other than actual cash (Sec. 61 [bd], [f-h].), or consist of intangible property, the value thereof shall be
initially determined by the incorporators or the board of directors,
subject to approval by the SEC. This means that the payment of
such subscription, either at the time of incorporation or thereafter,
shall be subject to approval by the SEC. The law being clear and
ambiguous, no exception can be read into it. (SEC Opinion, March

(Sec. 9.)

Consideration for issue of stocks.

Shares of stocks and bonds may be issued in exchange for
any or a combination of any two (2) or more of the consideration
enumerated in Section 61? These limitations must be noted.
(1) In view of Nos. (a) and (b) of Section 61, payment for shares
of stocks must be actually received by the corporation. Hence,
receivables cannot be treated as cash actually received since actual
•The term "new issues of stock" from the standpoint of the Revised Corporation Code
can be construed to include any of the following: (1) original issue(s) to incorporators/
subscribers of a new corporation taken from the original authorized capital stock; (2)
shares issued out of an increase in capital stock; and (3) shares issued by way of dividend.
(SEC Opinion, April 18, 1988.)
’"The pricing of shares of stock is a highly specialized field that is better left of
experts. It involves an inquiry into the earning potential, dividend history, business risks,
capital structure, management, and set values of the company, the prevailing business
climate, the political and economic conditions, and a myriad of the factors that bear
on the valuation of shares." (Bagatsing vs. Committee on Privatization, 246 SCRA 334
(1995), citing Tan Home, Financial Management and Policy, 652-653 (8th Ed.]; Leffler and
Farwell, The Stock Market, 573-575 (3rd Ed.].)

28, 1985.)

(5) A corporation may reclassify its shares by amending its
articles of incorporation and exchange outstanding shares of
stockholders for stocks reclassified or converted from one class to
another.

(6) A corporation cannot issue its stock as a gratuity but it is
lawful for a corporation to issue bonus stock to officers or employees
as incentives or for services actually rendered to the corporation for
in such case, the stock cannot be considered gratuitous, (see SEC
Opinion, Dec. 1, 1988; Sabalvaro vs. Erlanger & Galinger, Inc., 64
Phil. 588 [1937].)
The issued price of no-par value shares must be fixed as provided
in the last paragraph of Section 61.

556

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 61

Amount of consideration.
(1) Shares of stock shall not be issued for a consideration less
than the par or issued price thereof (see Sec. 64.), except treasury
shares so long as the price is reasonable, (see Sec. 9.)
(a) It is implied from Section 61 that a corporation may
issue shares of stock at a price above the par or issued value.
Such value does not necessarily reflect the true or actual value
of stock since book or market value normally fluctuates.
(b) Section 61 makes no distinction in respect to the
liability of the subscriber, between shares subscribed before
incorporation is effected and shares subscribed thereafter. All
alike are bound to pay full at least par or issued value in cash
or equivalent, and any attempt to discriminate in favor of one
subscriber by relieving him of his liability wholly or in part is
forbidden. (National Exchange Co., Inc. vs. Dexter, 51 Phil. 610
[1928].)
(c) Stocks issued for a consideration less than their par or
issued price are watered stocks, (see Sec. 64.)
(d) Where a corporation offered shares of stock to its
shareholders at one (1) share of stock for every two (2) shares
held at a price of P0.02 per share, but only a small portion of
the stock offered was subscribed, it has been opined that the
corporation may properly sell the remaining shares at only
P0.01, the amount being the par value of the shares, on the
theory that the price of P0.02 in the previous offer must have
been fixed, taking into account the then prevailing stock market
price of the shares but the corporation cannot legally give one
(1) fresh share to those who paid P0.02 per share as it would
violate Section 61. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 13, 1972.)

(2) Generally, a new issue of capital stock may be issued at a
fixed price above par, provided the old stockholders are given the
right to purchase their proportionate part of the issue. Thus, an
agreement by subscribers to pay more than the par value of their
share is not ultra vires or an attempt to increase the par value of the
stock (SEC Opinion, Sept. 23, 1987, citing 11 Fletcher, Sec. 5138.)

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec 61

557

Consideration other than cash.
(1) Property; service; corporate indebtedness. - If the consideration

is other than actual cash, or consists of intangible property, its value
must be worth the value of stocks issued.’ Hence, the need of the
approval of the valuation by the SEC.’ (Sec. 61, par. 2.)
(a) U.S. dollars representing payment on subscription of a
proposed corporation should be duly converted into Philippine
peso; otherwise, they shall be considered payment by way of
property. (SEC Opinion, July 28, 1986; see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 30-03, July 25, 2003.) Note that under Rep. Act. 8183,
obligations can now be settled in currencies other than legal
tender in the Philippines, (see Sec. 1.)

(b) Financial instruments such as notes, shares of stocks
and bonds may be classified as personal property; hence, they
may be legally accepted as capital contribution. (SEC Opinion,
Jan. 25, 1995.) Negotiable instruments other than promissory
notes such as checks can be used in payment of stocks but they

*This is known as the "true value" rule. The other rule of which Colt v. Gold Anulgating
Co., 119 U.S. 343, 7 S. Ct 231, 30 L. Ed. 420, is cited as the leading case, is known as the
"good faith" rule in which it is recognized that the value is a matter about which men
may honestly differ and in which the further questions of intention, good faith, and fraud
ate submitted to the court. Under this rule, to be sure, no device is tolerated to avoid an
honest valuation, yet a margin is allowed for honest differences of opinion, and generally

the transaction will be upheld even as against subsequent creditors if the valuation was
honestly made, although it appears that there was an error of judgment and that the
valuation was in fact incorrect. Of course, the transaction is always impeachable for

fraud, and gross or international overvaluation is itself proof of fraud. (Clinton Mining &
Mineral Co. v. Jamison, 256 F. 577 [3d Cir. 1919).)
Whether or not the "true value" rule has vitality today, serious doubt has been
expressed
*n actual practice the stockholder receives any different treatment under
the true value" rule than he receives under the New Jersey version of the "good faith"
ntle. (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on Corporations, p. 1096 [1969 Ed.), citing 2
Bonbright, Valuation of Property 799.)
’Stocks may be issued in consideration of previously incurred indebtedness of the
corporation (Sec. 62(4].), subject to the submission of the following requirements: (1)

Detailed schedule of liabilities being offset showing all debts and credits to such liability
executed by the
creditors) assigning the amount due to him in payment for the unpaid subscription(s);
(3) Company's books of accounts must be kept up to date and
be made available for
examination by the SEC to determine that the liabilities represent valid and legitimate
claims

account, date, nature of account and amount; (2) Deed of assignment

against It. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 2, 1992.)

SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4, Series of 2010 prescribes the Guidelines on

Valuations.

558

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 61

"shall produce the effect of payment only when they have been
cashed, or when through the fault of the creditor they have been
impaired." (Art. 1249, Civil Code.)
(2) Stock dividends.
Section 61(e) refers to stock dividends.
When stock dividends are declared, amount representing surplus
assets are "transferred from unrestricted retained earnings to
stated capital." In effect, the additional stocks are paid for by the
stockholders in cash or property out of the portion of the corporate
earnings so capitalized.
(3) Outstanding shares.
Under Section 61(f), a corporation
may issue its own stocks in exchange for outstanding shares in case
of reclassification or conversion. Thus, a holder of preferred shares
with conversion privilege may give his convertible preferred shares
as a consideration for the issuance of a certain number of common
shares.
(4) Receivables. They may be accepted as payment for shares
subject to these conditions: (a) the SEC is able to verify the existence
and collectability of the receivables; and (b) the shares to be issued
will be held in escrow until actual payment or collection of the
receivables. (SEC Opinion No. 11-05, July 14, 2005.)

—

—

—

Sec 61

559

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

. period
that the
of

same was received by them; and (3) that the 30-day
redemption has expired.
The said affidavit must be accompanied by a copy of the actual
written notice to all possible co-owners/ redemptioners and the
proof of receipt by them. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 28-14, Oct. 13,
2014.)
(2)

(6) Leasehold rights.

—

Leasehold rights may be accepted as

payment for shares. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 26, 2001.)
Nature of property which may
be taken for stock.
(1) Necessary or proper in carrying on the corporate business. The
property which a corporation may accept in exchange for its stock
must be of a kind which the corporation may lawfully acquire and
hold in carrying out the purpose of its incorporation, and which
is necessary or proper for it to own in carrying on its business. It
cannot lawfully issue stock for property which its charter does not
authorize it to acquire, or for property acquired for an unauthorized
purpose.” (11 Fletcher, pp. 542-543; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 0208, Jan. 3, 2008; SEC Opinion No. 11-05, July 14, 2005; SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 39-03, July 25, 2003; SEC Opinion, Nov. 13, 1985.)

—

-

(5) Co-owned property. Interest in a co-ownership of property
(Art. 493, Civil Code.) may be exchanged for shares of stock subject
to the above conditions and Articles 1620 and 1623 of the Civil
Code. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 6, 1990.) The ownership of a pro indiviso
interest in land or any other real property is a real right and, at the
same time, a real property which may be conveyed by the co-owner.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-08, Jan. 3, 2008.)

If the consideration for the subscription is co-owned property,
these documents are required so as to free the same from any right
of legal redemption or preemption:
(a) Waiver of Rights signed by all possible co-owners /redemptioners stating that they are waiving their right of redemp¬
tion or preemption in relation to the said transfer; or
(b) An affidavit, executed by the co-owner who exchanged
his interest for the shares of stock, stating: (1) that he has given
written notice thereof to all possible co-owners /redemptioners;

’’Where shares are issued for property, the accepted procedure would involve
a written offer to transfer it to the corporation in consideration of the issuance of a
specified number of shares. The minutes should read that the property is necessary to the
corporation in consideration of the issuance of a specified number of shares. The minutes
should read that the property is necessary to the corporation and its value at least equal
to the amount of shares transferred thereof. Acceptance should then be made formally by
resolution of the board of directors with the further authorization to the officers to issue
the stock upon receipt of the property. (W.L. Cary, op.cit., p. 44.) If the offeror is a director
see Sec 31.)
Under the SEC's Guidelines Covering the Use of Properties that Require Ownership
Registration as Paid-Up Capital of Corporation (Nov. 15, 1994), where the
payment is
made in the form of land, the applicant corporation shall submit to the SEC proof of
the
of the certificate of ownership thereon in the name of the transferee corporation,
bEC within 120 days from the date of approval of the application, extendible for
justifiable
rewons. Where it consists of property other than land, the corresponding shares
of stock
o be issued shall be held in escrow by the SEC and shall be
released only after proof of
re8‘strat’on thereon in the name of the transferee-corporation is submitted
30 daYs hom the date of the approval of the application extendible for
we
fustifiable reasons, (as amended by SEC Memo. Circ. No. 14-13, August 8, 2013.)

^Psfcf
•°

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

560

Sec. 61

(a) Thus, real property may be accepted as payment on
subscription to the capital stock only when the same can be used
in the business of the corporation, as in real estate development,
subdivision, agro-industrial business and for the establishment
of offices. But a corporation engaged in the import and export
business which needs little real property, may not accept real
properties located in the Philippines in exchange for its stock
except only such property that it needs for its operation. (SEC
Opinion, Feb. 13, 1975.)

(b) In view of the generality of Section 35(7) on corporate
acquisition of real properties, implying that properties located
anywhere may be contributed to the capital of the corporation,
properties located abroad as may be needed and necessary to
pursue the legitimate corporate objectives may be contributed.
However, the place where the property is located should be
considered, specifically, as to whether a foreign corporation may
own reality in a given state. (SEC Opinion, May 4, 1990.) The
payment of real estate located abroad for the issuance of shares
is subject to the determination that said infusion will enhance
the value of the company. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 39-03, July
25, 2003.)

—

(2) Possesses ascertainable pecuniary value.
The property
must be substantial nature, having a pecuniary value capable of
ascertainment (at a fair valuation equal to the par or issued value
of the stock issued), and must be something real and tangible as
distinguished from something constructive or speculative, (see
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-08, Jan. 3, 2008; SEC-OGC Opinion No.
11-05, July 14, 2005.)
(3) Capable of being transferred and applied to payment of debts. It
must be of such character that it can be delivered to the corporation,
instead of being merely communicated to its officers or employees,
and it must be actually transferred to the corporation and capable
of being transferred by the corporation. It must also be such as is
capable of being applied to the payment of debts and of distribution
among the stockholders, (see 11 Fletcher, pp. 544-546; see also 18

—

C.J.S. 673.)
The goodwill of a business purchased by a corporation and
paid for by stock is property and is to be taken into consideration in

Sec 61

TITLE VIL STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

561

determining the values paid for the stock, and is to be valued on the
basis of worth and never arbitrarily. (SEC Opinion, June 20, 1988.)
Services as consideration for stock.

(1) A corporation is allowed to receive as payment for its stocks
not only money and property but also labor performed for or services
actually rendered to the corporation provided the transaction is in
good faith and no fraud is perpetrated upon other stockholders and
creditors. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 7, 1982, citing Sterling Varnish Co. v.
Svenson Co., 241 Miss. 810; 133 So. 2d 624.)
(a) Compensation payable for services actually rendered to
the corporation is credit which is property and whose value is
ascertainable. An agreement to issue stock for services before
the same is rendered is void and the corporation is not estopped
to deny the services constituted as payment of the stock
subscription even though it has received the benefit thereof.11
(SEC Opinion, April 2, 1976.)
(b) It is legally feasible for a corporation to issue shares
from the unissued portion of the capital stock to a director or
stockholder for mortgaging his real estate as collateral for a
loan of the corporation. "A corporation finding it necessary to
borrow money for the purposes of its business may issue stocks
in payment for services in procuring it." (Town Country Tractor
Sales, Inc. v. Goodwin, 344 S.W. 2d 338.)
(c) The "accommodation" or "service" extended by the
director or stockholder for procuring the loan by offering his
property as collateral may be considered as a valid consideration
"There seems to be no reason why a corporation may not make a substantial
advance payment of compensation to a prospective employee. At least under generally
accepted accounting principles, such an advance payment would properly be recorded
as an asset, reflecting the fact that the corporation has not yet received the benefit
of the
promised future services. The asset could then be amortized over the
period for which
the advance payment constituted additional compensation.
Admittedly, such advance payments of compensation would be rare.
it would
seem not uncommon to offer a cash bonus to a prospective employeeBut
in order to
induce him to leave other activity and undertake the preferred new employment.
Since
presumably the corporation could issue stock to a prospective employee for cash and
*hen pay the same amount of cash to him as bonus, it would seem
arbitrary to prohibit the
corporation from taking the shortcut of issuing stock directly to the
prospective employee
in consideration of his
undertaking employment. (W.L. Cary, op. at., p. 1068.)

562

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 61

for the issuance of shares of stock similar to a guarantee fee
charged by banks, subject to certain conditions, such as that
the services rendered in exchange of the stocks be fairly and
adequately valued in relation to the par or issued value of the
stocks issued. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 2, 1982.)
(2) The corporation must comply with the requirements
prescribed by the SEC for the issuance of shares out of the unissued
capital stock where payment is in the form of labor or service, (see
SEC Opinion, Aug. 23, 1990.)
Issuance of stock to offset corporation’s
indebtedness.
(1) Section 61(d) expressly allows the set-off or satisfaction of
previously incurred indebtedness of a corporation by the issuance
of its shares of stock where conflicting rights of creditors are not
involved.
(a) Even when payment of the debt is in terms required
to be made by the corporation in money or cash, a set-off of
the debt without going through this unnecessary formality is
equivalent to a payment for the stock in cash. (18 C.J.S. 682-683;
see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-13,13 April 17, 2013.)
(b) The set-off is in effect a payment to the creditor for
shares of stock of the debtor-corporation in the form of property
(Sec. 61[b].) in lieu of cash (Sec. 61[a].) at the option of the
corporation; and it is legally feasible to issue stock in favor of
a subscriber who paid the obligations of the corporation to a
third party. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 15, 1974.) Credit in the hands of
the creditor is property (City of Manila vs. Gambe, 17 Phil. 677
[1910].), and as any property received for shares of stock, it is
subject to the same rule that it be taken at its fair valuation.
(2) Section 61 of the Revised Corporation Code expressly
allows a previously incurred indebtedness to be used as
consideration for the issuance of stocks, provided that the
valuation of the indebtedness be determined by the board of
directors, subject to approval of the SEC, in order to prevent
watering of stocks. The amount of the indebtedness or liabilities
11 Citing De Leon, The

Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 543 [2002].

Sec 61

TITLE VO. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

563

to be settled should be at least equal to the par value of the shares
of stock which the corporation intends to issue. However, there
must first be an indebtedness incurred in order that a liability may
be converted into subscription payment.

These requirements must be submitted to the SEC:
1. Detailed schedule of liabilities being offset, showing all
debts and credit to such liability account, date, nature of account
and amount.
2. Deed of assignment executed by the creditor(s) assigning
the amount due to him in payment for the unpaid subscription(s).
3. Company's book of accounts must be kept up-to-date and
be made available for examination by the SEC to determine that
the liabilities represent valid and legitimate claims against the
company.
4. If the principal office of the corporation is located in the
province, a report by an independent certified public accoun¬
tant must be submitted. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-13, April 17,
2013.)
Issuance of stocks in consideration
of profits.

,n

If stocks are issued in consideration of profits earned by the
corporation, but not distributed among the stockholders, such issue
is called stock dividends. Such consideration is permitted under
Section 61(e). Once declared and issued, stock dividends are fully
paid; hence, any sale or transfer thereafter is no longer an original
issue and may be disposed of at a price below par value, (see SEC
Opinion, April 24, 1968.)

For when stock has once been issued and fully paid for, there
is nothing to prevent a stockholder from returning the whole or a
part thereof to the corporation (see Sec. 9.), or to a trustee for its
sale, to be disposed of for its benefit. In such a case, the corporation
may dispose of the stock at less than its par or issued value without
violating Section 61 which regulates the issue of stock and without
rendering purchasers thereof liable to creditors beyond the price
which they agree to pay. (Ibid., citing 11 Fletcher, p. 719.)

I

564

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 61

Fixing of Issued price of no-par shares.
(1) Mode.— If the issued price of no-par value shares is not
fixed in the articles of incorporation, the board of directors may fix
the same only if authorized by the articles of incorporation or the
bylaws or in if not so fixed, by the stockholders. (Sec. 61, last par.)
Thus, the issued price of no-par shares may vary from time to time
as it is usually fixed on the basis of their book value. But they may
not be issued for a consideration less than the value of P5.00 per
share, (see Sec. 6, par. 6.)

—

(2) Change in value of issued shares.
The stated value of the
issued no-par value shares cannot be changed anymore in view of
Section 6 (par. 7.) which provides that "shares of capital stock issued
without par value shall be deemed fully paid and nonassessable
and the holder of such shares shall not be liable to the corporation
or to its creditors in respect thereto."

—

(3) Change in value of unissued shares. Any change in value of
no-par value shares shall apply only to the unissued portion of the
capital stock of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, July 31, 1979.)

Consideration for Issue of bonds.
Any or a combination of the consideration provided in Section
62 insofar as they may be applicable may be used for the issuance of
bonds by a corporation, (par. 3.) The bonds are subject to approval
of the SEC which is given the authority to determine the sufficiency
of the terms thereof. (Sec. 37, last par.)

Some statutes prohibit a corporation from issuing bonds except
for money, labor done, or property received. Such a provision is an
expression of public policy and is intended to protect creditors to
prevent the distribution of worthless securities and to protect the
stockholders against spoliation. It is intended to require every issue
of bonds to represent substantial values received by the corporation
and to impose upon those charged with the disposition of corporate
securities the duty to procure a fair and reasonable equivalent in
money, labor, or property actually contributed to the corporation.
(19 Am. Jur. 2d 515.)

Sec 62

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

565

Sec. 62. Certificate of Stock and Transfer of Shares. —
The capital stock of corporations shall be divided into
shares for which certificates signed by the president or
vice president, countersigned by the secretary or assistant
secretary, and sealed with the seal of the corporation shall
be issued in accordance with the bylaws. Shares of stock
so issued are personal property and may be transferred
by delivery of the certificate or certificates indorsed by
the owner, his attorney-in-fact, or anv other person legally
authorized to make the transfer. No transfer, however, shall
be valid, except as between the parties, until the transfer
is recorded in the books of the corporation showing
the names of the parties to the transaction, the date of
the transfer, the number of the certificate or certificates
and the number of shares transferred. The Commission
may require corporations whose securities are traded in
trading markets and which can reasonably demonstrate
their capability to do so to Issue their securities or shares
of stocks in uncertificated or scripless form In accordance
with the rules of the Commission,

No shares of stock against which the corporation
holds any unpaid claim shall be transferable in the books
of the corporation.

Nature of a certificate of stock.
(1) ^certificateof stock is a written instrument signed by the
proper
officer of a corporation stating or acknowledging that the person
named therein is the owner of a designated number of shares of
its
stock, (see Lao vs. Lao,1 567
SCRA 558 [2008].) It indicates the name
of the corporation and holder, the number, kind and
class of shares
represented, and the date of issuance, (see SEC-OGC Opinion
No.
02-05,’ Jan. 31, 2005.) It evidences prima facie the
ownership
rights
of
a stockholder in a corporation.
(2) The certificate is not stock in the
corporation but is merely, a
tangible evidence of the holder's interest and status in the corporation,
his
ownership of the share represented, but is not in law the equivalent
Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated,
p. 550 [2002).
iting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated,
p. 550 (2002).

566

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 62

of such ownership. It expresses the contract between the corporation
and the stockholder. It is based on the number of shares owned by
a stockholder. (Lao vs. Lao, 567 SCRA 558 [2008]; Insigne vs. Abra
Valley Colleges, Inc., 764 SCRA 261 [2015].)
(3) While the certificate expresses the contract between the
corporation and the stockholder, it is not essential to the existence of
a share of stock or the creation of the relation of shareholder to the
corporation (13 Am. Jur. 2d 769; see Tan vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 206 SCRA 740 [1992].), or the exercise of the rights of a
stockholder provided the subscription contract to take stock or the
transfer of stock has been duly made and recorded. It is a prima facie
evidence that the holder is a shareholder in a corporation.
Ordinarily, a certificate of stock is unnecessary to constitute one
a stockholder. (SEC Opinion, December 16, 1983.) The possession
of the certificate is not the sole determining factor of one's stock
ownership. In the absence of the certificate, the ownership of stocks
may be shown by the record thereof in the corporate books? (see
Sec. 73.)
(4) A certificate of stock, like the shares it represents, is
property, but it has a value separate and distinct from the value of the
shares represented. (Ibid.) It may be brought out of the domicile of the
corporation, being a personal property of the owner. (SEC Opinion,
July 29, 1976; Fletcher, pp. 60-61; see Sec 62.)
(5) It is not a negotiable instrument* (see Sec. 1, Act No. 2031.)
Certificates of stock may be issued only to registered owners of
stock The issuance of "bearer" stock certificates is not allowed
under the law. (SEC Opinion No. 02-05, Jan. 31, 2005.)

*The mere inclusion of a person as a shareholder in the general information sheet
(GIS) filed with the SEC is insufficient proof that one is a shareholder in corporation
an
where there is no certificate of stock in his name, nor any written document such as
corporation.
the
of
book
assignment in his favor; duly registered in the stock and transfer
corporation.
The information in the GIS will still have to be correlated with the books of
Lao,
567 SCRA
(Lao
vs.
books,
controls.
the
latter
corporate
As between the GIS and the
588 (2008).)

by the
‘Certificates of stocks are expressly declared to be negotiable instruments
Stock
Uniform
U.S. Uniform Commercial Code. (Secs. 8-105(1] thereof.) Moreover, the
is said
it
and
stock
of
certificates
to
negotiability
full
as
giving
Transfer Act is regarded
that the purpose of such Act is to make the stock certificate, to the fullest extent possible,
the representative of the shares. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 887-888.)

Sea 62

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

567

Although it is sometimes regarded as quasi-negotiable, in the
sense that it may be transferred by indorsement, coupled with
delivery, it is well-settled that it is non-negotiable, because the
holder thereof takes it without prejudice to such rights or defenses as
the registered owner's or the transferor's creditor may have under
the law except insofar as such rights or defenses are subject to the
limitations imposed by the principles governing estoppel? (SECOGC Opinion No. 02-05,‘ Jan. 31, 2005; Delos Santos vs. McGrath,
96 Phil. 577 [1957]; Tan vs. Securities and Exchange Commission,
206 SCRA 740 [1992].)

Issuance of certificate of stock.

Every certificate of stock "shall be signed by the president or
vice-president of the corporation, countersigned by the corporate
secretary or assistant secretary, and sealed with the seal of the
corporation" and "shall be issued in accordance with the bylaws."
(Sec. 62, see Sec. 35[c].)
(1) Compliance with requirements.
All certificates of stock
should conform to the above provision of law. Other requirements
may be made pursuant to the articles of incorporation or valid
bylaws. Accordingly, a typewritten statement advising a stockholder
of his ownership in a corporation cannot be a substitute to a formal
stock certificate. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 20, 1970.)

—

’Thus, where the owner of a street certificate of stock (one
which is indorsed in
Hank by the owner thereof and, therefore, transferable by mere
delivery) delivered
the certificate to a broker who pledged it to a bank, which
had no knowledge that the
certificate did not belong to the holder (broker), he is estopped from
claiming title or
interest therein as against the pledgee bank. A
fide pledgee or transferee of a stock
from the apparent owner is not chargeable withbona
of the limitations placed on it by
the real owner, or any secret agreement relating notice
to the use which might be made of the
stock by the holder. (Santamaria vs.
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp., 89 Phil. 780
[1951]; see Bachrach Motor Co. vs. Ledesma,
64 Phil. 681 (1937].) Upon its face the holder
of a street certificate is entitled to
demand its transfer into his name from the issuing
corporation. Such certificate is
deemed quasi-negotiable, and as such the transferee
•hereof is justified in believing that
it belongs to the holder and transfer. An exception
to the general rule is
where stock certificates endorsed in blank were taken from the
possession of the beneficial
owners thereof, making their transfer void for lack of delivery
and want of value. The same
cannot apply to stock certificates endorsed by the owner in
blank, were in the undisturbed
of his parents who were the beneficial owners
•hereof and who themselves as possession
such owners caused the transfer in their names. (Guy vs.
Cak>, 680 SCRA 214
[2012].)
*Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated,
p. 550 [2002].

568

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

The most, perhaps, is to treat it as a temporary receipt for stock
subscription certifying the number of shares. (SEC Opinion, Sept.
21, 1970.)
(2) Compliance with court order. A corporation is not liable to a
stockholder for cancelling outstanding certificates and issuing new
ones in lieu thereof where it does so in compliance with a lawful
requirement. Thus, a corporation having notice is not required to
publish a court order for the nullification of shares of stocks and
the subsequent issuance of a new certificate in lieu of the nullified
one, as such order is binding against any subsequent purchaser of
the outstanding certificate of stock without notice of order. (SEC
Opinion, March 3, 1982.)
(3) An internal affair of the corporation.— A corporation need not
to secure the prior consent of the SEC for the issuance of certificates
of stock inasmuch as it is a matter which the law (Sec. 46[i].) has left
for the corporation to decide. (SEC Opinion, Sept 29, 1964.) It is an
internal matter which the corporation can resolve by itself.

—

Only stock corporations can issue stock certificates.
Certificates of stock may be issued with the
(4) Co-owners.
conjunctive "and / or" placed between the names of the parties who,
apparently, are co-owners. It is understood that the above may be
transferred upon the indorsement of both stockholders or either of
them, and the right to vote the share may also be exercised by both,
or all, or any of them. (SEC Opinion, March 14, 1989.)
Where the property relation between
(5) Husband and wife.
by the system of absolute
governed
the husband and wife is
shall apply to the
co-ownership
on
the
rules
community of property,
being co-owners
spouses,
the
Accordingly,
community of property.7
the certificates
to
issue
secretary
corporate
thereof, may request the
certificates are
the
if
even
true
This
is
both.
of stock in the names of
still in their respective names.

—

—

regime
’Art. 75. The future spouses may, in the marriage settlements, agree upon the
property,
of
separation
complete
of
gains,
partnership
conjugal
community,
of absolute
agreed
or any other regime. In the absence of a marriage settlement, or when the regime Code
upon is void, the system of absolute community of property as established in this
shall govern. (119a)
community of
Art 90. The provisions on co-ownership shall apply to the absolute
(Family
Chapter.
this
property between the spouses in all matters not provided for in

Sec 62

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

569

However, if the shares are among the excluded properties under
Section 92 of the Family Code or where the spouses have chosen a
marriage settlement other than the system of absolute community of
property, the transfer of shares between the husband and wife shall
be recorded in the stock and transfer book only upon compliance
with Section 62. As co-owners, they shall be considered as one
stockholder. (SEC Opinions, Sept. 4, 1990 and Nov. 15, 1991.)
Delivery essential to issuance of certificate.

—

(1) Mode of delivery.
Delivery, actual or constructive, is
essential to the issuance of a certificate of stock. Making a certificate
and mailing it to the stockholder is an issue and delivery thereof.

The failure to deliver the stock certificates representing the
shares purchased amounts to a substantial breach of contract which
gives rise to a right to rescind the sale. (Raquel-Santos vs. Court of
Appeals, 592 SCRA 169 [2009].)
(2) Stock sold through a public instrument. It has been held that
"a formal contract of purchase and sale set in a notarial document
is equivalent to actual delivery of the certificates themselves" (Uy
Piaco vs. McMicking, 10 Phil. 286 [1908].), but only as between the

—

parties.
(3) Certificate retained by corporation.
There is no issuance of
stock certificate (therefore, no delivery) where it is never detached
from the stock books although blanks therein are properly filled up,
if the person whose name is inserted therein has no control over
the books of the corporation. But the issuance and delivery are not
essential where it appears that the persons sought to be held as
stockholders are officers of the corporation and have the custody of
the stock book and can detach the certificate at any time.

—

Where, however, the certificate made out in the name of the
subscriber has never been delivered to him but is retained by
the corporation as security for notes given by him for the
unpaid
portion of his subscription, the certificate cannot
be considered as
issued, and this is true even though the subscriber
votes the stock
and though dividends are declared on it which are
credited
on the
notes, (see Tuazon vs. La
Provisora Filipina, 67 Phil. 36 [1938], citing
11 Fletcher, pp. 324-325.)

570

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

(4) Certificate returned to transferee after cancellation and issuance of
certificate. Where as a result of the sale of stock, the corresponding

—

certificate was cancelled and a new certificate was subsequently
issued in the name of the transferee, there was already delivery
notwithstanding the return of the cancelled certificate to the
transferor for his indorsement and his deliberate non-indorsement.
In such a case, there is no necessity for the certificate to be
indorsed. All the acts required for the transferee to exercise his right
over the acquired stock are present and even the corporation is
protected from other parties, considering that the said transfer was
earlier recorded or registered in the corporate stock and transfer
book. (Tan vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 206 SCRA 740
[1992].)
Remedies of stockholders where corporation
refuses to issue certificate.
A certificate of stock is unnecessary to render one a stockholder
in a corporation. Nevertheless, a certificate of stock is the paper
representative or tangible evidence of the stock itself and of the
various interests therein, and every stockholder has a right to have
a proper certificate issued to him as soon as he has complied with
the conditions which entitle him to one as by payment for his shares
or the like. (11 Fletcher, pp. 329-331.)

A suit for specific performance of an express or implied
contract and a petition for mandamus when appropriate are the
common remedies to compel the issuance of certificates of stock. A
stockholder may, however, sue instead for damages where specific
performance cannot be granted, or in some instance, may rescind
his contract of subscription’ and recover the consideration paid. (11
Fletcher, p. 330.)

'One has no subscription contract with a corporation cannot compel the corporation
to issue certificates of stock for the shares paid for by him where certificates for the said
shares had already been issued in the name of an officer of the corporation with whom
the plaintiff had agreed on a joint venture to be conducted in the name of the corporation
and to whom the payment was given, his remedy being against such officer. (British
23
American Engineering Corporation vs. Alto Surety & Insurance Co., Inc, 18 SCRA
[1966].)

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec. 62

Effect of over-Issuance of shares.
A corporation cannot issue shares whether in consideration for
cash or property, or as stock dividends, in excess of the maximum
number authorized in its articles of incorporation for they do not
exist.
(1) The rule established by the decisions is that over-issued
stock is void. The certificate of stock which represents the over¬
issued stock is also void. The holder of the certificate, whether he be
the original holder or a bona fide transferee, regardless of his good
faith, does not become a stockholder. He acquires no right nor does
he incur the liability of a stockholder.
(2) An action may be maintained by the corporation to cancel
over-issued shares. But the corporation to cancel over-issued shares.
But the corporation may be held liable in damages or for restitution
to one who had innocently advanced money in the belief that the
shares were lawfully allotted. (W.L. Cary, op.cit., p. 1129, citing

Stevens on Corporations, p. 432.)

Unauthorized or forged certificates.
(1) Remedy of corporation.
Certificates of stock may be
cancelled where the stock represented was issued through a mistake
of fact or under such circumstances, they are either void or voidable.
The corporation may maintain a suit to cancel the certificates and
enjoin their transfer, or the voting by the holders, or the payment of
dividends on the shares. (SEC Opinion, citing 11 Fletcher, pp. 336,

—

338.)

—

(2) Rights of holder. The corporation may or may not be
bound
to make good such certificates.
(a) One who acquires a stock certificate knowing that
it
was fraudulently issued by officers of the corporation, or with
knowledge of facts sufficient to charge him with notice of the
fraud, is entitled to no rights as a stockholder.
(b) It is held, however, that if a fraudulently
issued
has reached the hands of a bona fide holder for value andstock
the
number of shares represented will not cause an over issue, the
corporation will be held bound to make good such
certificate
to the extent of any shares owned by the
company, provided

572

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

that the stock was issued by officers or agents held out by the
corporation as having the authority to do so.
Fraudulent stock certificates are not, however, certificates in
legal contemplation and give no rights of their own force. The act of
the corporation in issuing them where they have been accepted and
acted upon in good faith by another, is deemed merely to estop the
corporation from denying their validity.’ (18 Am. Jur. 2d 775-776.)
Requirements for transfer of stock.
Section 62 authorizes the transfer of the shares represented by the
certificate by its indorsement by the owner or his agent and delivery
to the transferee. Such delivery is the operative act transfer of title
to the shares from the lawful owner to the transferee.*10 (Rural Bank
of Lipa City, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 366 SCRA 188 [2001]; Bitong
vs. Court of Appeals, 292 SCRA 503 [1998]; Rivera vs. Florendo, 144
SCRA 643 [1986].)
(1) Where no certificate has been issued or where it is not in the
possession of the stockholder, fully (or partially) paid shares may be
transferred by means of a deed of assignment duly recorded in the
books of the corporation, (see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 09-19, March
19, 2019.)

(2) Any sale or transfer of shares from stockholders of a
corporation to third parties need not be reported to nor acquire an
authority from the SEC. (see Trustee, Sr. vs. Sandiganbayan, 145
’Under the U.S. Uniform Commercial Code (Secs. 8-206 thereof.), the lack of
genuineness is a complete defense even against a purchaser for value and without notice.
However, a forged or unauthorized signature on the issue of a stock certificate is effective
in favor of a purchaser for value without notice where the signing is done by persons
entrusted with the signing and handling of the certificates. (Ibid.)
l0In "a sale of shares of stock, physical delivery of a stock certificate is one of the
essential requisites for the transfer of ownership of the stocks purchased." (RaquelSantos vs. Court of Appeals, 592 SCRA 169 [2009).) Failure to deliver the stock certificate
constitutes a substantia! breach of contract which gives the right to the buyer to bring
an action for specific performance or rescission. (Fil-Estate Golf & Development, Inc. vs.
Vertex Sales and Trading, Inc., 698 SCRA 272 [2013]; see Teng vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 784 SCRA 216 [2016].)
The new Central Bank Act (R.A. No. 7653 as amended by R.A. No. 11211.) requires
prior approval by the Bangka Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), where the shares subject of the
transfer are those issued by banks, in case the "transfers or acquisitions or a series thereof,"
comprise at least ten (10%) of voting shares of the bank." Without such approval "no such
transfer or acquisition shall have legal effect nor shall the same may be recognized in the
books of the corporation or by any government agency.

Sec 62

1

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

573

SCRA 508 [1986].) However, to be valid against the corporation
and third parties, such transfer must be recorded in the stock and
transfer book of corporation.
(3) The transferee must present the indorsed stock certificate
to the secretary of the corporation who shall effect the transfer in
the corporate books, issue a new stock certificate in favor of the
transferee, and cancel the former certificate. A corporation has no
authority to cancel a certificate not in its possession or to which it
has no right. It will be liable to a bona fide holder of the old certificate
if, without demanding of the certificate, it issues a new one.
(4) While transfer of shares ordinarily does not require prior
approval of the SEC, the issuer corporation is required to have its
entire authorized capital stock registered pursuant to Section 8 of
the Securities Regulation Code where the outstanding shares are to
be sold to the public, that is, a number of persons indiscriminately
(SEC Opinion, Dec. 14, 1994.) unless it can be shown than the
transaction is expressly exempt under Section 10 of the Securities
Regulation Code.
Right to transfer fully paid shares
of stock.
As a rule, shares of stock can be transferred only by the registered
owner or an authorized person, (see Sec. 62.)
(1) Right inherent as an incident of ownership. Shares of stock
are personal property and the owner, as in the case of other personal
property, has an absolute and inherent right as an incident of his
ownership, to sell and transfer the same at will, except insofar as
right may be reasonably restricted by the articles of incorporation,
or a valid bylaw, or by a valid agreement between him and the
corporation. Absent such restrictions, a bona fide transfer does not
require the consent of the corporation, and cannot be prevented
by it or by its officers. (12 Fletcher, pp. 206-207; see Remo, vs.
Jr.
Intermediate AppellateCourt, 172 SCRA 405 [1989].)The registration
of a transfer of shares of stock is a ministerial
duty on the part of the

—

corporation.

—

(2) Legal limitation.
The limitation imposed by Section 62 is
when the corporation holds any unpaid claim against
the

shares
intended to be transferred. A corporation, either by its board,

its

574

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

bylaws, or the act of its officers, cannot create restrictions in stock
transfers because such restrictions must have their source in the
law as the corporation itself cannot create such impediment. In the
absence of such power, or cannot ordinarily inquire into the legality
of the transfer nor question has the consideration upon which the
sale is based. (Rural Bank of Salinas, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 210
SCRA510 [1992].)
Sale of subscription rights.

The rule is different where only the right to subscribe is assigned
by the subscriber to another.
(1) Consent of corporation. Assuming there is no restriction on
the transfer of shares in the articles of incorporation, a stockholder
may transfer or assign shares of stock forming part of his partially
paid stockholdings.
(a) It is necessary, however, to secure the consent of the
corporation, by way of resolution of the board of directors, to
the transfer or assignment of shares which are not fully paid
so that the transfer may be recorded in the stock and transfer
book of the corporation (SEC Opinion, July 22, 1965.), since
the transfer constitutes a novation (i.e., substitution of debtor)
of the contract of subscription between the corporation and
the transferor which requires the consent of the creditor, (see
Art. 1293, Civil Code; see SEC Opinion, October 9, 1995; SEC
Opinion, June 4, 1987.)
The corporation can accept or refuse to accept the transferee.
It alone is the judge of the financial responsibility of the
transferee. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 12, 1976, citing Butts v. King, 125
Atl. 654.)
(b) The acceptance by the corporation of the transferee as a
subscriber in the place of the original subscriber need not be by
formal action of the corporation expressed by vote or otherwise,
but instead may be implied from acts and course of conduct
of the corporation. (12 Fletcher, p. 301.) Thus, should the
corporation record the assignment of subscribed shares of stock
in its stock and transfer book, it can be treated as an implied
consent to such assignment. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 12, 1976.)

—

TITLE VII STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec. 62

575

(c) Only upon full payment of the whole subscription can
a stockholder transfer the same to several transferees. However,
the entire subscription, although not yet fully paid, may be
transferred with the consent of the corporation. The SEC only
allows transfer to a single transferee provided that the transfer
is approved by the board of directors and accompanied by an
affidavit of assumption of the unpaid balance by the transferee.
(SEC Opinion, March 8, 1990, Sept. 17, 1990 and June 3, 1994.)
(d) The SEC has opined that that to legally effect restrictions
the
on
transfer of shares of stock, such restrictions must be
provided for in the articles of incorporation. Accordingly, it
follows that to legally effect any restriction on transfer of shares
of stock, including restrictions on the rights attached to it, e.g.
transfer of preemptive right to subscribe, the same must be
provided for in the articles of incorporation. (SEC Opinion, July
19, 1993; see Sec. 97 for close corporations.)
(2) Consent of creditors.
It is unnecessary to secure the actual
consent of the creditors because transfer made and accepted by the
corporation in prejudice to the rights of the creditors can be set aside
on the ground of fraud. (Ibid., citing Butts v. King, 125 Atl. 654.) The
transferee of the subscription rights must assume payment of the
unpaid balance of the subscription to the corporation. (SEC Opinion,
April 12, 1982.)

—

Restrictions on transfer of stock.
(1) In general.
Shares of stock in a corporation are personal
property. The owner, as in the case of other personal property, has an
absolute and inherent right, as incident of his ownership, to sell and
transfer the same at will except insofar as the right may be restricted
by the charter of the corporation or the general law, provided
the
transfer is in good faith, and to a person capable of
assuming the
obligations of a stockholder. (SEC Opinion, February 15, 1993.) The
power to impose restrictions on transfer of shares
cannot be exercised
unless conferred upon the corporation by law or its articles
of
incorporation (see Nava vs. Peers Marketing Corporation, 74 SCRA
65 [1976].), and the restrictions must be stated
in the
stock to bind third persons, (see Sec. 6, par. 1.) The certificate of
reason is that
such restrictions are essentially contractual in
nature between the
stockholders and the corporation and hence, must be embodied in
fheir contract the articles of incorporation and
furthermore,

—

—

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

576

Sec. 62

the shares of stock burdened with such restrictions may fall into
the hands of innocent purchasers. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 13, 1994.) In
other words, absent transfer restriction clauses in the articles of
incorporation, a bona fide transfer of shares to a third party does not
require the consent of the corporation and cannot be prevented by
it or by its officers. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 16, 1996; SEC Opinion, July
1, 1994.)

(a) Only "reasonable restrictions" on transfers of shares may
be provided in the articles of incorporation. The underlying test
is whether the transfer restriction clause is reasonably needed
by the corporation to justify the same overriding the general
policy against restraints or alienation of property. (SEC Opinion,
May 27, 1996.)
(b) Stock transfer restrictions impair property rights so that
any restriction, to be valid and binding, should be clearly and
explicitly stated in the articles of incorporation. In case of doubt,
the same should be construed in favor of the stockholder. There¬
fore, a restriction expressed only as one on sale should be con¬
strued as applicable only to a transfer by sale and not to other
forms of transfer not expressly included (such as a donation).
(SEC Opinion, March 21, 1991; SEC Opinion, March 5, 1980.)
A transfer
(2) Where transfer subject to approval or prohibited.
restriction provision is not valid if it absolutely prohibits the sale or
transfer the stock without the approval of the stockholders (or the
board) as this would violate the general law on free alienability of
shares of stock as personal property. (SEC Opinion, May 27, 1996.)
(a) A bylaw which prohibits a transfer of stock without the
consent or approval of all the stockholders or of the president
or board of directors is illegal as constituting undue limitation
on the right of ownership and in restraint of trade. (Fleishcer vs.
Botica Nolasco Co., Inc., 47 Phil. 583 [1925]; In re Klus, 67 Wis.
401.)

—

(b) A provision in the certificate that is transferable only
to some person first approved by the board of directors
unreasonably restricts the right of the stockholder to dispose of
his shares. (Douglas v. Aurora Daily News Co., 160 Ill., A. 506)
For the same reason, the condition "nontransferable" appearing
on certificates of stock is null and void. (Padget vs. Babcock &
Templation, Inc., 59 Phil. 232 [1933].)

Sec 62

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

577

(c) The SEC has ruled that this provision is void as it

absolutely prohibits the stockholders from pledging or
mortgaging their shares of stock without the consent of the
board of directors: "No shares of stock may be mortgaged
pledged, or otherwise encumbered in favor of a person who
is not a stockholder of record of the Corporation, except with
the prior approval of at least a majority vote of all the members
of the Board of Directors of the Corporation." (SEC Opinion,
Aug. 28, 1995; see SEC Opinion, May 27, 1996.)
(d) If the purpose of transferring stock is only to qualify
the transferee for the election in the board of directors, without
giving him the beneficial ownership thereof, the transfer is
not violative of the transfer restriction clause in the articles of
incorporation. Said transfer would be more of a "trust" and
not a transfer of "ownership"; hence, the beneficial interest in
such share will remain with the assignor while the assignee will
hold only the legal title to the stock. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 4, 1995;
SEC Opinion, July 10, 1995; SEC Opinion, May 21, 1991; SEC
Opinion, May 21, 1986.)
(3) Where transfer subject to "first refusal".
The right of first
refusal is a right that arises only by virtue of contractual stipulations,
in which case the right is construed strictly against the right of
persons to dispose of or deal with their property. It may also be
provided for in specified statutory Revised Corporation Code
provisions, such as that provided for in Section 98 of the Revised
Corporation Code on close corporations. Unlike preemptive right
which pertains to stockholders by common law and does require
any statutory enabling provision, the right of first refusal, if not
provided for by law or by the articles of incorporation,
does not
exist. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 51-19, Oct. 11, 2019.)
(a) Provisions in articles of incorporations
requiring
stockholders desiring to sell their stocks to offer them first
to the corporation or to the existing stockholders at a
given
reasonable date before disposing of them to third persons may
be considered valid and enforceable. (SEC Opinion,
Feb. 23,
1993; see SEC Opinion, August 28, 1995.)
(b) According to the SEC, the period of one
month
is reasonably sufficient for the existing
stockholders of a
corporation within which to signify their desire to
buy the shares

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION OODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

578

Sec 62

being offered for sale by any stockholder before the same may
be offered to third parties. (SEC Opinion, February 20, 1995.)
(c) But where the transfer merely is to qualify the nominee
as director without transferring the beneficial ownership of
the share, the transfer need not comply with the "first refusal"
provision in the articles of incorporation (Infra.), for to rule
otherwise would create an injustice to corporate stockholders
who, under the law, have the right to be represented in the
board. Such transfer would be more of a trust and not a transfer
or ownership.
The transferee should be described in the corporate books
and the certificate to be issued merely as nominee or trustee
of the transferor. The notation shall serve as notice to both the
corporation and third parties that the transferee only holds the
share as nominee for the benefit of the real owner, (see SEC
Opinion, Feb. 15, 1991; SEC Opinion, November 23, 1992; SEC
Opinion, December 15, 1987.)
(d) It has been opined that a holder of a stock as a mere
trustee for the real owner cannot exercise the option in his own
right.
Thus, where eight (8) directors of X Corporation were elected
to their position upon transfer to them of one (1) share each of X
Corporation's stock in trust for Y Corporation to qualify them as
members of the board, said directors cannot exercise the option
granted to the stockholders (and the Corporation). The directors
are trustees of the stockholders for the benefit of Y Corporation,
the cestui que trust. However, should the bona fide stockholders
and the corporation fail to exercise their respective option to
purchase the offered stock within the period prescribed, then
the directors may so purchase in their own right. (SEC Opinion,

June 13, 1985.)
(4) Where suspension of power for a certain period has a beneficial
Where "the suspension of the power to sell has a
purpose.
beneficial purpose, result in the protection of the corporation as
well as the individual parties to the contract, and is reasonable as
to the length of time of the suspension," the restriction is valid and
binding upon the stockholder.
Thus, where two (2) of the creditors who took over the business
of a company in financial distress and accepted stocks in payment of

—

Sec 62

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

579

their respective credits, entered to an agreement, after becoming the
two (2) largest stockholders of the new corporation, that, in view of

the fact "that the success of said corporation depends, now and for
at least one (1) year following, in the larger stockholders retaining
their respective interests in the business of said corporation," neither
of the two (2) would "sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of their
present holdings of stock" in said company, "till after one year from
the date hereof," with a stipulation for the payment of liquidated
damages by the violator, the agreement suspending the power to
sell the stocks referred to was upheld as against the contention that
it was illegal, was in restraint of trade, and, therefore, offended
public policy. (Lambert vs. Fox, 20 Phil. 588 [1911].)
(5) Where certain percentage of Filipino ownership prescribed.
Corporations which will engage in any business or activity
reserved for Filipino citizens are required to indicate in the articles
of incorporation and in all the certificates the restriction against the
"transfer of stock or interest which will reduce the ownership of
Filipino citizens to less than the required percentage of the capital
stock as provided by existing laws . . ." (Sec. 14 [eleventh].)
(6) Where shares registered with the Securities Regulation Code.
Where the shares held by the public are registered under the
Securities Regulation Code, an investor wishing to acquire the
shares is subject to the provision of the law relative to "tender
offers," particularly Section 33 thereof. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 2, 1991.)

—

—

Option to purchase shares offered for sale.

—

(1) Close corporations.
In close corporations, restrictions
reasonably protecting existing stockholders in their interests by
giving them or the corporation the option to purchase stock offered
for sale, or the right of first refusal in case of sale of stock are
lawful
as promotive of good management and sound business
enterprise,
(see Casper v. Kaltz-Simmer,
150 N.W. 1101.)
Such restrictions must appear in the articles of incorporation
and in the bylaws in the certificate of stock; otherwise,
the same
shall not bind any purchaser in good faith. (Sec. 97.)
(2) Widely-held corporations. In
widely-held corporations, the
restriction is legally permitted provided it is stated in the
articles
of incorporation (see Sec. 6,
1.) and the option period is not too
par.
Inno

—

580

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

Considering that shares of stock burdened with restrictions
on transferability may fall in to the hands of innocent purchasers,
the SEC, as a matter of policy, also requires that the restrictions be
printed also on the corresponding stock certificate (SEC Opinion,
Oct. 13, 1964.); otherwise, the restriction is unavailing as against a
transferee in good faith and for a valuable consideration without
notice.

Modes of stock transfer.
Section 62
(1) Indorsement and delivery of stock certificate.
prescribes the manner by which a share of stock may be transferred."
(a) Mere endorsement of the certificate of stock is sufficient
to legally effect the transfer of title to a share of stock, even
without executing a deed of assignment of the shares, provided
the same is coupled with delivery and recorded in the stock
and transfer book of the corporation. An unrecorded transfer,
though valid between the parties, cannot be effective as against
the corporation. The right of a stockholder accrues only upon
entry of his name in the books of the corporation." (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 51-19, Oct. 11, 2019.)
(b) The law is clear that in order that a transfer of stock
certificate is to be effective, the certificate must be properly
indorsed and that title to such certificate of stock is vested in the
transferee by the delivery of the duly indorsed'2 certificate (Razon
vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 207 SCRA 234 [1992].), even

—

"Certificates of stock may be issued with the conjunctive "and/or" placed between
the names of the parties, who apparently, are co-owners of said shares. In the issuance of
the same, it is understood between corporation and the stockholders whose names appear
on the certificate, that the shares of stock may be transferred upon the indorsement of and
the right to vote the share may also be exercised by both (or all) or either (or any one) of
them. (SEC Opinions, June 13, 1973 and Aug. 27, 1974.) The corporation, however; may
adopt a policy requiring the indorsements of all the persons whose names appear on the
certificates of stock issued with the conjunctive "and/or" provided such policy applies
prospectively not only in fairness to the stockholders who may be adversely affected
but also on the ground of the implicit understanding between the corporation and the
stockholders that the former will honor the indorsement signed by only one of the latter.
(SEC Opinion, Nov. 15, 1974.)

"Bearer form of shares of stock transferable without indorsement by delivery is not
allowable under Sec. 62 and Sec. 73 (par. 4.). (SEC Opinion, Sept. 1, 1995.) In the absence
of delivery, the transferee as mere assignee, cannot enjoy the status of stockholder insofar
as the assigned shares are concerned. (Republic vs. Estate of Hans Menzi, 476 SCRA 20
12005].)

Sec 62

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

581

without executing a deed of assignment or sale of the shares
which is necessary only when certificate of stock has as yet been
issued or where the same is not in the possession for whatever
reason of the transferor. The delivery of the stock certificate
which represents the shares to be alienated is essential to protect
both the corporation and the stockholder concerned. (Nava vs.
Peers Marketing Corp., 74 SCRA 65 [1969].)
A corporation is not bound to record in its books a transfer of
stock and to issue a new certificate unless the original certificate
is surrendered for cancellation15 or is clearly shown to have been
lost, stolen, or destroyed. (Sec. 72.)
(c) The usual practice is for the stockholder to sign the form
on the back of the stock certificate.1’ This procedure cannot be
followed with respect to shares not covered by any certificate of
stock or for which no certificate of stock has been issued.
(2) Transfer made in a separate instrument.
The use of the
word "may" indicates that the transfer may be effected in a manner
different from that provided for in the law. (Chua vs. Samahang
Magsasaka, 62 Phil. 472 [1935]; Tan vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 206 SCRA 740 [1992].)
(a) While it is usual to effect the transfer of shares by
indorsement on the certificate, a conveyance may be made by
an assignment or sale in a separate instrument.” (Uy Piaco vs.

—

“The matter of keeping and destroying cancelled stock certificates depends on the
internal policies of a corporation. There is no law requiring corporations to preserve
cancelled stock certificates within a certain period. After issuance of a new certificate and
its notation in the stock and transfer book, the old certificate becomes a worthless paper.
The corporation may microfilm certificates before destruction. (SEC Opinions, March 6,
1984 and Aug. 21, 1985.)
“The usual stock certificate contains on its back a printed assignment or endorsement
and also a power of attorney in blank, like the following: "For value received, I hereby
assign the within named shares to
and appoint
my attorney to make the
transfer on the books of the company." The certificate may thereafter be transferred from
one person to another. If the holder of the certificate desires to assume the legal rights
of a shareholder to enable him to vote at corporate elections and to receive dividends,
he fills up the blanks in the form inserting his own name as transferee. Then he delivers
the certificate to the secretary of the corporation so that the transfer may be entered in
the corporation's books. The certificate is then surrendered and a new one issued to the
transferee. (Hager vs. Bryan, 19 Phil. 138 [1911).)
’SEC Memo. Circ. No. 17 (Nov. 4, 2004) provides that deeds of assignment of
shares of stock shall no longer be accepted by SEC for acknowledgment and recording
purposes unless required by and/or submitted to the SEC as supporting documents for
applications for registration.

582

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

McMicking, 10 Phil. 286 [1907]; Rivera vs. Florendo, 144 SCRA
643 [1986 ; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 51-19,“ October 11, 2019.)
in lieu of the indorsement of the certificate, unless the bylaws
expressly provide that the transfer shall be made exclusively in
the manner authorized by the statute. (Fisher, op.cit., p. 149.) The
execution of such instrument is equivalent to an indorsement of
the certificate. A registered owner of shares may dispose of the
same even in the absence of the stock certificate.
(b) While an assignment or sale may be valid and binding
between the parties despite non-compliance with the requisite
endorsement and delivery, it does not necessarily make the
transfer effective, for the assignee cannot enjoy the status of a
stockholder, and the assignor cannot be deprived of his rights as
stockholder, until and unless the issue of ownership and transfer
of the shares in question is resolved with finality. (Rural Bank of
Lipa City, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 366 SCRA 188 [2001].)
(3) Judicial or extrajudicial settlement of the estate.
In case the
stockholder dies intestate, a judicial or extrajudicial partition of his
estate is necessary to transfer theshares of stock in favor of his heirs;
otherwise, it will be necessary to wait for the termination of the
testamentary proceedings and the final adjudication of the shares
in accordance with the will of the decedent. (SEC Opinions, Feb. 9,
1961 and May 12, 1988.)
(a) Where the stockholder, before his death, requested in a
letter to the corporation to transfer his shares to his son, and
there is no indication that the certificates covering the shares
were indorsed to the latter, the transfer can no longer be effected
after his death on the basis of the letter because on the death of a
stockholder, his administrator or executor becomes vested with
the legal title to the stock, and until a settlement and division
of the estate is made, the stock of the deceased belongs to said
administrator or executor as his personal representative. (SEC
Opinion, June 24, 1988.)

—

(b) Where the requirements for a judicial or extrajudicial
partition of a deceased stockholder's estate have been complied
with, it would be a ministerial duty on the part of the corporation
’‘Gdng De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, pp. 564-565

[2010].)

Sec 62

TITLE VD. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

583

to register the transfer in the name of the legal heir. If the
corporation wrongfully refuses to do so, it may be compelled
by suit in equity for specific performance or mandamus. (SEC
Opinion, June 23, 1993.)
(c) Where shares of stock are in the name of a deceased
person, no final determination can be had without his estate
being impleaded in the suit. His estate is an indispensable party
with respect to the cause of action dealing with the registration
of the shares in the names of the heirs. (Gochan vs. Young, 354
SCRA 207 [2001].)
Validity of stock transfer.
(1) As between the parties, the requisite for a valid transfer is
merely the delivery of the certificate indorsed by the owner or his
attomey-in-fact or other person authorized to make the transfer.
(Sec. 62.)

(a) Registration is not necessary to enable the transferee to
acquire the right of a stockholder as against the transferor. The
law provided in effect that an unregistered transfer shall not
be valid "except as between parties." The inference is that, as
between the parties, it is valid.

(b) It is the conveyance, not the act of registration, which
gives title to the transferee. (Fisher, op. cit., p. 151.) As between
the parties, the title passes by contract, and not by record.
(Scripture v. Longmount Supply Ditch Co., 50 N.H. 571.)
(c) The parties may agree that shares of stock sold would
be registered in the name of the seller until the price has been
fully paid. Such agreement is valid. (C.N. Hodges vs. Lezama,
14 SCRA 1030 [1965].)
(2) In order to be valid as against third persons and the corporation
and its shareholders, the transfer of shares must be entered and noted

upon the books of the corporation so as to show the names of the
parties to the transaction, die date of the transfer, the number of the
certificate, and the number of shares transferred. (Sec. 62.) When
the stock transfer is entered in the corporate books, the buyer or
transferee becomes a stockholder of record entitled to enjoy all the
privileges of a stockholder.

584

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 62

Sec 62

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

585

(a) A corporation is not required to secure the prior approval
of the SEC for the transfer of share of stock because the question
of whether or not such transfer should be recorded in its books
is one that the law has left for the corporation to decide. (SEC
Opinion, Sept. 29, 1964.) It is an internal affair which can be
resolved by the corporation itself. (SEC Opinion, July 6, 1988.)

The transfer or disposition of shares of stock which constitute
part of the community property or conjugal partnership property is
subject to the provisions of the Family Code.” (E.O. No. 209.)

(b) As far as the corporation is concerned, the stockholder
acquires voting and other rights only when the shares to be
voted are registered in his name in the stock and transfer book of
the corporation. Thus, one purpose of registration is "to inform
the corporation of any change in share ownership so that it can
ascertain the persons entitled to the rights and subject to the
liabilities of a stockholder." (De Erquiaga vs. Court of Appeals,
178 SCRA 1 [1989], citing Corporation Code, Comments, Notes
and Selected Cases, by Campos & Lopez-Campos, p. 838, 1981
ed.) The corporation whose shares are subject to transfer, need
to be a party to the transaction but as far as the corporation is
concerned, a non-recorded transfer is non-existent.

The requirement for the registration of transfers of shares in the
corporate books is intended principally for the benefit and protection
of the corporation so it may know who are its stockholders to whom
it must accord the right granted to them by law and against whom
it can enforce liability that may arise from ownership of stock. (Lim
Tay vs. Court of Appeals, 293 SCRA 634 [1998].)
(1) The reasons for this requirement are:
(a) to enable the corporation to know at all times who its
actual stockholders are because mutual rights and obligations
exist between the corporation and its stockholders;
(b) to afford to the corporation an opportunity to object or
refuse its consent to the transfer if it has any claim against the
stock sought to be transferred, or for any valid reason; and
(c) to avoid fictitious or fraudulent transfers. (Escafio vs.
Filipinas Mining Corp., 74 Phil. 711 [1944].)
(2) The purpose of registration is two-fold: to enable the
transferee to exercise all the rights of a stockholder, including the
right to vote and be voted for, and to inform the corporation of any
change in ownership so that it can ascertain the person entitled to

(c) A bona fide transfer of shares of a corporation not
registered or noted in the books of the corporation is invalid as
against a subsequent lawful attachment or execution of these
shares whether or not the attaching creditor had actual notice of
the transfer; and as to all persons interested, except the parties
to such transfers. (Lim vs. Court of Appeals, supra; Uson vs.
Diosomito, 61 Phil. 535 [1935].)

(d) The transfer of the title by means of succession though
valid and effective between the parties involved (i.e., between
the decedent's estate and heirs) does not bind the corporation
and third parties. The transfer must be registered in the books
of the corporation to make the transferee-heir a stockholder
entitled to recognition as such both by the corporation and third
parties. (Reyes vs. Regional Trial Court, 561 SCRA 553 [2008].)

(e) Section 62 strictly requires the recording of the transfer
in the books of the corporation, and not elsewhere, to be valid
against third parties. (Lim vs. Court of Appeals, supra.)

Reasons/purpose for requiring registration
of stock transfer.

1TU nder Arts. 96 and 125 of the Family Code, the administration and enjoyment of
the community property or conjugal partnership property shall belong to both spouses
jointly. “In case of disagreement, the husband's decision shall prevail, subject to recourse
to the court by the wife for a proper remedy, which must be availed of within five (5)
years from the date of the contract implementing such decision.''
"In the event that one spouse is incapacitated or otherwise unable to participate
in the administration of the common properties, the other spouse may assume sole
powers of administration. These powers do not include disposition or
encumbrance
without authority of the court or the written consent of the other spouse. In the absence
of such authority or consent, the disposition or encumbrance shall be void.
However, the
transaction shall be construed as a continuing offer on the part of the consenting spouse
person, and may be perfected as a binding contract upon the acceptance by the
other spouse or authorization by the court before the offer is withdrawn
by either or both

586

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 62

the rights and subject to the liabilities of a stockholder. (Batangas
Laguna Tayabas Bus Co. vs. Bitanga, 362 SCRA 635 [2001], citing
Campos, The Corporation Code Comments, Notes, Selected Cases,
1990 Ed., Vol. 2, p. 301.)
(3) Such a requirement is intended for the benefit and protection
of persons who may deal with the corporation and become its
creditors so that they may know who are its stockholders, and as
such liable to them. (12 Fletcher, p. 307.)
Right of corporation to refuse registration
of transfer.

The registration of transfers of shares of stock in the stock and
transfer book of the corporation is a function which usually pertains
to that of the corporation secretary or the transfer agent of the
corporation. (Tim Tay vs. Court of Appeals, 293 SCRA 634 [1998].)

—

(1) Validity of transferee's title.
The duty of the corporation
record
stock
to
is ministerial upon the
transfer
of
secretary
However, he cannot
thereof.
the
of
buyer ownership
acquisition by
be compelled to do so when the transferee's title to said shares
has no prima facie validity or is uncertain, (see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 09-19,’* March 19, 2019.) More specifically, a pledgee, prior to
foreclosure and sale, does not acquire ownership over the pledged
shares and thus, cannot compel the corporate secretary to record his

alleged ownership of such shares on the basis merely of the contract
of pledge. (Ibid.)
(2) Breach of restriction on transfer. The corporation may refuse
to record any transfer if there is a clear breach of reasonable and
valid restrictions on the power to transfer shares of stock. But
it waives the requirement of registration by failure or refusal to
register a valid transfer without legal or good cause (see Salvador
vs. Mencias, [C.A.] 55 O.G. 6405; Lorenzo vs. Genato Commercial
Corp., [C.A.] 45 O.G. 2972 [1958].), such as existence of claim
arising from unpaid subscriptions, the failure of the transferee to
present evidence of payment of corresponding taxes or certificate

—

‘•Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippine Annotated, p. 560 [9th
ed.).

Sec. 62

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

587

of exemption therefrom, the failure of the transferee to comply with
registration requirements prescribed in the articles of incorporation,
and the existence of conflicting claims as to the right of the transferee
in which case the corporation may legally refuse to register until the
right has been settled by interpleader or otherwise. (SEC Opinion,
Nov. 6, 1987.)
(3) Legality or propriety of transfer.
Section 34 of the
Corporation Law (now Sec. 62.) which require that all transfers to
be valid as far as the corporation is concerned must be entered in the
books of the corporation, contemplate no restriction as to whom the
shares may be transferred. (C.N. Hodges vs. Lezama, 8 SCRA 717
[1963].) A corporation cannot inquire into the legality or propriety
of a transfer of its shares from one person to another.
In case of conflicting claims, the corporation, for its protection,
may demand security or require all known claimants to interplead,
(see Rules of Court, Rule 63, Sec. 1.)

—

Basis of transferee’s right to registration.

The right of a transferee /assignee of shares of stock of a
corporation to have the transfer /assignment to him registered in
the stock and transfer book in his name is contractual. It is likewise
an inherent right flowing from his ownership of the shares.
(1) The corporation agrees to make the transfer to a bona fide
transferee on demand and presentation of the corresponding
certificate of stock; and having represented to its stockholders and
to all who may desire to purchase its stocks that it will invest the
purchasers thereof with ail the rights of stockholders by making a
record on its books of the fact of each transfer as made, it would be
highly inequitable to permit it to repudiate this representation to the
prejudice of innocent purchasers.
(2) Without such right, the sale of stocks would be injuriously

hampered resulting in much commercial and industrial

inconveniences and embarrassment, (see 12 Fletcher, pp. 392-394.)

(3) Even a corporation under receivership for tremendous losses
may not legally refuse to register a transfer of shares. A trial court has
jurisdiction to order a receiver of a corporation under
receivership
to

do any act so as to protect and preserve its properties, and to
that end, it may order the secretary of the corporation to do an act

588

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 62

within the internal affairs of the corporation aimed at protecting the
interests of the stockholders. The obligation to register is ministerial,
and if it refuses to make such transfer, it may be compelled to do so
by mandamus. (Rural Bank of Salinas, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 210
SCRA 510 [1992].)
Remedy of stockholder where corporation
refuses to register transfer.

The Revised Corporation Code prescribes no period within
which the registration should be affected. The right to have the
transfer recorded does not accrue until there has been a demand by
the transferee and a refusal on the part of the corporation to register
the transfer.
(1) Common remedies.
Transferees of shares of stock who
desire to be recognized as and accorded the rights of stockholders
must secure a standing as such by having the transfer recorded
in the books of the corporation. In case of wrongful refused of the
corporate secretary to record the transfer, specific performance and
mandamus are the common remedies within the law that may be
availed of to compel the registration. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 12, 1993.)

—

One cannot use the flimsy excuse for not complying with the
requirements of the law, for example, that it would have been a
vain attempt to force the incumbent corporate secretary to register
the assignment or transfer in the stock and transfer book because
the latter belongs to the opposite faction. (Torres, Jr. vs. Court of
Appeals, 278 SCRA 793 [1997].)

—

(2) Mandamus generally not available.
By the weight of
authority, it is held that mandamus will not lie in ordinary cases to
compel a corporation or its officers to transfer stock on its books and
issue new certificates to the transferee.

(a) The writ (in such case) is purely a private one, and
there is generally an adequate remedy by an action against the
corporation for damages.
(b) To permit the writ of mandamus to issue to compel the
officers of a corporation to transfer stock upon the books of the
corporation might, under certain circumstances, require such
officers to transfer stock against which the corporation holds
unpaid claims. (Sec. 62, par. 2.) These claims might easily arise

Sec. 62

589

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

between the time of the issuance of the writ and the service of the
same upon such officers. There is no need of the extraordinary
remedy by mandamus in so ordinary a case. (Hager vs. Bryan, 21
Phil. 523 [1912].)
(c) Mandamus will not issue to establish a right but only
to enforce one already established. (TCL Sales Corporation vs.
Court of Appeals, 349 SCRA 35 [2001]; Lim Tay vs. Court of

Appeals, 293 SCRA 634 [1998].)

—

(3) When remedy available. The remedy of mandamus will lie only if
these requisites are present:
(a) Due application therefor has been made;
(b) Said application has been denied;
(c) There are no unpaid claims against the stock by the
corporation;
(d) An ordinary action for damages against the corporation
would be inadequate; and

(e) An action in the nature of a suit in equity to secure a
decree ordering the transfer would also be inadequate. (Hager
vs. Bryan, 19 Phil. 138 [1912].)

Mandamus will lie if the transferee seeking relief has performed
and complied with all the statutory requirements for valid transfer
of shares. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 12, 1993.)

—

(4) Authority from registered owner to register transfer. It has been
held that under Section 34 of the Corporation Law (now Sec. 62.),
the mere indorsement of stock certificates does not in itself give to
the indorsee such a right to have a transfer of the shares of stock
on the books of the corporation as will entitle him to the writ of
mandamus to compel the corporation and its officers to make such
transfer at his demand because, under such circumstances, the duty,
the legal obligation is not so clear, and indisputable as to justify the
issuance of the writ.

As between the corporation on the one hand, and its
shareholders and third persons on the other, the corporation looks
only to its books to determine who its shareholders are, so that a
mere indorsee of a stock certificate claiming to be the owner, will not
necessarily be recognized by the corporation and its officers, absent

590

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 62

express instructions of the registered owner to make such transfer
to the indorsee, or a power of attorney authorizing such transfer.
(Hager vs. Bryan, 19 Phil. 138 [1912].)
Only absolute transfers need to
be registered.

The requirement that the transfer shall be recorded in the
books of the corporation to be valid as against third persons has
reference only to absolute transfers or absolute conveyance of the
ownership or the title to a share. Consequently, the entry or notation
on the books of the corporation of pledges, chattel mortgages, or
attachments of shares is unnecessary to their validity (although it is
advisable to do so) since they do not involve absolute alienation of
ownership of stock. (Monserrat vs. Ceron, 58 Phil. 469 [1933]; Chua
Guan vs. Samahang Magsasaka, Inc., 62 Phil. 472 [1935]; Chemphil
Export & Import Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 251 SCRA 257 [1996].)
Effects of an unregistered transfer
of shares.

These are the effects of the failure to register a transfer of shares:
(1) It is valid and binding, as between the transferor (record owner)
and the transferee (beneficial owner) (Sec. 62; Delos Santos vs. McGrath,
96 Phil. 577 [1955].), where neither the corporation nor third persons
are involved, and the death of the transferor before the transfer is
recorded does not affect the transferee's right to have the transfer
recorded and to have a new certificate issued to him. (12 Fletcher, p.
288; Navarro vs. Suntay, [C.A.] 48 O.G. 5335 [1952].)
Unless the transfer is annulled, the rights of the transferee under
the contract must be respected and upheld.
(2) It is invalid or ineffective as to the corporation (Uson vs.
Diosomito, 61 Phil. 535 [1935]; Batangas Laguna Tayabas Bus
Co. vs. Bitanga, 362 SCRA 635 [2001].) unless notice is given to
the corporation for purposes of registration. (Lorenzo vs. Genato
Commercial Corp., [C.A.] 45 O.G. 2972 [1958].) Notice given to the
corporation of the sale of shares and presentation of the certificates
for transfer is equivalent to registration.

There is no requirement that a stockholder of a corporation
must be a registered one, i.e., the transfer or assignment of stocks
must first be registered, in order that the SEC may take cognizance

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec 62

591

of a suit seeking to enforce his rights as such stockholder. (Abejo vs.
De la Cruz, 149 SCRA 654 [1987].)
(a) The transferor has the right to vote and be voted for, and
until challenged in a proper proceeding, the transferor has the
right to participate in any meeting and, in the absence of fraud,
any action at such meeting cannot be collaterally attacked by
reason of such participation. (Price & Sulu Dev. Co. vs. Martin,
58 Phil. 707 [1933]; see De Erquiraga vs. Court of Appeals, 178
SCRA 1 [1989].)
(b) In case of unrecorded transfer of shares, the transferor
has the right to dividends as against the corporation without
notice of the transfer but the transferor is deemed the trustee of
the real owner of the dividends. (SEC Opinion No. 29-03,” June
2, 2003.)

(c) As between the mortgagor and the mortgagee where
the mortgagee earns dividends, the mortgagee has no right to
collect the dividends as against the corporation without notice
of the mortgage.
(d) A person who has purchased stock, and who desires to
be recognized as a stockholder for the purpose of voting, must
secure such a standing by having the transfer recorded on the
corporate books. Until the transfer is registered, the transferee
is not a stockholder but an outsider. (Batangas Laguna Tayabas
Bus Co. vs. Bitanga, supra; Rivera vs. Florendo, 144 SCRA 652
[1986].)

(3) It is invalid as against corporate creditors, and the transferor
is still liable to the corporation. (Uson vs. Diosomito, supra.) The
transfer of stock by a shareholder does not relieve him from
liability to creditors of the corporation for unpaid subscription
until the transfer is perfected by being registered in the books of the
corporation. (12 Fletcher, p. 357.)
(4) It is invalid as to the attaching or executing creditors of the
transferor, as well as subsequent purchasers in good faith without notice
of the transfer, and indeed, as to all persons interested, except the parties
to such transfers. (Uson vs. Diosomito, supra; see Lim vs. Court of
Appeals, 323 SCRA 102 [2000].)
Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 350 [1993],

592

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 62

593

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

—

Nontransferability of unpaid stock
on corporate books.

Under Section 62, shares of stock against which the corporation
holds any unpaid claim arising from any unpaid subscription (not
from any other indebtedness) shall not be transferable on the books

of the corporation. There are no unpaid claims against the stock
when there are no unpaid subscriptions due and payable, (see Sec.
66, par. 2.)

—

(1) Consent of corporation to registration of transfer. The proviso
in Section 62 does not mean that a stockholder cannot transfer his
unpaid shares. He can, but since such transfer shall not be recorded
in the books of the corporation by reason of being delinquent in
the payment of unpaid subscription (Ibid.), the same is valid only
between the transferor and the transferee but not insofar as the
corporation and third persons are concerned.
The transfer may be allowed provided it is approved by the
board of directors and accompanied by an affidavit of assumption
of obligation to pay the unpaid balance by the transferee. (SEC
Opinion, March 8, 1990.)

—

(2) Sale of stock not covered by any certificate.
A corporation
cannot be compelled by mandamus on the petition of the purchaser
to register in its stock and transfer book (see Sec. 73.) a sale made by
a subscriber of shares (e.g., 20 shares forming part of his subscription
of 80 shares) where such shares were paid by the seller without any
certificate of stock issued to him and the corporation has an unpaid
claim for the balance (60 shares) due on the whole subscription (80
shares).

—

For any
(3) Sale of stock burdened with other indebtedness.
indebtedness other than for unpaid subscriptions, the corporation
has no right to refuse registration of transfer.
A corporation has no lien upon stock for debt not arising from
unpaid subscription. Such lien may, however, be created in the
articles of incorporation pursuant to Section 6, which provides that
"shares of stock corporations . . . may have such . . . restrictions as
may be stated in the articles of incorporation." (see SEC Opinion,

April 13, 1981.)

Sea 63

No certificate
Sec. 63. Issuance of Stock Certificates.
of stock shall be issued to a subscriber until the full amount
of the subscription together with interest and expenses (in
case of delinquent shares) if any is due, has been paid.

Full payment of subscription required for
Issuance of certificate of stock.
The certificate of stocks may be issued to the subscriber or to
the duly appointed nominee of the subscriber upon the latter's
instruction.
(1) Pro rata application of partial payments not allowed. Section
63 prohibits the issuance of certificate of stock to a subscriber who
has not paid "the full amount of his subscription together with
interest and expenses (in case of delinquent shares), if any is due."
According to the SEC, the provision enunciates the doctrine that a
subscription is one, entire and indivisible contract and, therefore, it
cannot be divided into portions, so that the stockholder shall not be
entitled to certificate of stock until he has paid the full amount of his
subscription together with interest and expenses, if any is due.'
All partial payments on one (1) subscription shall be deemed
applied proportionately among the number of shares. Therefore, to
permit the issuance of stock certificate for payment of a subscription
that does not cover the entire number and value of the shares
subscribed would be violative of Section 63. (SEC Opinions, Sept
12, 1989 and Nov. 12, 1993.)

—

—

(2) Contrary view.
In case of partied payments on a
subscription, said payments should be deemed pro-rated among all
'If the stockholder has not paid the full amount of his subscription, he cannot
transfer part of it, or the entire subscription to several transferees without the consent
of the corporation (SEC Opinion, Sept. 12, 1989.) in view of the indivisible nature of a
subscription contract. The reason behind the principle disallowing transfer of not fully
paid subscription to several transferees is that it would be difficult to determine whether
or not the partial payments made should be applied as full payment for the corresponding
number of shares which can only be covered by such payment or as proportional payment
to each and all of the entire number of subscribed shares. Consequently, it would be
difficult to determine the unpaid balance to be assumed by each transferee. (SEC
Opinions, March 8, 1990 and Oct. 9, 1995.) However, the entire subscription, although
pot yet fully paid, may be transferred to a single transferee who must assume the unpaid
balance. Again, it is necessary to secure the consent of the corporation since the transfer
of subscription right contemplates a novation which under Art. 1293 of
the Civil Code
cannot be made without the consent of the creditor. (SEC Opinion. April 11, 1994.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

594

Sec 63

the shares subscribed and, therefore, no certificate of stock can be
issued showing any of the shares to be fully paid up until the entire
subscription is paid, (see Fua Cun vs. Summers, 44 Phil. 705 [1923].)
But unless prohibited by its bylaws, certificates of stock may be
issued for less than the number of shares subscribed provided the
par value of each stock represented by the certificate has been fully
paid. (Baltazar vs. Lingayen Gulf Electric Co., 14 SCRA 522 [1965].)
In other words, in the absence of provisions in the bylaws to the
contrary, a corporation may apply payments made by subscribers
on account of their subscriptions, either as: (a) full payment for the
corresponding number of shares, the par value of which is covered
by such payment, or (b) as payment pro rata to each and all the entire
number of shares subscribed for. This rule applies to all kinds and
classes of stock corporations. The two (2) alternatives cannot be
availed of by the corporation simultaneously. Once an alternative
is chosen, it must be applied uniformly to all stockholders similarly
situated, and, therefore, it cannot be changed without the consent
of all the stockholders who might be affected. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 7,
1968.)

ILLUSTRATION:
Assume that S subscribed to 100 shares at par value of
P10.00 each share of X Corporation or a total subscription of
Pl,000. S made an initial payment of P500.
Here, the board of directors of X Corporation, at its option,
may either apply the P500 as full payment for 50 shares and
issue a certificate of stock for the 50 shares, or as payment pro
rata for the entire 100 shares so that each share is paid P5.00
in which case no certificate shall be issued until the balance is
paid.
The first alternative cannot be adopted when prohibited by
the bylaws.2
’Section 64 of the old Code (now Sec 63.) was taken from Sec 37 of the former
Corporation Law. The latter provision reads as follows: "Sec. 37. . . . No certificate of stock
shall be issued to a subscriber as fully paid-up until the full par value thereof, or the full
subscription in case of no-par stock has been paid by him to the corporation. . . ." Section
64 requires the payment by the subscriber of the full amount of his subscription before a
certificate of stock shall be issued to him.
It would seem that Sec. 63 prohibits the issuance of certificate of stock where the
subscription is only partially paid notwithstanding that the payment fully covers the

Sec 63

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

595

Purpose of prohibition in Section 63.

The purpose of the prohibition is to prevent the partial disposition
of a subscription not fully paid, because if it is permitted, and the
subscriber becomes delinquent in the payment of his subscription,
the corporation may not be able to sell as many of his subscribed
shares as would be necessary to cover the total amount due from
him, which is authorized under Section 67. (see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 50-19,’ Oct. 11, 2019; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 5-16, March 31,
2016.)

Such partial disposition of the subscription would be possible if
the stock certificates are issued covering partial payments, because
the subscriber will not be restrained to sell the same as the transfer
can be recorded in the stock and transfer book of the corporation.
If no stock certificates are issued covering the partial payments,
the subscriber will have difficulty in selling his equity, because the
corporation may refuse to record the transfer in its book unless the
entire subscription is fully paid. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 24, 1963.)
Nature of relation of stockholder
to the corporation.

The relation of the stockholder to the corporation may be
described:
(1) Relation based on contract.
The relation between the
corporation and its shareholders is contractual. This relation is
within the protection of the Constitution prohibiting legislation
impairing the obligation of contracts. (Art. 1H, Sec. 10 thereof.)
(2) Share not indebtedness to stockholder. A share of stock or the
certificate of a share is not an indebtedness to the stockholder nor
evidence of indebtedness and, therefore, is not credit.

—

—

shares for which the certificate is issued. According to the SEC since subscription is one
indivisible whole contract, it cannot be divided into portions so that the stockholder shall
not be entitled to a certificate of stock until he has paid the full amount of his subscription.
(SEC Opinion, Sept. 12, 1989.) The deliberation on Sec. 63 shows that
the legislative
intention is to abandon the ruling in Baltazar. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 12, 1993.) Nonetheless,
there is nothing wrong or immoral nor is it prejudicial to corporate creditors or contrary
to any public policy to adopt the first alternative. Since the subscriber is still liable
for his

unpaid subscription, no prejudice is caused to the corporation or to corporate creditors.
Tnerefore, it is believed that the ruling in the Baltazar case is still applicable but onlv if
allowed by the bylaws.
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 578 [20101.

I

596

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

(a) In other words, the holder of stock, whether common
or preferred, in a corporation is not, by reason of his ownership
of the stock, a creditor of the corporation. He is a risk taker who
invests capital in the corporation and who can look only to
what is left after corporate debts and liabilities are fully paid.
Hence, shares cannot be issued entitling the holders thereof
to a fixed interest instead of dividends, to insure the return of
his investment, inasmuch as this will constitute the contract of
subscription as one of loan, making the corporation a debtor of
the subscriber. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 10, 1969.)

Neither has the stockholder the right to compel the
corporation to return his investment, (see Sec. 41.)
(b) There is, however, one sense in which stockholders,
common and preferred, are creditors. In the sense that a corpo¬
ration includes all its capital stock among its liabilities, but it is
a liability which is postponed to every other liability. As such a
creditor, a stockholder is subordinate to every other creditor of
the corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 982.)
(c) While there is no relationship of debtor and creditor
between the corporation and the stockholder with respect to his
shares of stock, a subscriber becomes a debtor to the corporation
for the amount or price of the shares subscribed by him.
A
(3) Corporation owns its property as a distinct entity.
corporation is a legal entity with a personality distinct and separate
from the body of its shareholders. (Sec. 2.) Properties registered in
the name of the corporation are owned by it as an entity separate
and distinct from stockholders or members. Consequently:
(a) The stockholders have no title, legal or equitable, to the
property owned by the entity known as the "corporation" but
the shares represent integral parts of the whole and proportional
shares of the dividends declared or to be declared and of the net
assets upon its dissolution. (Pascual vs. Del Saz Orosco, 19 Phil.
83(1911]; 13 Am. Jur. 465.)
(b) The stockholder is not a co-owner of the corporate

—

property.
(c) Nor is the stockholder entitled to the possession of any
definite portion of its property or assets. (Stockholders of F.
Guanzon & Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, 6 SCRA 373 [1962].)

Sec 63

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

597

—

(4) Where stockholder unknown.
For stocks where owners
located,
trust
a
created between the
be
is
relation
impliedly
cannot
corporation and the unknown stockholder. Such shares may be
entered in the corporate books and shall stand in the name of the
corporation as "trustee" or said holder may be described as "trustee"
in the certificate. That a stock stands in the corporate books in the
name of a person as a trustee in the certificate is notice to both the
corporation and to the persons who may purchase such shares from
the trustee that the latter does not hold the shares in his own right.
(SEC Opinion, Dec. 1, 1988.)
It is the duty of the corporation to exhaust all means in locating
the whereabouts of owners of its subscribed / issued shares and if
the search proves futile, it is the fiduciary duty of the corporation
to continuously hold said shares as trustee for the owners thereof,
unless otherwise escheated in accordance with law. (SEC Opinion,
July 10, 1990.)

Rights of stockholders.

The theory of a corporation is that the stockholders may have
all the profits but shall turn over the complete management of
the enterprises to their representatives or agents called directors.
(Ramirez vs. Orientalist, 38 Phil. 634 [1918]; Wolfson vs. Araneta
Stock Exchange, 72 Phil. 492 [1941].) The stockholders, however, as
part owners of the corporation, are given certain rights or remedies
so that they can protect themselves from the possibility of misuse of
corporate funds and mismanagement by those directly involved in
corporate affairs.

These rights4 are:
s,ockh°'der has no title, legal or equitable, to the corporate
evident that what hedoes have with respect to the corporation and his fellow property, it is
stockholders,
ri8hts S“‘ 8™'™- ^ese rights are generally enumerated as being, first, to have
certificate or other evidence of his status as stockholder issued to him; second,
to vote
meetings of the corporation; third, to
his proportionate share of the profits of
w corporation; and lastly, to participatereceive
in the distribution of corporate
absolution or winding up. (Pascual vs. Del Saz Orosco, 19 Phil. 82 [1911].)assets upon the
who are not corporate officers do not have a fiduciary duty to the
rporation as they are not in a position
to misuse corporate property. They may, therefore,
W O'
“T50”110" (which has a separate legal existence) and transact business
with

^Stockholders
it™

J1*

and o^nagement; (2) 8tockh°lde« have been classified as follows: (1) rights as to control

proprietary rights; and (3) remedial rights. Induded in proprietary

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

Sec 63

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

599

(1) Right to attend and vote in person or by proxy at
stockholder's meetings (comments under Secs. 49, 57.);
(2) Right to elect and remove directors (Secs. 23, 27.);

(16) Right to demand payment of the value of his shares and
withdraw from the corporation in certain cases (see comments
under Secs. 40 and 80.); and

(3) Right to approve certain corporate acts (see comments
under Sec. 51.);

(17) Right to have the corporation voluntarily dissolved, (see
comments under Secs. 134-135.)

(4) Right to adopt and amend or repeal the bylaws or adopt
new bylaws (Secs. 45, 47.);

Rights of heirs of deceased stockholders.

Upon the death of a stockholder, the heirs do not automatically
become stockholders of the corporation and acquire the rights and
privileges of the deceased as stockholder of the corporation. The
shares must be distributed first to the heirs in estate proceedings,
and the transfer of the shares must be recorded in the books of the
corporation.
(1) Equitable owners of shares before transfer. Section 63 provides
that no transfer shall be valid, except as between the parties, until
the transfer is recorded in the books of the corporation. During such
interim period, the heirs stand as equitable owners of the shares,
with the executor or administrator duly appointed by the court
being vested with the legal title to the shares. Until a settlement and
division of the estate is effected, the shares of stock of the decedent
are held by the administrator or executor.
To transfer the shares of the stock in favor of the heirs of the
deceased stockholder, a judicial or extrajudicial partition of his
estate is necessary, if he died intestate. It is necessary to wait for
Hie termination of the testamentary proceedings and the final
adjudication of the shares of stock in accordance with the will of the
decedent. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 28-06, July 11, 2006.)
(2) Rights of heirs pending settlement and division
of estate.
Pending settlement and division of the estate, it is the administrator
or executor who is entitled to exercise the rights and
privileges of
the

(5) Right to compel the calling of meetings of stockholders
when for any cause there is no person authorized to call a meeting
(Sec. 49, last par.);
(6) Right to issuance of certificate of stock or other evidence of
stock ownership and be registered as shareholder (see comments
under Sec. 62.);

—

(7) Right to receive dividends when declared (see comments
under Sec. 42.);
(8) Right to participate in the distribution of corporate assets
upon dissolution (see comments under Secs. 134-135.);
(9) Right to transfer of stock on the corporate books (see
comments under Sec. 62.);
(10) Right to preemption in the issue of shares (see comments
under Sec. 38.);
(11) Right to inspect corporate books and records (Sec. 73.);
(12) Right to be furnished the most recent financial statement
upon request and to receive a financial report of the corporation's
operations (Sec. 74.);

—

(13) Right to bring individual and representative or derivative
suits (infra.);
(14) Right to recover stock unlawfully sold for delinquency
(Sec. 68.);
(15) Right to enter into voting trust agreement (Sec. 58.);
debts, subject
rights is the privilege of immunity from personal liability for corporate
375.)
Ballantine,
(see
p.
judicial limitations against abuse of this privilege,

deceased stockholder.

(a) Unless the shares of stock of the decedent
have been
transferred in the name of his legal heirs before the stated
meeting or at a certain cut-off date as provided in the
the heirs cannot vote the shares, since they cannot be bylaws,
considered
stockholders of record as of the stated cut-off date. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 28-06, July 11, 2006). Under Section 74,
Executors,

to

I

J
THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

600

Sec 63

Sec. 63

601

TITLE VII . STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

administrators, receivers, and other legal representatives duly
appointed by the court may attend and vote in behalf of the
stockholders or members without need of any written proxy.

(b) Under Section 47 (par. 1.), the corporation may amend
or repeal any bylaw or adopt new bylaws by the prescribed vote
of the board of directors and the stockholders.

(b) Section 73 enumerates the persons who are entitled to
inspect corporate books. The stockholder's rights of inspection
of the corporation's books and records is based upon his own¬
ership of shares in the corporation and the necessity for self¬
protection. Similarly, only stockholders of record are entitled to
receive dividends declared by the corporation (Sec. 42.), a right
inherent in the ownership of the shares. In the absence of trans¬
fer of the shares of the deceased stockholder to the heir/ s in the
corporation's transfer book, the said heir /s would have no right
to inspect its books and receive dividends. (Musni vs. Puno, 599
SCRA 585 [2009].) Nevertheless, a beneficial owner may be giv¬
en the right under special circumstances to protect his interest
when clearly established by evidence.

(2) Ownership of stock confers no vested right.
In fine, a
stockholder acquires no vested right by his ownership of stock. It
cannot be said, therefore, that a stockholder who claims that before

Rights of stockholders may be changed

—

or restricted.
Any person "who buys stock
(1) Rule of majority governs.
knowledge that its affairs are
the
in a corporation does so with
and that he impliedly
stockholders
dominated by a majority of the
govern in all matters
shall
majority
the
contracts that the will of
and lawfully enacted
incorporation
of
act
within the limits of the
law."*
bylaws and not forbidden by
(a) Under Section 15, any corporation may amend its ar¬
ticles of incorporation. If the amendment changes or restricts
the rights of existing stockholders, then the dissenting minority
under Section 80 has only one right, viz.: to demand payment of
the fair value of his shares.
"parted
*To this extent, therefore, the stockholders may have considered to have which
property
his
with his personal right or privilege to regulate the disposition of
the will of
he has invested in the capital stock of the corporation and surrendered it to that the
said
therefore,
justly
be
cannot,
It
...
the majority of his fellow incorporators.
is infringed
contract express or implied, between the corporation and the stockholders
Jr. vs.
(Gokongwei,
.
."
.
the
majority
by
authorized
is
which
... by any act of the former
369, Sec
Thompson
6
citing
[19791,
336
Securities and Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA
4490.)

—

the amendment of the bylaws he had all the qualifications to be a
director of a corporation, has a vested right to be elected director
and that the amendment deprived him of such right, in the face of
the fact that the law at the time he became a stockholder "contained
the prescription that the corporate charter and the bylaw shall be
subject to amendment, alteration, and modification." (Gokongwei,
Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)
Rights of dissenting minority.

Minority stockholders (or members), however, are required to
submit to the will of the majority only if the majority acts in good
faith and within the limitations of the law.
(1) In some instances, minority stockholders objecting to
certain corporate action may demand appraisal and payment of
their stock (see Sec. 80.), and thus terminate their relationship with
the corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 991.)
(2) In other instances, they may bring actions at law (e.g., for
damages, injunction) in their names to preserve and protect their
interests or in the name of the corporation to redress wrongs
committed solely against the corporation, (infra.)
The majority stockholders (members) owe the minority
stockholders the duty to exercise good faith, care, and diligence to
protect the interest of the minority in the corporation. They
have a
fiduciary duty to minority stockholders to use their control of the
corporation in the best interests of all stockholders.

Actions by stockholders or members.
Actions by stockholders (or members) may be divided into three

general categories: (1) derivative actions; (2)
individual actions;
and (3) representative or class actions. The
determination of the
appropriate action or suit depends on the object of the wrong done,
whether it is the corporation itself, or an individual stockholder

602

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 63

personally, or a group or specific class of stockholders. The remedies
are mutually exclusive and not a matter discretion.
(1) Action in behalf of corporation generally brought through board
of directors/ trustees. Corporations represent their stockholders (or
members) in all matters within the scope of their corporate powers.
This is true respecting litigations and in other matters. As a result of
the separate identities of the corporation and its stockholders, any
wrong or injury done directly against the corporation itself gives
rise to a cause of action on the part of the corporation through the
board of directors (or trustees) and not primarily of an individual
stockholder.*
To allow stockholders to directly recover damage for themselves
for wrongs committed against the corporation would result in the
distribution among them of part of the assets of the corporation
before its dissolution which, as a rule, is prohibited to protect the
prior rights of corporate creditors, (see Sec. 139, last par.)
(2) Individual and representative suits.— Where a stockholder
or member is denied the right of inspection, his suit would be
individual because the wrong is done to him personally and not to
the other stockholders or the corporation. Where the wrong is done
to a group of stockholders, as where preferred stockholders' rights
are violated, a class or representative suit will be proper for the
protection of all stockholders belonging to the same group. (Cua, Jr.
vs. Tan, 607 SCRA 645 [2009].)
(3) Derivative suit brought by stockholder in behalf of corporation.
Where the acts complained of constitute a wrong to the corporation
itself, a cause of action belongs to the corporation and not to the
individual stockholder or member. (Cua, Jr. vs. Tan, 607 SCRA 645
[2009].)

—

—

is

‘Although in most every case of wrong to the corporation, each stockholder
this fact
necessarily affected because the value of his interest therein would be impaired,
is
corporation
the
since
action
of
cause
individual
an
him
to
give
of itself is not sufficient
wrongdoer;
the
sue
itself
should
and
him,
can
and
a person distinct and separate from
would be
otherwise, not only would the theory of separate entity be violated, but there
Furthermore,
creditors.
of
rights
priority
the
of
violation
as
well
as
multiplicity of suits
paid to each
there is the difficulty of determining the amount of damages that should bevs.
Subic Bay
Ching
[2009];
see
individual stockholder. (Cua, Jr. vs. Tan, 607 SCRA 645
suit
derivative
when
is
exception
The
[2014].)
569
SCRA
Inc.,
734
Club,
Golf and Country
is allowed.

I

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec 63

603

Whenever the officials of a corporation refuse to bring suit to
redress the wrong, such as when they are the ones to be sued, a
stockholder may maintain a derivative suit to enforce the corporate
right of action in behalf of himself, the other stockholders, and for
the benefit of the corporation. The fact that no other stockholder
has made common cause with the suing stockholder is irrelevant
because the smallness of his stockholding is no ground for denying
relief. (Republic Bank vs. Cuademo, 19 SCRA 671 [1967].)
In such a suit, the corporation is the real party-in-interest while
the suing stockholder, on behalf of the corporation, is only a nominal
party. (Filipinas Port Services, Inc. vs. Go, 518 SCRA 453 [2007];
Hi-Yield Realty, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 590 SCRA 548 [2009].)
Derivative suit explained.
A derivative suit is thus defined as one brought by one or
more stockholders or members in the name and on behalf of the
corporation to redress wrongs committed against it or to protect or
vindicate corporate rights, whenever the officials of the corporation
refuse to sue, or are the ones to be sued, or hold control of the
corporation. It is a remedy designed by equity for those situations
where the management through fraud, neglect of duty, or other
cause, declines to take the proper and necessary steps to assert
the corporation's rights. (Commart [Phils.], Inc. vs. Securities and
Exchange Commission, 198 SCRA 73 [1991].) In other words, a
derivative suit is a suit by a shareholder to enforce a corporate cause
of action. (Ago Realty Development Corporation vs. Ago, G.R. No.
210906, October 16, 2019.)

—

(1) Stockholder, a nominal party with corporation real
party in
interest. The right of a stockholder to bring derivative suits is
impliedly recognized by Sections 30, 33, and 64. In such action,
the suing stockholder who actually instituted it is regarded
as a

nominal party with the corporation as the real party-in-interest, and
the fact that the plaintiff was not authorized by the corporation
to
sue is of no moment as any such authority could not
be expected
since the suit is aimed at nullifying the action taken by the
officials
of the corporation. (Republic Bank vs. Cuademo,
supra;
Gamboa
vs. Victoriano, 90 SCRA 40 [1979]; Yu vs. Yukayguan, 589
SCRA 588
[2009].)

604

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

—

In a derivative suit
(2) Corporation an indispensable party.
the corporation
whether
stockholder,
important
not
it is
filed by a
(see
defendant,
Rule 3, Sec. 3,
or
should be joined as a plaintiff
should be
the
corporation
that
is
Rules of Court.) What is important
binding
upon
judgment
the
court's
made a party in order to make
Bank
vs.
(Republic
issues.
the
of
it and thus bar future litigations
the
that
corporation
non
qua
sine
Cuademo, supra.) It is a condition
be impleaded as a party. (Asset Privatization Trust vs. Court of
Appeals, 300 SCRA 579 [1998].)
Not only is the corporation an indispensable party, but it is also
the present rule that it must be served with process. The reason given
is that the judgment must be made binding upon the corporation
in order that the corporation may get the benefit of the suit and
may not bring a subsequent suit against the same defendants for
the same cause of action. The corporation must be joined as party
because it is its cause of action that is being litigated and because
judgment must be a res judicata against it. (Villamor, Jr. vs. Urnale,
736 SCRA 325 [2014].)
It has been held that a suit against corporate officers in their
official capacity is considered a suit against the corporation. (E.
Cano Enterprises, Inc. vs. Court of Industrial Relations, 13 SCRA 290
[1965].) A derivative suit has been the principal defense of a minority
shareholder against abuses of the majority. (Commart [Phils.], Inc
vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, supra; Western Institute of
Technology, Inc. vs. Salas, 278 SCRA 216 [1997]; Lim vs. Lim-Yu, 352
SCRA 216 [2001].)
Nature of derivative suit.
(1) A derivative suit is in the nature of a representative action
(Infra.), the stockholder (or member) bringing the action in the name
and in behalf of the corporation, for a wrong done to the corporation,
and not one done to himself, being in fact its representative and
anyrelief obtained belongs to the corporation and not to the
stockholders, individually or collectively (13 Fletcher, pp. 422, 440441.) but the plaintiff is entitled to reimbursement at least of legal
expenses. It is a suit by a stockholder to enforce a corporate cause of
action.

Sec 63

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

605

(2) The cause of action when a stockholder brings a derivative
suit is dual in composition. It consists of a basic cause of action, which
pertains to the corporation and on which it might have sued, and the
derivative cause of action, which pertains to the stockholder consisting
in the fact that the corporation will not or cannot sue for its own
protection. (Ibid., p. 429.) Hence, the name of the remedy because he
derives his right from the corporation.
(3) A derivative suit is fundamentally distinct and independent
from liquidation proceedings under Section 139. (Yu vs. Yukayguan,
589 SCRA 588 [2009].)
(4) Derivative suits are grounded, not on law, but on equity.
(Ago Realty Development Corporation vs. Ago, G.R. No. 210906,
October 16, 2019.) A derivative suit is a remedy designed by equity
as a principal defense of the minority shareholders against the
abuses of the majority. (Forest Hills Golf and Country Club, Inc. vs.
Fil-Estate Properties, Inc., 797 SCRA 655 [2016].)
A stockholder's right to institute a derivative suit is not based on
any express provision of the Revised Corporation Code, or even the
Securities Regulation Code, or related statutes authorizing the same
but is impliedly recognized when the said laws make corporate
directors or officers liable for damages suffered by the corporation
and its stockholders for violation of their fiduciary duties. Hence,
a stockholder may sue for mismanagement, waste or dissipation
of corporate assets because of a special injury to him for which he is
otherwise without redress. (Ibid.) The right is a product of jurisprudence
based on equity. (Ching vs. Subic Bay Golf and Country Club, Inc.,
734 SCRA 569 [2014]; Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas vs. Campa, Jr.,
787 SCRA 476 [2016].) However, a derivative suit cannot prosper
without complying with the legal requisites for its institution. (Infra.)
(5) In effect, the suit is an action for specific performance
of an
obligation owed by the corporation to the stockholders to assist
its rights of action when the corporation has been
put in
by the wrongful refusal of the directors or management default
to make
suitable measures for its protection. The basis of a stockholder's suit
is always one in
equity. However, it cannot prosper without first
complying with the legal requisites for its institution. (Ibid.; Legaspi
Towers, Inc. vs. Muer, 673 SCRA 453 [2012].)

606

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

(6) Derivative suits remain an exception. As a rule, corporate
litigation must be commenced by the corporation itself, with the
imprimatur of the board of directors, which, pursuant to the law,
wields the power to sue. Therefore, since the derivative suit is a
remedy of last resort, it must be shown that the board, to thedetriment
of the corporation and without a valid business consideration,
refuses to remedy a corporate wrong. A derivative suit may only be
instituted after such an omission. Simply put, derivative suits take a
back seat to board-sanctioned litigation whenever the corporation is
willing and able to sue in its own name. (Ago Realty & Development
Corp. v. Ago, G.R. Nos. 210906 & 211203, October 16, 2019.)
(7) Since the board is guilty of breaching the trust reposed in it
by the stockholders, it is but logical to dispense with the requirement
of obtaining from its authority to institute the case and to sign the
certification against forum shopping. It has been held that when
"the corporation ... is under the complete control of the principal
it is obvious that a demand upon the
defendants in the case
[board] to institute an action and prosecute the same effectively
would [be] useless, and the law does not require litigants to perform
useless acts." Thus, the institution of a derivative suit need not be
preceded by a board resolution. (Ago Realty & Development Corp,
v. Ago, G.R. Nos. 210906 & 211203, October 16, 2019.)

...

Importance of derivative suits.
trustees)
If the duties of care and loyalty which directors (or
owe to their corporation could be enforced only in suits by the
many wrongs done by directors would never be

corporation,
remedied.
Where the majority of the shareholders (or members) benefit
by the directors' breach of duty, they will normally continue
to
to elect the same directors or others who can be relied on not
the
institute litigation designed to remedy the wrong. Even where
the
shareholders do not benefit by the directors' wrongdoings,
them
difficulty of so organizing the majority shareholders to cause
to oust the wrongdoing directors from office and elect new directors
who will institute litigations against their predecessors is often
insuperable. The minority shareholders' suit is a procedural device

.1

Sec. 63

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

607

designed to facilitate holding wrongdoing directors and majority
shareholders to account, and also to enforce corporate claims against
third persons. (W.L. Cary, op. cit., p. 868.)
Type of wrong contemplated.
(1) Derivative suits have for their object the vindication of
a corporate injury, even though they are not brought by the
corporation, but by its stockholders. The corporation is the victim

of the wrong. (Ago Realty & Development Corp. v. Ago, G.R. Nos.
210906 & 211203, October 16, 2019.)
The whole purpose of the law authorizing a derivative suit is
to allow the stockholders /members to enforce rights which are
derivative (secondary) in nature, i.e., to enforce a corporate cause of
action. (Agdao Landless Residents Association, Inc. vs. Maramion,
G.R. Nos. 188642, 189425 & 188888-89, October 17, 2016.)
(2) The wrongful act by directors or other managers may result
in direct injuries to individual shareholders entitling the latter to
sue in their own right and for their own benefit. Of such wrongful
character are the wrongful failure to permit a shareholder to vote
and to permit a transaction of shares on the corporation's books.
On the other hand, many wrongful acts or omissions of
directors or other managers injure the shareholders only indirectly
through depleting the corporate assets or using them in a manner
contrary to the articles of incorporation. Shareholders' derivative
suits are concerned with this latter type of wrong (Ibid.), allowing a
stockholder to enforce rights which are derivative or secondary. It
requires that the injury alleged be indirect as far as the stockholders
are concerned and direct only insofar as the corporation is
concerned.
(R.N. Symaco Trading Corporation vs. Santos,
467 SCRA 312 [2005].)
However, the removal of a stockholder (particularly a
stockholder) from the management of the corporation majority
the
dissolution of a corporation in a derivative suit filed byand/or
a minority
stockholder is a drastic measure which should be resorted only
when the necessity is clear. (Chase vs. Buencamino, Sr., 136
SCRA
385

[1985].)

608

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 63

Requisites for bringing derivative suit
Before a stockholder or member may sue in behalf of the
corporation, these requisites must exist:
(1) There must be an existing cause of action in favor of the
corporation, as where the board of directors (or trustees) wastes or
dissipates the funds of the corporation, fraudulently disposes of its
property, or perform ultra vires acts (Angeles vs. Santos, 64 Phil. 697
[1927].), and not in favor of the particular stockholder bringing the
suit. In other words, the cause of action actually devolves on the
corporation, the wrongdoing or harm having been, or being caused
to, the corporation, and not to the particular stockholder bringing
the suit (San Miguel Corporation vs. Kahn, 176 SCRA 447 [1989].);’
(2) The stockholder or member must first make a demand upon
the corporation or the management to sue, unless such a demand
would be futile or useless (Reyes vs. Tan, SCRA 198 [1961]; Pascual
vs. Del Saz Orosco, 19 Phil. 82 [1911].), and the corporation refuses
or fails to sue notwithstanding such demand. This is known as
exhausting intra-corporate remedies;
(3) The stockholder or member must have been such at the time
of the objectionable acts or transactions, as well as at the time the
(Gochan
action was filed and during the pendency of the action*
Kahn,
vs.
vs. Young, 354 SCRA 207 [2001]; San Miguel Corporation
are
and
176 SCRA 447 [1989].), "unless such transactions continue
other
some
injurious to him or affect him especially or specifically in
way" (Pascual vs. Del Saz Orosco, supra.); and
filing a

him from
’The personal injury suffered by the stockholder cannot disqualify
rise to an additional cause of
derivative suit in behalf of the corporation. It merely givesshort,
the allegations of injury
action for damages against the erring corporate officers. In
to the corporation.
pertaining
those
with
co-exist
can
complaint
the
in
stockholder
the
to
supra.)
(Gochan vs. Young,
to invest
*The bona fide ownership by a stockholder of stock in his own right suffices
The
corporation.
the
of
benefit
the
for
suit
derivative
him with a standing to bring a
the
for
behalf,
or
own
in
his
number of his shares is immaterial since he is not suing
committed
wrong
a
of
redress
or
the
right,
particular
own
his
of
vindication
protection or
(San Miguel
against him, individually, but in behalf and for the benefit of the corporation.
Makati, 561
of
Court
Trial
Corporation vs. Kahn, 176 SCRA 447 [1989]; Reyes vs. Regional
as a
impleaded
be
the
corporation
that
non
qua
sine
a
condition
is
(2008).)
It
SCRA 593
with
served
be
must
but
indispensable
party
an
party because not only is the corporation
process. (Chua vs. Court of Appeals, 443 SCRA 259 [2004].)

See 63

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

609

(4) The action must be brought by the stockholder or member
name and for the benefit of the corporation.’ (Evangelista vs.
the
in
Santos, 86 Phil. 388 [1950].)
(5) The derivative suit must be filed by a minority stockholder.
Majority stockholders with undisputed corporate control cannot
resort to derivative suits when there is nothing preventing the
corporation itself from filing the case. The interests of the majority
stockholders should have been protected by the board through
affirmative action. (Mallare v. Hwang, G.R. No. 249789 [Notice],
April 28, 2021; see Ago Realty & Development Corporation vs. Ago,
G.R. No. 210906, October 16, 2019.)
It is enough that a member or a minority of stockholders file a
derivative suit for and in behalf of a corporation. Thus, although
the shareholdings of petitioners are only two out of the 409 alleged
outstanding shares or 0.24%, the petitioners may file a derivative
suit. (Ching vs. Subic Bay Golf and Country Club, Inc., 734 SCRA
569 [2014].)
The requisites have for its purpose "to make the derivative
suit the final recourse of the stockholder, after all other remedies to
obtain relief sought had failed. (Forest Hills Golf and Country Club,
Inc. vs. Fil-Estate Properties, Inc., 797 SCRA 655 [2016].) Not every
suit filed in behalf of the corporation is a derivative suit.

Requisites under the Interim Rules.

Under the Interim Rules of Procedure for Intra-Corporate
Controversies (A.M. No. 01-2-04-SC, March 13, 2001), these requisites
must exist in order for derivative suits to prosper:
’Among the basic requirements for a derivative suit

to prosper is that the minority
stockholder must allege in his complaint that he is suing on
a derivative cause of action
on behalf of the corporation and all other
stockholders similarly situated who wish to
join him in

the suit. A case which is
for estafa and falsification of publicmerely an appeal on the civil aspect of a criminal case
documents filed against the majority and controlling
members of the board is not a derivative suit. (Western
Institute of Technology vs. Salas,
278 SCRA 216 [1997]; Tam Wong
vs. Makasiar 350 SCRA 475 [2001]; see Hi-Yield
Realty, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 590Tek
SCRA 548 [2009]; Limsam Enterprises, Inc vs. Banco
de Oro Unibank, 670 SCRA
310 [2012]; Go vs. Distinction Properties Development and
Construction, Inc., 671 SCRA 461 [2012].)
A violation of Secs. 23 and 25 of the
Corporation Code on how decision-making is
vested in the board of directors and on
the board's quorum requirement implies that a
decision was wrongly made for the entire corporation, not just with
respect to a handful
stockholders. (Florete, Jr. vs. Florete,
Sr., 781 SCRA 255 [2016].)

—

—

610

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

(1) The person suing must be a stockholder or member at the
time the acts or transaction subject of the action occurred and the
time the action was filed;
(2) He exerted all reasonable efforts, and alleges the same with
particularity in the complaint, to exhaust all remedies available
under the articles of incorporation, bylaws, laws or rules governing
the corporation or partnership to obtain the relief he desires;
(3) No appraisal rights are available for the act or acts
complained of; and
(4) The suit is not a nuisance of harassment suit, (see Mallare v.
Hwang, G.R. No. 249789 [Notice], April 28, 2021.)
The fifth requisite for filing derivative suits, while not included
in the enumeration, is implied in the first paragraph of Rule 8,
Section 1 of the Interim Rules: The action brought by the stockholder
or member must be "in the name of [the] corporation or association.
. ." (Florete, Jr. vs. Florete, Sr., 781 SCRA 255 [2016].)

.

Thus, it is a condition sine qua non that the corporation be
impleaded as party in a derivative suit. The minority stockholder
suing for and on behalf of the corporation must allege in his
complaint that he is suing on a derivative cause of action on behalf

of the corporation and all other stockholders similarly situated who
may wish to join him in the suit. (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas vs.
Campa, Jr., 787 SCRA 476 [2016].)

Exhaustion of Intra-corporate remedies.
In addition to the existence of grievances which call for this
kind of relief, it is equally important that before the shareholder (or
member) is permitted, in his own name to institute and conduct a
litigation which usually belongs to the corporation, he should show
to the satisfaction of the court that he has exhausted all the means
within his reach to attain within the corporation itself, the redress of
his grievances, or action in conformity to his wishes.
all
The stockholder must exert all reasonable efforts to exhaust
remedies available under the articles of incorporation, the bylaws,
and the laws or rules governing the corporation to obtain the relief
he or she desires. Such fact must then be alleged with particularity
the
in the complaint. The obvious intent behind the rule is to make
other
all
stockholder,
after
derivative suit the final recourse of the

Sec 63

TITLE VD. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

611

remedies to obtain the relief sought had failed." (Ago Realty &
Development Corp. vs. Ago, G.R. Nos. 210906 & 211203, October
16, 2019.)
(1) He must make an earnest, not simulated, effort, with the
managing body of the corporation, to induce remedial action on
their part. He must show, if he fails with the directors (or trustees),
that he has made an honest effort to obtain action by the stockholders
as a body in the matter of which he complains.10 (Pascual vs. Del Saz
Orozco, supra, citing Hawes v. Oakland, 14 Otto, 104 U.S. 450, 456.)
(2) A request upon the stockholders as a body to sue has been

required:

(a) where demand upon the directors or officers is excused
as where it would be unavailing to protect the rights of the
stockholders because the officers of whose management or
misconduct a plaintiff stockholder complains of, are in control
of the corporation,11 or
(b) where the subject matter of his complaint is within the
immediate control of the stockholders.
(3) A stockholder need not seek action by the stockholders
as a body, where under the facts he cannot do so or it would be
unreasonable or useless to require it. Thus, if the body of stockholders
has no adequate power or authority to remedy the wrong asserted
by the individual stockholders, an application to it to redress the
wrong before bringing a representative action is unnecessary. (19
Am. Jur. 2d 77-79.)

'•Under the Rules of Procedure in the
this requirement in previous Supreme
Court rulings is not mandatory as exhaustionSEC
of intra-corporate remedies is not included
in the grounds for motion to dismiss an
action or suit before it. (see Sec 1,
"In a case, the Supreme Court ruled out laches, holding "that the Rule VI thereof.)
Board of Directors
under the bylaws of the corporation, had the control of
the affairs of the corporation and it
is not to be expected that the board
would sue its members to recover the sums of money
voted by and for themselves (as compensation).
Thus, under the circumstances, where
the corporation was virtually
from commencing suit against its directors,
laches does not begin to attachimmobilized
against the corporation until the directors cease to be
such." (Central Cooperative Exchange, Inc.
vs. Enciso, 162 SCRA 706 [19881.) Under Secs.
23 and 36(1 ), the directors
or officers have the right to decide whether or not a corporation
should sue. Since they will never be willing to sue themselves, or
impugn their wrongful
or fraudulent decisions,
of the corporation to stockholders are permitted by law to bring an action in the name
hold these directors or officers accountable. (Yu vs. Yukayguan, 589
SCRA 588 (2009); Ang vs. Ang,
699 SCRA 272[2013].)

612

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

ILLUSTRATION:
"In Hi-Yield Realty, Incorporated v. Court of Appeals, et
al., a corporation, through its controlling stockholder and
without authority from its board of directors, entered into loan
obligations that later led to the foreclosure of its property. A
minority stockholder then instituted a petition to annul the
mortgage deeds and the consequent foreclosure sales. The
complaint alleged that the suing minority stockholder had been
excluded from corporate affairs and that attempts between
him and the other stockholders to compromise die case had
failed. Since the board of directors did nothing to rectify the
corporation's questionable transactions, the Court allowed the
institution of the complaint as a derivative suit.

In Gochan v. Young, minority stockholders instituted a
complaint against directors and officers who appropriated for
themselves corporate funds through excessive salaries and
cash advances. It was stated that the capital of the corporation
was impaired, as the firm was prevented from using its own
funds in the conduct of its regular business. The Court held
that the suit was correctly classified as derivative in nature
since the relator-stockholders had clearly alleged injury to
the corporation. The fact that the plaintiffs alleged damage to
themselves in their personal capacities on top of the damage
done to the corporation merely gave rise to an additional
cause of action, but it did not disqualify them from filing a
derivative suit.
In San Miguel Corporation v. Kahn, a significant number
of shares of San Miguel Corporation (SMC) were acquired by
14 other companies. SMC tried to repurchase shares through
its wholly-owned foreign subsidiary, Neptunia Corporation
Limited (Neptunia). However, the shares had been sequestered
by the Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG)
on the ground that they were owned by one of the cronies of
former President Ferdinand E. Marcos. Later, SMC's Board of
Directors passed a resolution assuming Neptunia's liability
for the purchase of the subject shares. The board opined that
there was nothing illegal about the assumption of liability
since Neptunia was wholly-owned by SMC. Subsequently,
Eduardo de los Angeles (De los Angeles), director and minority
stockholder of SMC, brought a derivative suit challenging the
board resolution as constituting an improper use of corporate

Sec. 63

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

613

funds. When the case reached the Court, it was held that De
los Angeles had properly resorted to a derivative suit. It was
of no moment that he owned only 20 SMC shares or that he
was elected to the board of directors by the PCGG. Since the
case concerned the validity of the assumption by SMC of
the indebtedness of Neptunia, a cause of action that indeed
belonged to the former corporation, the Court held that De los
Angeles could maintain the suit on behalf of SMC. (Ago Realty
& Development Corp. vs. Ago, G.R. Nos. 210906 & 211203,
October 16, 2019.)

Reasons given for not allowing direct
individual suit.

The reasons given are:
(1) The universally recognized doctrine that a stockholder in a
corporation has no title, legal or equitable, to the corporate property;
that both of these are in the corporation itself for the benefit of the
stockholders. To allow shareholders to sue separately would conflict
with the separate corporate entity principle;
(2) The prior rights of the creditors may be prejudiced. Thus, the
Supreme Court held in the case of Evangelista vs. Santos, that "the
stockholders may not directly claim those damages for themselves
for that would result in the appropriation by, and the distribution
among them of part of the corporate assets before the dissolution
of the corporation and the liquidation of its debts and liabilities,
something which cannot be legally done;"
(3) The filing of such suits would conflict with the duty of the
management to sue for the protection of all concerned;
(4) It would produce wasteful multiplicity of suits; and
(5) It would involve confusion in ascertaining the effect of
partial recovery by an individual on the damages recoverable by the
corporation for the same act. (Asset Privatization Trust vs. Court of
Appeals, 300 SCRA579 [1998], citing Agbayani, Commercial Law of
the Phils., Vol. HI, p. 566, citing Ballantine, pp. 366-367; see Villamor,
Jr. vs. Umale, 736 SCRA 325 [2014].)

614

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 63

Individual suit explained.
When a wrong is directly inflicted against a shareholder, the
latter can maintain an individual or direct suit in his own name
against the corporation. Stockholder's individual suit is, therefore,
an action brought by a stockholder against the corporation for direct
violation of his contractual rights as such individual stockholder,
such as the right to vote, and to be voted,” the right to share in the
declared dividends, the right to inspect corporate books and records
and similar other examples. (Republic vs. Cuademo, supra; Camboa
vs. Victoriano, supra.)

Authorization from the board of directors of a corporation
is unnecessary where a stockholder is not acting in behalf of the
corporation but in his own personal capacity. (CMH Agricultural
Corporation vs. Court of Appeals, 378 SCRA 545 [2002].) Since the
wrong is done to him personally and not to the other stockholders
(or members) or the corporation, the cause of action belongs to him
alone.
Derivative suit and individual suit
distinguished.
If the injury is one to the plaintiff as a stockholder (or member)
and to him individually, and not to the corporation, as where the
action is based on a contract to which he is a party, or on a right
belonging severally to him, or on a fraud affecting him directly, it is
an individual action.”

On the other hand, if the wrong is inflicted primarily or directly
on the corporation (indirectly upon the stockholders), the redress
for it must be sought by the corporation, unless a derivative action
by a stockholder is allowable, and the stockholder cannot sue as
an individual. The action is derivative, i.e., in the corporate right,

”A complaint for nullification of the election of the members of the board of directors
filed by petitioners who were members thereof before the election, against respondents,
who are the newly elected members, is a direct action. Petitioners are the injured party,
whose right to vote and to be voted upon were directly affected by the election of the new
set of board of directors. (Legaspi Towers, Inc. vs. Muer, 673 SCRA 453 [2012].)
l3Individual suits have likewise been permitted upon a wrong which although
against the corporation, also violates a duty owing directly to the stockholder or member.
(General Rubber Co. v. Benedict, 125 N.Y. 18.) Any recovery by a stockholder in an
individual suit belongs to him.

Sea 63

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

615

if the gravamen of the complaint is injury to the corporation or
to the whole body of its stock or property without any severance
or distribution among individual holders, or if it seeks to recover
assets for the corporation or to prevent the dissipation of its assets.
(13 Fletcher, pp. 367-373; Florete, Jr. vs. Florete, Sr., 781 SCRA 255
[2016].) The reliefs prayed for must pertain to the corporation. If
the action succeeds, the judgment rendered shall be in favor of the
corporation.
Representative suit explained.
When a wrong is committed against a group of stockholders
(such as violation of the rights of preferred stockholders), a
stockholder may sue in behalf of himself and all other stockholders
who are similarly situated to protect stockholders in the group.
This is called a shareholder's representative suit which is a kind of
class action. It saves the persons involved in the action substantial
time and money, (see Villamor, Jr. vs. Umale, 736 SCRA 325 [2014];
Florete, Jr. vs. Florete, Sr., 781 SCRA 255 [2016].)
Thus, suppose a group of stockholders has been denied the right
to vote. On the ground of economy, a stockholder may file a suit
in behalf of himself and all the others because (1) the questions of
law and fact involved are common to all of them and (2) the parties
are so numerous that it is impracticable to bring them all before the
court. (Rule 12, Sec. 13, Rules of Court.) But the right of preemption
(see Sec. 38.), it has been said, is personal to each stockholder; and
while a stockholder may maintain a suit to compel the issuance of
his proportionate share of stock, it has been ruled, nevertheless,
that he may not maintain a representative action on behalf of other
stockholders who are similarly situated. No stockholder has any
right to, or any interest in, the stock to which another is entitled.
(Mathay vs. Consolidated Bank and Trust Co., 58 SCRA 559 [1974].)

A representative suit is also the method used by minority
stockholders to compel the declaration of dividends.

616

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Derivative suit and representative suit

।

Sec. 63

<

distinguished.
A representative suit, strictly speaking, is brought by a person in
his own behalf and on behalf of all similarly situated. A derivative
suit is brought by a person as a representative of another.
A suit by a stockholder (or member) as a representative of the
corporation is a derivative action, although often, and properly,
referred to as a representative suit in the sense that he sues as
a representative of the corporation. However, an action by a
stockholder may be representative and yet not derivative as where
an action is brought by a stockholder as an individual in his own
right but in behalf of himself and other stockholders similarly
situated. (13 Fletcher, pp. 364-365.)

Liabilities of stockholder.
Stock ownership in a corporation carries certain rights. Similarly,
it also places certain liabilities upon the stockholder. These liabilities
may be grouped into:
(1) Liability to the corporation for unpaid subscription (Secs.
66-69.);
(2) Liability to the corporation for interest on unpaid
subscription (Sec. 65.);
(3) Liability to creditors of the corporation on unpaid
subscription (Sec. 59.);
(4) Liability for watered stock (Sec. 64.);
(5) Liability for dividends unlawfully paid (Sec. 42.); and
(6) Liability for failure to create corporation, (see Sec. 10.)
While a stockholder has no personal liability for the debts of
the corporation beyond the amount of his capital investment,
he is personally liable for these obligations. In addition, he may
become personally liable to damages or otherwise for any wrongful
disposition of corporate assets, breaches of fiduciary duties, fraud,
gross negligence, unauthorized acts, violations of law, or improper
use (e.g., to defraud his creditors to escape personal debts) of the
corporate form.

Sec. 64

TITLE VH. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

617

Sec. 64. Liability of Directors for Watered Stocks. — A
director or officer of a corporation who: (a) consents to
the issuance of the stocks for a consideration less that its
par or issued value; (b) consents to the issuance of stocks
for a consideration other than cash, valued in excess of
its fair value; or (c) having knowledge of the insufficient
consideration, does not file a written objection with the
corporate secretary, shall be liable to the corporation or
its creditors, solidarity with the stockholder concerned
for the difference between the value received at the time
of issuance of stock and the par or issued value of the
same. (A)

Meaning of watered stock.

Watered stock is stock issued not in exchange for its equivalent
either in cash or in property, (see Sec. 61.) It includes stock:
(1) issued without consideration (bonus share); or
(2) issued for a consideration other than actual cash, such as
property or services actually rendered, the fair valuation of which is
less than its par or issued value; or
(3) issued as fully paid when the corporation has received a
lesser sum of money than its par or issued value (discount share); or
(4) issued as stock dividend when there are no sufficient
retained earnings or surplus (see Sec. 42.) to justify it.

ILLUSTRATION:
Where the par value of par value shares or the issued value
of no-par value shares is Pl 00 and only P80.00 is paid to the
corporation but the share is issued as fully paid, the share is
considered "watered" or "fictitiously paid-up" to the extent of
P20.00, which is the difference between the consideration paid
and the par value or issued value of the share taken. In such
case, the subscriber is liable for the difference of P20.00.
The issue itself is not void, but the agreement that the
shares shall be paid for less than its par or issued value is illegal
and void and cannot be enforced. (Phil. Trust and Company vs.
Rivera, 44 Phil. 470 (1923].)

618

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 64

Issue of watered stock prohibited.

Section 64 prohibits the issuance of watered stock to protect
persons who may acquire stock and the creditors of the corporation
particularly those who may become such on the faith of its
outstanding capital stock being fully paid. The prohibition secures
equality among subscribers and prevents discriminations against
those who have paid in full the par or issued value of their shares.
(1) As to the corporation, the issuance of watered stock is not
merely ultra vires but is illegal per se as it violates of Section 61. (see
SEC Opinion, June 15, 1987.)
(2) As to creditors, the law makes no distinction between those
who became such prior and after the issuance of watered stock. The
liability attaches whether or not creditors have relied on an over¬
valuation of corporate capital.
(3) As to the SEC, whether or not an issuance would amount to
an issue of watered stock is well within its authority to inquire into in
view of its power and duty to enforce all laws affecting corporations,
(see Securities and Exchange Commission vs. Pimentel, 90 Phil. 702
[1951].)

Sec 64

TITLE VD. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

619

the creditors' right of action to compel the making good of the
representation as to the corporation's capital is based on fraud, and
the trust fund doctrine is only another way of expressing the same
underlying idea. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 250.)

Prohibition refers to original issue.
The prohibition to issue "watered stock" refers only to the
original issue of stocks but not to a subsequent transfer of such
stocks by the corporation, for then it would no longer be an "issue"
but a sale thereof. (Rochelle Roofing Co. v. Burley, [Mass.] 115 N.E.
478.)

Hence, treasury shares may be sold for less than their par or
issued value for they have already been issued and paid for, provided
the price is reasonable. (Sec. 9.) The SEC has opined that if treasury
shares are transferred for a price that is not reasonable, the treasury
shares may still be considered watered stock. (SEC Opinion, July 17,
1984; SEC Opinion, October 1, 1982.) Strictly speaking, the concept
of watered stock applies only to the original issue of shares (and not
to treasury shares).

Liability for watered stock.

Basis or theory of liability.

(2) Constructive fraud upon creditors.
Where the corporation
issues watered stock and assumes an ostensible capitalization in
excess of its real assets, the transaction necessarily involves the
misleading of subsequent creditors, and whether done with that
purpose actually in mind or not, is at least a constructive fraud upon
creditors. Hence, it is held that recovery may be had by a creditor in
such case, even though the corporation itself has no cause of action
against the stockholders.

Under Section 64, not only the corporate creditors but also the
corporation itself or any dissenting stockholder, for and in behalf of
the corporation in case the corporation refuses to claim the difference
not received, can set up the inadequacy of the consideration for the
issuance of stocks. (Pascual vs. Del Saz Orosco, 19 Phil. 83 [1911];
Everett vs. Asia Banking Corp., 49 Phil. 512 [1926].)
(1) Consenting director or officer. The liability of the consenting
director or officer who does not file a written objection for the
"water" in the stock is solidary (see Arts. 1207, 1208, Civil Code; see
Mam Realty Development Corporation vs. NLRC, G.R. No. 114787,
June 2, 1985.) with die participating stockholder. Note that the fair
value of the stock is determined at the time of its issuance so that
the subsequent increase in value of property given as consideration
will not eliminate the "water" in the stock and relieve the director
or officer and stockholder from liability. (Sec. 64.)

(3) Trust fund doctrine.
Some of the earlier decisions put
the right of recovery in such a case upon the so-called "trust
fund doctrine." (see Sec. 40.) In any view of the matter, however,

(2) Subscriber.
In view of the provision of Section 61 that
stocks shall not be issued for a consideration less than the par
issued price thereof," persons to whom watered stock is issued

—

(1) Reliance of creditors upon corporation's ostensible capitalization.
Apart from statute, the view has been taken that one who acquires
stock from a corporation in exchange for property or services at an
over-valuation or at a discount is liable to respond to creditors, upon
the principle that one giving credit to a corporation is entitled to rely
upon its ostensible capitalization as the basis for the credit given.

—

—

—

—

620

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 64

are not only liable to be called upon to contribute, if necessary, for
the benefit of creditors to the extent of the difference between the
amount paid and the par or issued value of the shares but are also
liable for the purpose of adjusting the rights of the stockholders
inter se. (see 11 Fletcher, pp. 679-681.)
(a) The holder of watered stock cannot escape liability by
transferring the same to an irresponsible person or to a bona fide
purchaser.
(b) A creditor cannot, however, recover against a holder
of watered stock fraudulently represented as having been
fully paid unless and until he has been actually injured. He is
interested only in the collection of his debt when due; if it is paid
in full at maturity, he is not injured by any misrepresentation
made with respect to watered stock and, therefore, has no right
of action against those to whom such stock was issued. (19 Am.

Jur. 2d 250.)

—

(3) Subsequent transferee. A transferee of stock in a corporation
occupies the same position as his transferor with respect to the right
to complain of an issue of watered stock, and is, therefore, estopped
to complain if his transferor was estopped. This is true although he
purchased the stock in good faith and in ignorance of the fraudulent
or unlawful issue.1 (11 Fletcher, p. 687.)

—

(4) Transferor or party to the fraud.
In an event, a purchaser
without notice may maintain an action to recover damages sustained
by him, either against the transferor, if the latter knew the character
of the stock, or against the directors or the other officers who issued
the same, or against the corporation itself if it can be regarded as a
party to the fraud. (11 Fletcher, pp. 687-688.)

'There is a contrary view. It holds that a transferee is not liable unless he either was a
party to the transaction in the first instance or has in effect in some manner made himself
a party since. The liability of a holder of watered stock to pay to creditors the difference
between the par value and the amount actually paid is not based upon his relationship to
the corporation as a stockholder but upon a fraudulent transaction. So, a purchaser in the
open market of stock purporting to be fully paid who has no notice that it is in fact not
fully paid, is not liable for the unpaid amount. He cannot be compelled to make good the
false representation as to the capital of the corporation, which he had no part in making
and the responsibility for which he has done nothing to assume. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 254.)

Sec 65

TITLE Vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

621

Sult by the State.
When a corporation is guilty of ultra
(1) Quo warranto.
vires or illegal acts which constitute an injury to or fraud upon the
public or which will tend to injure or defraud the public, the State
may institute quo warranto proceedings to forfeit its charter for the
misuse or abuse of its franchises. The Solicitor General, therefore,
may institute such proceedings to enforce a forfeiture of the charter
of a corporation for an ultra vires, or illegal issue of watered or
fictitiously paid-up stock, and the court will decree forfeiture if
the circumstances are such as to bring the case within the general
principles governing the forfeiture of charters, (see Rules of Court,
Rule 66, Sec. l[c].)

—

—

(2) Injunction.
If a threatened act of a corporation will
constitute a public nuisance, and prompt action is necessary to
prevent injury to the public therefrom, the Solicitor General may
proceed for an injunction. It is perhaps safe to say, however, that this
principle does not authorize a suit by the Solicitor General to enjoin
the issue of watered stock. The State cannot maintain a suit to enjoin
or cancel an issue of watered or fictitiously paid-up stock, where
private rights only will be affected. (11 Fletcher, pp. 670-672; 14 C.J.
457-459.)

—

Sec. 65. Interest on Unpaid Subscriptions. Subscribers
to stocks shall be liable to the corporation for Interest on
all unpaid subscriptions from the date of subscription,
If so required by and at the rate of interest fixed in the
subscription contract. If no rate of interest is fixed In the
subscription contract, the prevailing legal rate shall apply.

(A)

Liability of stockholder for Interest
on unpaid subscriptions.
(1) When liable. While the entire amount on stock subscription
has not been paid, the subscribers are liable to the corporation for
interest from the date of the subscription, but only if so required by
the bylaws or the subscription contract.
Under Section 65, a subscriber is liable to pay interest only "if
so required by and at the rate of interest fixed in the subscription
contract." A mere resolution of the board of directors to that effect

—

622

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 66

would not make thesubscribers liable unless the board is empowered
by the bylaws to charge interest on unpaid subscriptions. But even
if not so required by the bylaws, a delinquent stockholder shall be
liable to pay interest from the date of delinquency, (see Sec. 67.)

—

(2) Rate of interest.
If the rate of interest is fixed in the
contract,
such
rate shall be paid; otherwise, such
then
subscription
the
legal rate. By virtue of Central Bank
rate shall be deemed to be
1974.),
29,
the legal rate was 12% per annum,
Circular No. 416 (July
[the
Usury Law], as amended by P.D. No.
(see Sec. 3, Act No. 2655
116.) It was applicable until June 30, 2013 before the effectivity of
BSP Circular No. 779 which prescribes the new legal rate of interest
at six percent (6%).
(3) Waiver of interest. The corporation may waive the right
to collect interest on the unpaid subscriptions, if it so desires,
because it is a right which could be waived (SEC Opinion, March
11, 1969.) provided that no corporate creditors are prejudiced
by such waiver. But if the payment of interest is required by the
bylaws, waiver may be done only by amending the bylaws. (SEC
Opinion, March 20, 1980.)

—

Sec. 66. Payment of Balance of Subscription. — Subject
to the provisions of the subscription contract, the board
of directors may, at any time declare, due and payable to
the corporation unpaid subscriptions to the capital stock
and may collect the same or such percentage thereof, in
either case with accrued Interest, If any, as It may deem
necessary.
Payment of any unpaid subscription or any percentage
thereof, together with any Interest accrued, shall be made
on the date specified In the subscription contract or on the
date stated in the call made by the board. Failure to pay on
such date shall render the entire balance due and payable
and shall make the stockholder liable for Interest at the
legal rate on such balance, unless a different Interest rate Is
provided In the subscription contract The Interest shall be
computed from the date specified, until full payment of the
subscription. If no payment Is made within thirty (30) days
from the said date, all stocks covered by the subscription

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec 66

623

shall thereupon become delinquent and shall be subject to
sale as hereinafter provided, unless the board of directors
orders otherwise. (A)

Remedies to enforce payment
of stock subscription.

Section 66 applies to a stock corporation's recourse on unpaid
subscription. The remedies are:
(1) Extrajudicial sale at public auction.
This is the first and
most special remedy and it consists in permitting the corporation
to put up unpaid stock for sale and dispose of it for the account of
the delinquent subscribers. In this case, Sections 66 to 68, inclusive,
apply and must be followed, (see Velasco vs. Poizat, 37 Phil. 302
[1917].)

—

A stock becomes delinquent and shall be subject to extrajudicial
sale at public auction, unless the board of directors orders otherwise,
upon failure of the stockholder to pay the unpaid subscription or
balance thereof within the grace period of 30 days from the date
specified in the contract of subscription (without need of prior call
or board action demanding payment) or absent a date fixed in the
contract of subscription, from the date stated in the call made by the
board of directors. The delinquency takes place automatically after
such failure (Sec. 66, par. 2.); and
(2) Judicial action. This other remedy is by court action under
Section 69. The statutory right to sell the subscriber's stock is merely
a remedy in addition to that which proceeds by action in court

—

(Ibid.)

Sections 66 to 69 provide ample remedies for the payment of
stock subscriptions. Hence, reversion of the stock to the corporation
in case of non-payment thereof is contrary to said provisions. (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 29, 1976.) The corporation may, at its discretion,
pursue either remedy (sale of the unpaid stock or action in court),
though not both (4 Fletcher, p. 651; see De Silva vs. Aboitiz & Co., 44
Phil. 755 [1923].); and
(3) Collection from cash dividends and withholding of stock

dividends.

—

This is authorized by Section 42. (infra.)

624

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 66
n

Statutory sanctions on stock delinquency.

—

Under Section 70, a stock
delinquent for unpaid subscription shall not be voted or be entitled
to vote or to representation at any stockholders' meeting, nor entitle
the holder thereof to the rights of a stockholder except the right to
dividends subject to Section 42. At all elections of directors, it is
declared by Section 23 "that no delinquent stock shall be voted."
(1) Rights denied to stockholder.

—

(2) Right given to corporation. The corporation may exercise
these rights with respect to delinquent shares:
(a) Under Section 42, the corporation has the right to first
apply cash dividends due on delinquent stock to the unpaid
balance on the subscription plus cost and expenses, while as
to stock dividends, to withhold the same from the delinquent
stockholder until his unpaid subscription is fully paid. This
right may be exercised by the corporation although it is not pro¬
vided in its bylaws.
(b) Under Section 40, the corporation has the right to pur¬
chase delinquent shares sold during a delinquency sale.
(c) Under Section 63, no certificate of stock shall be is¬
sued to a subscriber until the full amount of the subscription
together with interest and expenses (in case of delinquent
shares), if any is due, has been paid.

Remedies limited to delinquent subscription.
The power or right of corporations to sell shares for the payment
of stockholders' debts should be considered subject to the procedure
laid down in Sections 66 to 68, or enforceable by judicial action as
provided in Section 69. This being so, such power or right is limited
to delinquent subscription and does not extend to any other debt of
stockholders to corporations.

—

To hold that
(1) Obligations other than unpaid subscriptions.
corporations may sell shares of stockholders for the satisfaction of
the latter's debt to the former, would in effect make corporations the
sole judges of the merits of their claims against stockholders and
would deprive the latter of the opportunity to pay the debt before
the sale of stock and of the right to defend themselves and be heard,
and to have the sale of stock made to the highest bidder, substantial

Sec 66

TITLE vn.STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

625

and fundamental proprietary rights that cannot be ignored and set
aside for the advantage and benefit of corporations.
A lien upon stock in
(2) Lien upon stock for said obligations.
favor of corporations for debt or liability of stockholders other than
unpaid subscription due and payable would be an obstacle to the
trading of shares. Before accepting a transfer of corporate shares,
a prospective transferee would have to inquire into unregistered
claims against said shares in favor of the corporation.1 (Bank of P.I.
vs. Caridad Estates, C.A.-G.R. No. 16, Aug. 22, 1939.)

—

Payment of unpaid subscription
or percentage thereof.

—

(1) When to be made. The contract of subscription or the call by
the board of directors, as the case may be, may require the payment
of the entire unpaid subscription or only a certain percentage thereof
on the date specified for payment.
Under Section 66 (par. 2.), the payment of any unpaid
subscription or any percentage thereof, with interest, if any, shall
be made:
(a) on the date specified in the contract of subscription; or
(b) in the absence of any specified date in the contract of
subscription, on the date stated in the call made by the board of
directors.
Section 66 does not give the board of directors absolute power
to make a call for the payment of the unpaid subscription. The first
paragraph of Section 66 succinctly provides that the call for the
payment of the unpaid subscriptions is required only when there is
no fixed date for payment in the contract of subscription; otherwise,
no amount of calls from the board will make the subscription due
and payable until the arrival of the fixed date provided for in the
subscription contract. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 05-16, March 31,

2016.)

A provision creating a lien upon shares of stock for unpaid debts, liabilities, or
assessment of stockholders to the corporation should be embodied in the articles of
incorporation, and not merely in the bylaws, because Sec. 6 (par. 1.) prescribes that the
snares of stock of a corporation "may have such rights, privileges or restrictions as may
be stated in the articles of incorporation." (SEC Opinion, April 13, 1981.) Section 91, dealing
with termination of membership in a nonstock corporation, specifically states that the
manner and causes for such termination shall be provided in the articles of incorporation
or the bylaws.

626

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 66

Calls for the payment of the balance of the subscription may be
made on installment, because the Revised Corporation Code itself
provides that the contract of subscription or the call by the board
of directors, as the case may be, may require the payment of the
entire unpaid subscription or only a certain percentage thereof on the
date specified for payment. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 05-16,2 March
31, 2016.)

—

(2) Effect of failure.
Failure to pay on such date shall render
the entire balance due and payable and make all the stocks covered
by the said subscription delinquent and subject to sale at public
auction.
(a) This means that the delinquent shares shall cover not
only the unpaid portion of the stockholder's subscription but
his entire subscription consistently with the doctrine that a
subscription is one, entire, indivisible, whole contract, (see Sec
63.)
(b) The stockholder shall also be liable for interest at the
legal rate (see Sec. 65.) on such balance, unless a different rate
of interest is provided in the bylaws, computed from such date
until full payment. (Sec. 66, par. 2.)

—

(3) Effect of payment.
Upon fuU payment by the delinquent
stockholder of his unpaid subscription together with accrued
interest, cost, and other expenses, he shall be restored to all the rights
of a stockholder including the right to be issued other certificates of
stock evidencing his subscription.

Call and assessment defined
and distinguished.
(1) A call is a declaration officially made by a corporation
usually expressed in the form of a resolution of the board of directors
requiring the payment of all or a certain prescribed portion of a
subscriber's stock subscription.
(2) The term assessment is used with reference to both paid and
unpaid subscriptions.
(a) As to paid subscriptions, it means a levy made upon the
Stock of a corporation, generally for the purpose of correcting
2

Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 614 [2010).

Sec. 66

TITLE VIL STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

627

an impairment of the capital and indicates the proportionate
amount required to be paid by each stockholder.
(b) With reference to unpaid subscriptions, the term is used
interchangeably with "call" or "installment." (18 Am. Jur. 2d
861.) In the absence of statutory authority, a corporation does
not possess the power to assess fully paid stock. As a rule,
stockholders are not liable beyond the extent of their unpaid
subscriptions. (Ibid., 495.)
Requisites for a valid call.

The requisites for a valid call are intended to safeguard the
rights of stockholders. These requisites are:
(1) It must be made in the manner prescribed by law;
(2) It must be made by the board of directors; and
(3) It must operate uniformly and equally upon all the

shareholders.’
Thus, a call made only upon some of the subscribers will be void.
Power of board of directors to make call.
(1) As to date of payment. The board of directors may at any
time declare due and payable unpaid subscriptions. (Sec. 66, par. 1.)
(a) This power of the directors is no longer absolute as it
can be limited by the subscription contract (Ibid.), such that
the directors may not disregard the amount to be paid and the
period for payment fixed in the subscription contract and make

—

a call earlier.
(b) The board of directors may make a call "anytime"
only where no date is specified in the contract of subscription;
otherwise, the balance shall be payable on a date or dates fixed
in the contract without need of call.
’It has been held that a call made upon some of the subscribers is void (Seybreth
v. American Commander Min. & Mill. Co., Idaho 254.) or which requires some to pay
a higher rate than the others. (Great Western Peleg. Co. v. Bumham, 79 Wis. 47.) A call
cannot be of such a character as to permit the directors to practice favoritism or act
oppressively. (North Milwaukee Town Site Co. v. Bishop, 103 Wis. 492.) The call cannot
operate on stock which has not been subscribed at the time the call is made. Hence,
a subscriber is not liable for calls made prior to his subscription. It is not, however,
a
defense that the corporate liability which necessitates the call was incurred prior to the
subscriber becoming the owner of the stock. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 867.)

628

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 66

—

Such
(2) As to necessarily, wisdom, or advisability of call.
call,
the
within
power
if
a
of
case
in
any
particular
question arising
of the board of directors to make.
(a) The matter is to be determined by the directors and their
motive or judgment is not open to attack by the stockholders if
it is in good faith and for the purpose of the corporation, (see
Nashua Savings Bank v. Anglo-American Land Mortgage &
Agency Co., 189 U.S. 240.)
(b) The directors need not even show that the call is made
for a corporate purpose or that the business of the corporation
requires it to be made and paid. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 864-865.)
(c) Unless required by the articles of incorporation, a call by
the board of directors does not need stockholders' approval.

Necessity and purpose of call.
(1) The necessity for calls depends upon the contract of
subscription, (see Sec. 66, par. 1.)
A call is necessary when required by the subscription agreement.
no
time is fixed for payment in the agreement, the subscription
If
is payable only upon call by the board of directors which may be
made "at any time" as the board may decide. The date specified in
the board resolution is the date of the call for payment of unpaid
subscription, not the date approving the resolution.4
(2) The amount that may be called also depends upon the terms
of the contract.
In the absence of provisions as to the percentage of the unpaid
subscription that shall be paid, the board may call for payment in
full or at one time, in such amounts as it may see fit to call. The
purpose, therefore, of a call is to fix the time of payment of unpaid
subscription and the percentage thereof to be paid when they are
not fixed in the subscription contract.

♦The word "caU," according to an English case, is capable of three (3) meanings. It
may either mean the resolution, or its notification, or the time when it becomes payable.
(SBC Opinion, Aug. 31, 1995.)

Sec. 66

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

629

When call unnecessary.
(1) When insolvency supervenes upon a corporation, the
payment of stock subscription may be enforced without the necessity
of a prior call.
(2) The same is true where the subscriber becomes insolvent. (4
Fletcher, p. 689; Velasco vs. Poizat, 37 Phil. 802 [1917].)
(3) Also, no call is necessary to fix the subscriber's liability when
the subscription is payable not upon call or demand by the directors
but immediately or on a specified day on or before a specified day,
or when it is payable in installments at specified times.
In any such case, it is the duty of the subscriber to pay the
subscription or installment thereof as soon as it is due, without any
call or demand, and if he fails to do so, an action may be brought at
any time (Miranda vs. Tarlac Rice Mill Co., 57 Phil. 619 [1932].) after
the expiration of the 30-day grace period from the specified date for
payment, (see Sec. 60, par. 2.)

Payment without call.
A stockholder can pay his subscribed shares of
stock even if
there is no call for the payment.5
The subscription contract creates a creditor-debtor
between the corporation and the subscriber. As such relationship
debtor, the
subscriber can pay his unpaid subscription any time as to
discharge
his obligation. The corporation, as creditor, cannot
a
refuse
tender of payment offered to it. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 12, 1989.) valid

Necessity of notice of call.
(1) Where call is necessary,
notice must be
to the
stockholder concerned. A call without notice to thegiven
subscriber
is
practically no call. (Pike v. Dangar Co., Short Line R.R., 68
Me. 445.)
(2) The notice is regarded
as a condition precedent to the right
of recovery. It must, therefore,
be alleged and proved to maintain
’A stockholder who voluntarily
remits an amount in excess of the
call
directors cannot ask for a refund of such excess paymentpercentage
payment
because

by the board of

once
is accepted
and any reduction by the corporation, it becomes part of the assets of the corporation
thereof
violates
(now
Sec
16
Sec. 42 part of Secs. 13, 61, and 64.) of the
Corporation Law. (SEC Opinion,
April 7, 1972, SEC Bulletin, Oct. 1982, p. 89.)

630

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 67

an action for the call. (Baltazar vs. Lingayen Gulf Electric Power
Co., Inc., 14 SCRA 522 [1965].) Thus, an obligation arising from
non-payment of stock subscriptions to a corporation cannot be set¬
benefits) due an
off against the money claim (i.e., wages and other
is without
set-off
Such
employee against the corporation-employer.
unpaid
of
payment
the
for
lawful basis. Absent notice of call
vs.
(Apodaca
payable.4
and
due
subscriptions, the same is not yet
[1989].)
442
SCRA
Commission,
172
National Labor Relations
(3) The right to notice of call, however, may be waived by the
subscriber.

—

Sec. 67. Delinquency Sale. The board of directors may,
by resolution, order the sale of delinquent stock and shall
specifically state the amount due on each subscription
plus all accrued interest, and the date, time and place of
the sale which shall not be less than thirty (30) days nor
more than sixty (60) days from the date the stocks become
delinquent.
Notice of the sale, with a copy of the resolution, shall
be sent to every delinquent stockholder either personally,
by registered mail, or through other means provided In
the bylaws. The same shall be published once a week
for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation In the province or city where the principal office
of the corporation is located.
Unless the delinquent stockholder pays to the
corporation, on or before the date specified for the sale
of the delinquent stock, the balance due on the former's
subscription, plus accrued Interest, costs of advertisement
and expenses of sale, or unless the board of directors
otherwise orders, said delinquent stock shall be sold at
public auction to such bidder who shall offer to pay the
full amount of the balance on the subscription together
with accrued Interest, cost of advertisement and expenses
of sale, for the smallest number of shares or fraction of a
share. The stock so purchased shall be transferred to such
‘Furthermore, such deduction is not allowed by Sec. 113 of the Labor Code which
allows a deduction from wages of the employee only in three (3) instances mentioned

therein. (Ibid.)

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

Sec. 67

631

purchaser in the books of the corporation and a certificate
for such stock shall be issued in the purchaser’s favor. The
remaining shares, if any, shall be credited in favor of the
delinquent stockholder who shall likewise be entitled to
the Issuance of a certificate of stock covering such shares.
Should there be no bidder at the public auction
who offers to pay the full amount of the balance on the
subscription together with accrued interest, costs of
advertisement and expenses of sale, for the smallest
number of shares or fraction of a share, the corporation
may, subject to the provisions of this Code, bid for the
same, and the total amount due shall be credited as fully
paid in the books of the corporation. Title to all the shares
of stock covered by the subscription shall be vested in the
corporation as treasury shares and may be disposed of by
said corporation In accordance with the provisions of this
Code.

Procedure for the sale of delinquent

,

stocks.

,

Briefly, the procedure is:
(1) Resolution declaring unpaid subscriptions
payable. The board
of directors passes a resolution declaring payable the
whole or a
certain percentage of the unpaid subscriptions stating the
for payment. If the date for payment is specified in the date fixed
contract of
subscription, no call is necessary. (See Sec. 66, par. 1.)
(2) Notice to stockholders of resolution.
The stockholders are
given notice of the resolution by the
secretary of the corporation.
The publication of the notice of call is not
required.
(a) If the stockholders do not pay
within 30
date specified in the contract of subscription days from the
or on the date
stated in the call made by the board, all the stocks
the subscription shall become delinquent and be covered by
subject to sale.
(b) Conversely, unpaid shares
which are not delinquent are
not subject to sale. (See Sec. 70.) In view
of
the board of directors orders otherwise," the proviso "unless
the board may order the removal of thein Section 66 (par. 2.),
delinquent status of
unpaid

—

—

subscription.

632

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 67

(c) The moment the unpaid subscription becomes
delinquent, its delinquent status remains for as long as the
stockholder does not pay in full his subscription, unless the
board orders otherwise. Hence, subsequent call is unnecessary.
But if the stock, after a postponement of its sale, will again be
subjected to delinquency sale, the manner required by Section
67 for the notice of delinquency sale must be observed. (SEC
Opinion, Sept. 30, 1991.)

—

The board of
(3) Resolution ordering sale of delinquent stocks.
stocks,
delinquent
the
of
sales
the
directors, by resolution, orders
with
of
sale
time,
and
place
date,
the
stating the amount due and
registered
by
personally,
either
notice to the delinquent stockholders
mail, or through other means provided in the bylaws. The notice
must be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the province or city where the
principal office of the corporation is located. (Sec. 67, pars. 1, 2.)
The requirements as regards notice and publication are
mandatory, not only to assure notice to all subscribers, but also to
assure equality and uniformity of assessments on stockholders.
(Lingayen Gulf Electric Power Co., Inc. vs. Baltazar, 93 Phil. 404

—

[1953].)
(4) Notice and publication of delinquent sale. The phrase "unless
the board of directors otherwise orders" (par. 3.) means that the
board of directors may order the extension of the time and date of
sale. However, if the prescribed 60-day period shall be extended,
notice of such extension must be again served and published in the
same manner required by law for the notice of delinquency sale.
(SEC Opinion, Sept. 30, 1991.)
On the date of the sale, the
(5) Sale of delinquent stocks.
auction to the bidder h who
public
at
sold
will
be
stock
delinquent
will pay the full amount due on subscription, with the accrued
interest, costs of advertisement and expenses of sale, for the smallest
number of shares or fraction of a share. (Sec. 67, par. 3.)

—

(a) Unless there was an agreement beforehand that the
dividendsearned by the delinquent stock before the delinquency
sale was effected shall inure to the winning bidder, the sale
belong to the delinquent stockholder. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 12,
1980.)

Sec 67

' '

633

TITLE VII STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

(b) Section 67 provides no limit as to the number of times
that unpaid subscription may be auctioned. (SEC Opinion No.
15-10, April 23, 2010.)
(c) Strict compliance with the formalities of sale is necessary,
the power to make the sale being merely granted by law and
an extraordinary one. (4 Fletcher, p. 670.) Unless the delinquent
shares are sold in accordance with Section 67, the stockholder
remains the owner of the same.
(6) Issuance of stock certificate and recording in books.
In a
delinquency sale, a certificate of stock shall be issued to the successful
bidder if the full amount of the bid price, with interest and expenses,
has been paid at the time of the sale. The stock so purchased shall
be transferred to such purchaser in the books of the corporation and
a certificate for such stock shall be issued in his favor. A stockholder
has the right to have proper certificate issued to him as soon as he
has complied with the conditions (i.e., full payment of the bid price
and expenses) which entitled him. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 09-16,
April 26, 2016.)

—

Meaning of highest bidder.
The highest bidder is the person offering at the sale to pay the full
amount of the balance on the subscription with accrued interest, if any,
cost of advertisement' and expenses of sale, for the smallest
number
of shares or fraction of a share. (Sec. 67, par. 3; see
SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 09-16, April 26, 2016.) In other words, the "highest bidder"
in
delinquent sale is not necessarily the offerer of the highest bid buta
the bidder who will pay the full amount of the
unpaid balance on
the subscription. Thus, the subscriber cannot incur
deficiency
liability because the highest bid must not be lessany
than the full
amount due.

Only the number of shares which the bidder is willing to
buy
shall be transferred to the highest bidder.

ILLUSTRATION:
Suppose X subscribed five shares of stock with a par value
of P100 each, paying P300 as his
initial payment. The balance
'Art. 1325. Unless it appears otherwise, business
advertisements of things for sale
are not definite offers,
but mere invitations to make an offer, (n)

I
634

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 67

of P200 was called in. X failed to pay; hence, his stock was
declared delinquent. The interest, expenses, and cost of sale
amount to P50.00, making a total of P250. A, B, and C are the
bidders.
A offers to pay P250 for two (2) shares, B, P250 for three (3)
shares and C, P250 for four (4) shares. Here, A is the highest
bidder; X retains three (3) shares and A will own two (2) shares.
All the five (5) shares will be deemed fully paid. A is entitled
to issuance, after payment of his bid, of a certificate of stock for
two (2) shares and X, for the remaining three (3) shares.
But B is the highest bidder if the bids are: A, P200 for two
(2) shares; B, P250 for four (4) shares; and C, P240 for three (3)
shares. Here, X retains one (1) share. B is still the highest bidder
if his bid is P250 for five (5) shares because he is the only one
who offers to pay the full amount due. Here, all payments
made by X on his subscription are deemed forfeited.

Right of corporation to reject highest
bid.
Under Section 67 (par. 2.), the delinquent stock shall be sold to
the highest bidder "unless the board of directors otherwise orders."
This means that the board is not bound to accept the highest bid
unless the contrary appears. The reason is that in a public sale, the
corporation is not making the offer to sell. In reality, the bidder is
the one making the offer to purchase which the corporation is free
to accept or reject.
Under Article 1326 of the Civil Code, it is provided that
"advertisements for bidders are simply invitations to make
proposals, and the advertiser is not bound to accept the highest or
lowest bidder, unless the contrary appears."

Purchase by the corporation of delinquent
stock.
In the absence of bidders (or the highest bidder), the corporation
may bid for the delinquent stock and purchase for itself the
delinquent stock.
(1) In such case, the delinquent subscriber shall also be released
from liability with regard to his subscription which is deemed fully
paid, for "the total amount due shall be credited as paid in full in the

67

. TITLE VIL STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

635

books of the corporation." (Ibid., last par.) Of course, the purchase
by the corporation must be made out of net earnings in view of the
trust fund doctrine, (see Sec. 40[b].)
(2) Title to all the shares purchased covered by the subscription
shall be vested in the corporation as treasury shares and may be
disposed of by the corporation for reasonable price fixed by the
board of directors, (see Sec. 67, last par.)
Forfeiture of delinquent stock not authorized.
Forfeiture of delinquent stock, without the corporation paying
for it under Section 67, is not authorized under the Revised
Corporation Code. Accordingly, if there is no bidder after complying
with all legal requirements in the sale of delinquent shares under
Section 67, the corporation cannot forfeit in its favor delinquent
share to be taken up in the corporation's books as treasury shares.
However, the corporation can sue in court to recover unpaid
subscriptions under Section 69.

Shares to be sold in case of delinquency.

The unpaid subscription must be paid by the subscriber
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the subscription contract
with the corporation. Where the subscription contract fails to fix the
time and amount to be paid, the same may be fixed in the notice of
call pursuant to a resolution of the board of directors.
The corporation is allowed two (2) alternatives in applying
payments made by subscribers on their subscriptions, (see
Sec. 63.)
(1) All the shares subscribed. If it applies the
partial payments
pro rata to each and all the entire number of shares
subscribed
for, all the shares are unpaid and are
covered by a declaration of
delinquency; hence, can be sold at public auction. Even if the partial
payment is applied to some of the shares but for
which no certificates
of stocks have been issued, the entire
subscription (i.e., all the shares
subscribed) shall become delinquent and shall be subject
to sale at
public auction. (Sec. 65, par. 2.)
The reason is that a subscription is "one, entire
whole contract" as set forth in Section 63. Thus, where and indivisible
the stockholder
subscribed 100 shares at P10.00 par value, and paid P200,
case of
elinquency, all the 100 shares covered by his subscriptioninshall
be
subject to sale.

—

636

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 68

—

Nevertheless, if allowed by its
(2) Only the unpaid shares.
bylaws a corporation may issue certificates of stock corresponding
to partial payments made on account subscriptions. If the unpaid
portion for which no certificates of stock have been issued is declared
delinquent, only the unpaid shares covered by the declaration can
be sold at public auction. (Baltazar vs. Lingayen Gulf Electric Co., 14
SCRA 522 [1965]; see however, Sec. 63.)
Sec. 68. When Sale May Be Questioned.

— No action
upon

to recover delinquent stock sold can be sustained
the ground of irregularity or defect in the notice of sale, or
in the sale itself of the delinquent stock, unless the party
seeking to maintain such action first pays or tenders to the
party holding the stock the sum for which the same was
sold, with interest from the date of sale at the legal rate. No
such action shall be maintained unless a complaint is filed
within six (6) months from the date of sale. (A)

Recovery of stock unlawfully sold.

—

(1) Grounds.
The grounds to recover stock unlawfully sold
for delinquency are:
(a) irregularity or defect in the notice of sale; and
(b) irregularity or defect in the sale itself of the delinquent

stock.
Irregularity or defect in the call for unpaid subscription or in the
notice of delinquency is no longer included among the grounds for
questioning the sale.
(2) Requirements for maintaining action.
Under Section 68,
the action to recover stock unlawfully sold may be maintained,
provided:
(a) "the party seeking to maintain such action first pays or
tenders to the party holding the stock the sum for which the
same was sold, with interest from the date of sale at the legal
rate"; and
(b) such action "shall be maintained unless a complaint is
filed within six (6) months from the date of sale."
The owner of stock lawfully sold at public auction for
delinquency is not given the right of redemption.

—

Sec 69

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

637

—

(3) Delinquent stock. Section 68 refers to unpaid subscription
to capital stock, the sale of which is governed by Section 67. These

provisions cannot be applied where the stock was fully paid.

Instead, Article 1140 of the Civil Code on filing within eight (8) years
of action to recover movables (in this case share of stock) applies.
(Calatagan Golf Club, Inc. vs. Clemente, Jr., 585 SCRA 300 [2009].)

—

Sec. 69. Court Action to Recover Unpaid Subscription.
Nothing In this Code shall prevent the corporation from
collecting through court action, the amount due on any
unpaid subscription, with accrued interest, costs and
expenses. (A)

Judicial remedy to recover unpaid
subscription.

—

(1) Necessity of prior call.
The statutory authority to recover
unpaid subscription including pre-incorporation subscription (see
Sec. 60.) through judicial action is found in Section 69. As a rule, a
corporation may not maintain a suit to enforce unpaid subscription
without first making a call as provided by law. (see Sec. 66; see Art.

1169, Civil Code.)
(2) Prescriptive period.

—

The judicial action to recover unpaid
subscription based on a written subscription contract must be
brought within 10 years from the time the right of action accrues
(Art. 1144[1], Civil Code.); or within six (6)
years if based on a verbal
subscription contract. (Art. 1145[1], ibid.)
Generally, the prescriptive period begins from the date demand
is made of the subscriber by the corporation to
pay the balance of
the subscription, (see Garcia vs. Suarez, 67 Phil. 441 [1959];
see also
Art. 1169, Civil Code.)
(3) Amount recoverable. The judicial
remedy is limited to
amount due on any unpaid subscription with accrued interest, "the
costs
and expenses." Therefore, the
corporation cannot recover any other
claim against the subscriber. The foregoing is also true in
case of
the extrajudicial sale at public auction of
(Sec.
delinquent
shares.
67,
par. 3.)'

—

'The question is now only of academic interest. The Securities Regulation
52, R.A. No. 8799.)
transferred jurisdiction to decide cases involvmg intracorporate
disputes to courts ofhas
general jurisdiction.

638

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 70

—

No delinquent stock
Sec. 70. Effect of Delinquency.
or to be represented
vote,
to
for,
be
entitled
voted
be
shall
at any stockholders' meeting, nor shall the holder thereof
be entitled to any of the rights of a stockholder except
the right to dividends in accordance with the provisions
of this Code, until and unless payment is made by the
holder of such delinquent stock for the amount due on
the subscription with accrued Interest, and the costs and
expenses of advertisement, if any. (A)
.

•!

Sec 70

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

639

(5) A delinquent stockholder shall not be entitled to the rights
of a stockholder but he shall still be entitled to receive dividends,
subject to Section 42 which restricts the right to dividends by
requiring that the cash dividends due shall first be applied to the
unpaid balance while stock dividends shall be withheld until the
unpaid balance is fully paid.
(6) Delinquent stocks shall be subject to delinquency sale as
provided by Section 67.

.

Effects of stock delinquency.
(1) Stock delinquency shall deprive the stockholder the right
to be voted for or be entitled to vote or to representation at any
stockholders' meeting as provided above and in Section 23.
Section 66 (par. 2.) provides that the delinquent stockholder
loses his rights pertaining to a stockholder the moment the unpaid
subscription becomes delinquent. Thus, the prohibition to vote
applies even if the delinquent status of the unpaid subscription
occurs after the record date has been fixed. (SEC Opinion, March
13, 1998.)
(2) The delinquency affects the entire subscription based on the
doctrine that a subscription contract is one, entire, and indivisible,
as provided in paragraph 2 of Section 66. If the auction is successful,
the corporation must issue a certificate of stock covering the entire

subscription and not only for the unpaid portion of the subscription.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-10, April 23, 2010.)
(3) Notice of stockholders' meetings need not be given to
delinquent stockholders. Notice need be given only to each
stockholder entitled to vote at the meeting, or those entitled to be
present. Under Section 70, no delinquent stock shall be voted or be
entitled to vote or to representation at any stockholders' meeting.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 27-10, Aug. 27, 2010.)

Delinquent stock is not to be included in determining the
existence of a quorum, (see SEC Opinion dated March 13, 1998; SECOGC Opinion No. 25-14, Sept. 4, 2014; but see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 15-10, April 23, 2010.)
(4) Quo warranto proceedings may be instituted against directors
elected by delinquent stockholders. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 8, 1976.)

Denial of voting rights.

—

(1) Stock delinquency.
Delinquent stock is denied voting
rights because, if it shall be allowed to have the same rights as
nondelinquent stock, stockholders of good standing will cease to
have interest in paying their subscriptions promptly, and that will
be inimical to the best interest of the corporation. To rule otherwise
would, in effect, also allow delinquent shares to vote and would
tolerate continuance of the delinquency status of the subscription
since the delinquent stockholder would have no more interest
in
paying the unpaid balance. (SEC Opinion, March 13, 1998.) The same
observation applies with respect to payment of dues by members of
nonstock corporations, (see Ibid.) But delinquent members may
still
be allowed to vote depending upon their bylaws.1 (SEC
Opinion,
April 8, 1976.)

—

(2) Mismanagement not sufficient ground.
corporation refused to count the votes by a

In a case, the
stockholder in a
stockholder's meeting maintaining that she had forfeited her
right to vote because she had mismanaged the
corporation, had
attempted to sell her stock in violation of the corporate
charter, and
the sheriff had seized her stock for
non-payment debts. The court
held that none of these matters were sufficient
grounds to deny her
of the right to vote her shares.
The other stockholders had recourse
against her in other ways such as a suit for
violation of her duties to
the corporation and to the stockholders. (Foreman
v. Hines, 314 So.
2d 460 [Ct. App. La. 1975].)

'See SEC Opinion, March 10, 1987 under Sec. 46.

640

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 71

Sec. 71. Rights of Unpaid Shares, Nondelincuent, —
Holders of subscribed shares not fully paid which are not
delinquent shall have all the rights of a stockholder.

Rights of unpaid shares.

—

Before unpaid shares become
considered to have violated any
not
thereof
is
delinquent, the holder
and,
a rule, he has all the rights of a
as
contract with the corporation
stockholder, which rights include the right to vote and to participate
in dividends based on his total subscription.
(a) Such rights commence from the time his subscription is
accepted by the corporation or if the offer to subscribe is made
by the corporation, from the time such offer is accepted by
the subscriber. However, he is liable for interest on his unpaid
subscription if so required by the bylaws. (Sec. 65.)
(b) Under Section 71, full payment of subscription is not
required to make one a stockholder.
(c) Where the subscription contract is subject to a suspensive
condition of full payment, a subscriber is not entitled to the rights
of a regular stockholder before the fulfillment of the condition.
(d) Where the consideration for the shares subscribed is
other than cash, the valuation thereof shall be subject to approval
by the SEC. (see Sec. 61.) This means that before such approval,
the subscriber cannot exercise the rights of a stockholder.
(1) Before delinquency.

—

The moment the unpaid subscription
(2) After delinquency.
loses the right to vote the shares
holder
the
becomes delinquent,
(see
Sec. 70.)
subscription,
entire
covering the
(a) Section 66 (par. 2.) states when an unpaid subscription
is considered delinquent. In nonstock corporations, whether or
not a delinquent member is still entitled to exercise his voting
rights to be determined by the articles of incorporation and the

bylaws.
(b) Where partial payment on a subscription is applied as

full payment for the corresponding number of shares for which
the subscriber is issued certificates of stock, a call for payment
of the unpaid portion of the subscription and its subsequent
declaration of delinquency will not affect the fully paid-up stock

Sec 72

TITLE vn. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

641

but only the unpaid shares for which no certificates of stock
have been issued. (Baltazar vs. Lingayen Gulf Electric Co., 14
SCRA 522 [1965]; see, however, Sec. 63, note 31.)
Sec. 72. Lost or Destroyed Certificates. — The following
procedure shall be followed by a corporation In issuing
new certificates of stock in lieu of those which have been
lost, stolen or destroyed:
(a) The registered owner of a certificate of stock In a
corporation or such person’s legal representative shall file
with the corporation an affidavit in triplicate setting forth, If
possible, the circumstances as to how the certificate was
lost, stolen or destroyed, the number of shares represented
by certificate, the serial number of the certificate and the
name of the corporation which issued the same. The owner
of such certificate of stocks shall also submit such other
Information and evidence necessary; and
(b) After verifying the affidavit and other information
and evidence with the books of the corporation, the
corporation shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the place where the corporation has its
principal office, once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks
at the expense of the registered owner of the certificate of
stock which has been lost, stolen or destroyed. The notice
shall state the name of the corporation, the name of the
registered owner the serial number of the certificate, the
number of shares represented by such certificate, and
shall state that after the expiration of one (1) year from
the date of the last publication, if no contest has been
presented to the corporation regarding the
certificate
of stock, the right to make such contest shall be barred
and the corporation shall cancel the lost, destroyed
or
stolen certificate of stock in Its books. In lieu thereof, the
corporation shall Issue a new certificate of stock,
unless
the registered owner files a bond or other security as
may
be required, effective for a period of one (1) year, for
such
amount and in such form and with such sureties as may
be satisfactory to the board of directors, in which
case a

new certificate may be Issued even before the expiration
of the one (1) year period provided
herein. If a contest

642

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 72

has been presented to the corporation or if an action Is
pending in court regarding the ownership of the certificate
of stock which has been lost, stolen or destroyed, the
issuance of the new certificate of stock in lieu thereof
shall be suspended until the court renders a final decision
regarding the ownership of the certificate of stock which
has been lost, stolen or destroyed. (A)
Except in case of fraud, bad faith, or negligence on the
part of the corporation and its officers, no action may be
brought against any corporation which shall have issued
certificate of stock in lieu of those lost, stolen or destroyed
pursuant to the procedure above-described.

Lost, stolen, or destroyed stock

certificates.
Section 72 prescribes the procedure to be followed for the
issuance by a corporation of new certificate^) in lieu of those which
have been lost, stolen, or destroyed.
(1) The provision of Section 72(2) regarding notice of loss
is mandatory. The conditions prescribed are for the protection of
the corporation which cannot be made liable to any claimant of
the shares until the procedure provided for has been complied
with. Thus, all the facts required to be stated should be included
in the notice. However, a corporation may adopt a "notice of loss"
which need not follow the exact letters of the law as long as there is
substantial compliance. (SEC Opinion, July 12, 1993.)
(2) The corporation is not liable to any person prejudiced by
the issuance of new certificate(s) of stock pursuant to the procedure
described except in case of fraud, bad faith, or negligence on the part
of the corporation and its officers, (par. 2.) New certificates issued
because of misinterpretation of the registered owner are invalid,
(see Red Grange Estate Co., Inc. vs. Board of Liquidators, 104 SCRA
963 [1978].)
(3) Whether or not a corporation is bound to replace a
stockholder's certificate is intra-corporate, even if there is a prayer
for damages for the question of damages is merely incidental to the
main issue. (Philex Mining Corporation vs. Reyes, 118 SCRA 602
[1982]; see Sec. 177.)

72

TITLE VII. STOCKS AND STOCKHOLDERS

643

(4) The expenses attendant to the issuance of a replacement
certificate shall be borne by the registered owner unless fault can be
attributed to the corporation or its officers.

When publication requirement may
be dispensed with.
(1) Instances.
The procedure prescribed in Section 72 is not
applicable (a) in a proceeding to compel issuance of a certificate
to one in whose favor none was ever issued by the corporation
where upon the facts, the certificate was lost by the corporation;
(b) when the stock and transfer book has been lost or destroyed,
and the corporation decides to issue new certificates of stock in lieu
of the old certificates held by existing stockholders, the procedure
or formalities prescribed under Section 72 are not applicable, for
the stockholder should not be made to suffer the consequences on
account of the negligence of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 12,
1994.)

—

While the provision of Section 72 appears to be mandatory, the
same admits exceptions, such that a corporation may voluntarily
issue a new certificate in lieu of the original certificate of stock
which has been lost without complying with the requirements
under Section 72 of the Revised Corporation Code, provided that
the corporation is certain as to the real owner of the share to whom
the new certificate shall be issued. It is within the prerogative of
the corporation to determine whether, under the circumstances
surrounding the situation, there is a necessity to impose the
conditions and requirements laid down under Section 72, and if
it finds that compliance therewith is unnecessary, it would
be an
internal matter for the corporation to find measures in ascertaining
who are the real owners of stock to whom the new certificates shall
be issued. (SEC Opinion, May 27, 1996.)
A corporation may voluntarily issue a new certificate of stock
in place of an original
certificate which has been lost or destroyed
and it can be compelled to issue a new certificate
without any
indemnity; and (d) where, upon the facts, it is reasonably certain
that the original certificate will not reappear;
1) as where there is clear proof that the
original had been
destroyed, or

I
644

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 72

2) where the certificate was lost by the corporation itself by
carelessness, or
3) if the corporation was otherwise protected, for in such

case the corporation could incur no liability by reason of the
original certificate. (SEC Opinion, May 27, 1996; SEC Opinions,

Jan. 8, 1990 and June 11, 1990, citing 11 Fletcher, Sec. 5180.)

The SEC has opined that the publication requirements under
Section 72 of the Corporation Code of the Philippines can be legally
dispensed with in the case of a lost certificate covering only a
nominal share worth Pl 0.00 considering the cost of publication visa-vis the value of the lost certificate of stock. (SEC Opinion, June
11, 1990; see also SEC Opinion, January 8, 1990; but see, however,
SEC Opinion dated March 29, 1990 to the effect that the publication
requirement cannot be dispensed with.)

—

(2) Amount of bond. The board of directors is given the power
to determine the bond to be filed by the owner of lost, stolen, or
destroyed certificate of stock so that a new certificate may be issued
before the expiration of the one-year period provided in the bond.
(a) Considering the nature of a bond, which is to protect the
corporation against loss or damage from any source growing
out of the issuance of the duplicate certificate including liability
to the holder of the original certificate to innocent holders of
certificates based on the duplicate (11 Fletcher, p. 510.), it is the
board of directors that can best determine the form and the
identity of the surety, the kind of surety bond and the amount
sufficient for the protection of the corporation. (SEC Opinion,
April 1, 1987.)

(b) It has been said that the amount will depend upon the
rights sought to be exercised by the stockholder who seeks
issuance of a new stock certificate. The bond posted should be
in an amount adequate to protect the corporation against any
loss sustained. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 796.)

— oOo —

Title VIII

CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

—

Sec. 73. Books to be Kept; Stock Transfer Agent.
Every corporation shall keep and carefully preserve aLiiS
principal office all information relating to the corporation
Including, but not limited to:

(a) The articles of incorporation and bylaws of the
corporation and all their amendments;
(b) The current ownership structure and voting
rights of the corporation, including lists of stockholders
or members, group structures, intra-group relations,
ownership data, and beneficial ownership;
(c) The names and addresses of all the members of the
board of directors or trustees and the executive officers;
(d) A record of all business transactions;

(e) A record of the resolutions of the board of directors
or trustees and of the stockholders or members;

(f) Copies of the latest reportorial requirements
submitted to the Commission; (N, from [a] to [f]); and

(g) The minutes of all meetings of stockholders or
members, or of the board of directors or trustees. Such
minutes shall set forth in detail, among others; the time
and place of the meeting held, how It was authorized, the
notice given, the agenda therefor, whether the meeting was
regular or special, its object if special, those present and
absent, and every act done or ordered done at the meeting.
Upon the demand of a director, trustee, stockholder or
member, the time when any director, trustee, stockholder
or member entered or left the meeting must be noted In
the minutes; and on a similar demand, the yeas and nay
must be taken on any motion or proposition, and a record
645

646

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 73

thereof carefully made. The protest of director, trustee,
stockholder or member on any action or proposed action
must be recorded in full upon their demand. (A)
Corporate records, regardless of the form in which
they are stored, shall be open to inspection by any director,
trustee, stockholder or member of the corporation in
person or by a representative at reasonable hours on
business davs, and a demand in writing mav be made by
such director, trustee or stockholder at their expense, for
copies of such records or excerpts from said records,
TheJnspecting or reproducing party shall remain bound
bv confidentiality rules under prevailing laws, such as the
rules on trade secrets or processes under Republic Act
No, 8293, otherwise known as the “Intellectual Property
Code of the Philippines." as amended. Republic Act No,
10173, otherwise known as the "Data Privacy Act of 2012."
Republic Act No, 8799, otherwise known as “The Securities
Regulation Code.” and the Rules of CourtA requesting party who is not a stockholder or member
of record, or is a competitor, director, officer, controlling
stockholder or otherwise represents the interests of
a competitor shall have no right to inspect or demand
reproduction of corporate records. (N)

73

TITLE VIII. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

647

refusal: Provided, further, That it shall be a defense to any
action under this section that the person demanding to
examine and copy excerpts from the corporation's records
and minutes has improperly used any information secured
through any prior examination of the records or minutes of
such corporation or of any other corporation, or was not
acting in good faith or for a legitimate purpose in making
the demand to examine or reproduce corporate records, or
is a competitor, director, officer, controlling stockholder or
otherwise represents the interest of a competitor.
If the corporation denies or does not act on a demand
for inspection and/or reproduction, the aggrieved party
may report such denial or inaction to the Commission.
Within five (5) days from receipt of such report, the
Commission shall conduct a summary investigation and
Issue an order directing the inspection or reproduction
of the requested records. (N)

Any stockholder who shall abuse the rights granted
under this section shall be penalized under Section 158 of
this Code, without prejudice to the provisions of Republic
Act No. 8293, otherwise known as the “Intellectual Property
Code of the Philippines,” as amended, and Republic Act
No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Act of
2012." (N)

Stock corporations must also keep a stock and
transfer book, which shall contain a record of all stocks
In the names of the stockholders alphabetically arranged;
the installments paid and unpaid on all stocks for which
subscription has been made, and the date of payment of
any installment; a statement of every alienation, sale or
transfer of stock made, the date thereof, by and to whom
made; and such other entries as the bylaws may prescribe.
The stock and transfer book shall be kept in the principal
office of the corporation or In the office of its stock transfer
agent and shall be open for inspection bv any director or
stockholder of the corporation at reasonable hours on
business days. (A)

Any officer or agent of the corporation who shall refuse
to allow the, inspection and/or reproduction of records
In accordance with the provisions of this Code shall be
liable to such director, trustee, stockholder or member
for damages, and in addition, shall be guilty of an offense
which shall be punishable under Section 161 of this Code:
Provided, That if such refusal Is made pursuant to a
resolution or order of the board of directors or trustees,
the liability under this section for such action shall be
Imposed upon the directors or trustee who voted for such

A stock transfer agent or one engaged principally in
the business of registering transfers of stocks in behalf
of a stock corporation shall be allowed to operate in the
Philippines upon securing a license from the Commission
and the payment of a fee to be fixed by the Commission,
which shall be renewable annually: Provided, That a
stock corporation is not precluded from performing or
making transfers of its own stocks, in which case all the
rules and regulations imposed on stock transfer agents,
except the payment of a license fee herein provided, shall

648

Sec. 73

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

be applicable: (A) Provided, further. That the Commission

mav require stock corporations which transfer and/or
trade stocks in secondary markets to have an Independent
transfer aaent.

Sec. 73

TITLE VW CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

649

Code and the Labor Code. They may also keep such optional records
and subsidiary books as the needs of their business may require.
Requirements of keeping books mandatory.

Books and records to be kept
by corporations.

—

(1) Under the Revised Corporation Code. Section 73 deals with the
records every private corporation is required to keep and carefully
preserve at its principal office.1 It requires every corporation, stock
or nonstock, to keep books and records containing all information
relating to the corporation including, but not limited to, the matters
enumerated in Section 73 (a) to (g).

The "records of all business transactions" would include the
journal, ledger, financial statements, income tax returns, vouchers,
receipts, contracts and all papers pertaining to the operation of the
corporation of the interest to its stockholders. (SEC Opinion, March
15, 1991.) The minutes of board meetings should be signed by the
corporate secretary. Without such signature, neither probative
value nor credibility could be accorded such minutes. (Union of
Supervisors [R.B.]-NATU vs. Secretary of Labor, 109 SCRA 139
[1981].) The minutes of all meetings shall set forth in detail all,
among others, the information mentioned in Section 73, par. 1[g].)
(2) Under special laws.
In addition, corporations must keep
other books and records required by special laws like the Public
Service Act, the General Banking Law, the National Internal Revenue

—

'The proper custodian of the books, minutes and official record of a corporation is
usually the corporate secretary. Being the custodian of corporate records, the corporate
secretary has the duty to record and prepare the minutes of the meeting. The signature of
the corporate secretary gives the minutes of the meeting probative value. (Lopez Realty
Inc. vs. Tanjangco, 739 SCRA 644 [2014).) Without the signature of the board secretary,
the alleged minutes of a board meeting taken by a mere clerk, although it was part of
the latter's duties to take down stenographic notes of the discussions in board meetings,
have neither probative value nor credibility. (Union of Supervisors [R.B.] NATU vs.
Secretary of Labor, 109 SCRA 139 [1981].)
The minutes are a brief statement not only of what transpired at a meeting, usually
of stockholders/members or directors /trustees, but also at meeting of an executive
committee. The minutes are kept in a book especially designed for that purpose, but they
may also be kept in the form of memoranda or in any other manner in which they can be
Identified as minutes of a meeting. (People vs. Dumlao, 580 SCRA 409 [2009], citing the
Corporation Code of the Phils. Annotated [1994] by R.N. Lopez, Vol. 2, p. 871.)

—

The language of Section 73 imposing upon corporations the
duty of keeping books and records is imperative and mandatory.
(1) Place where books to be kept. All the books and records must
be kept at the principal office of the corporation (par. 1.), except that
the stock and transfer book may be kept in the principal office of the
corporation or in the office of its stock transfer agents,2 if one has
been appointed by the corporation, (par. 7.) A corporation which
has been dissolved must continue to preserve them until the final
settlement and liquidation of its affairs.

—

—

(2) Practical necessity of keeping books.
Aside from this legal
duty, corporations are under the practical duty imposed by necessity
and convenience of keeping adequate books and records, if for no
other reason than because it is advisable as a measure of precaution,
’Essentially, a clearing house is an agent of the stock exchange and its members, and
the transfer agent is an arm or agent of an issuer corporation listed on the exchange and
its members. If the jobs of the auditor, clearing house, and transfer agent are lodged in
one and same person, all measures of checks and balances become ineffective, conflicts of
interest may come into play, and laxity in the proper performance of each work will not
be remote. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 29, 1971.)
A transfer agent may, in addition to keeping the current stock and transfers book,
keep the stockholders' ledger, in which case he prepares a list of stockholders for the use
of the corporation whenever needed for the payment of dividends, the issue of stock
warrants, stockholders' meetings, and other corporate purposes. He may also distribute
the dividends, warrants, and so forth. (E.L. Kohler, op. at., p. 472.)
In addition to the records required to be maintained pursuant to Sec 74, RSA Rule
40-5 requires every transfer agent to make and retain for a period of five (5) years these
books and records relating to its transfer agent activities:
(1) its rules and procedures;
(2) policy of financial institution bond coverage;
(3) exception reports filed with the SEC under RSA Rule 40-3;
(4) complaint log as required to be maintained under RSA Rule 40-3;
(5) reports to the issuers for whom the firm acts as transfer agent as required
under RSA Rule 40-3; and
(6) annual report on SEC Form 40-AR.
Every transfer agent shall make available any or all of its books and records upon
request of an authorized representative of the SEC. Failure to do so shall result in an
unmediate suspension of the transfer agents registration. Such suspension shall continue
until such time as the books and records are made available to the SEC. (For rules on
registration of and reports from clearing agencies and transfer agents, see RSA Rules

650

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 73

expediency and convenience, since they provide the only certain
and accurate method of establishing the various corporate acts and
transactions and of showing the ownership of the stock and like
matters? (see SEC Opinion, Feb. 19, 1975, citing 5 Fletcher, p. 509.)
Entries to be made in stock
and transfer book.
Stock corporations must keep a "stock and transfer book" in
which must be kept a record of all stocks containing the entries
required by Section 73 to be made and such as other entries as the
bylaws may prescribe? (par. 7.) The book is the official record of all
stockholders, their status, and their corresponding stockholdings in

the corporation.
The stock and transfer book is the quintessential record of
all stockholders and their corresponding stockholdings in the
corporation. Thus, the stock and transfer book is considered the
best evidence to prove the status of a person as a stockholder of
corporation. However, the same is not conclusive in nature to prove
one's stockholdings. Only if the stock and transfer book is lost or
destroyed should the corporation resort to gathering extrinsic
evidence or parol evidence of stock ownership following the general
rules on the presentation of secondary evidence. Should the stock
and transfer book be lost or destroyed, other pieces of evidence
such as but not limited to the latest general information sheet of
the corporation, or the certificate of stock may be presented to
substantiate one's claim as a stockholder of a corporation. (SECOGC Opinion No. 51-19, Oct. 11, 2019; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 3-15,
July 3, 2015.)
(1) Transfer contemplated to be recorded.
The "alienation, sale,
or transfer of stock" that is supposed to be recorded in the stock and
transfer book as contemplated in Section 73 (par. 7.) refers generally
to shares which may be alienated, and they are those covered by
certificates of stock (Nava vs. Peer Marketing Corp., 74 SCRA 65
[1970]; see Sec. 62, par. 2.) Only absolute transfers of shares of stock
are required to be recorded in the stock and transfer book in order to

—

’Lanuza vs. Court of Appeals, 454 SCRA 54 (2005), ddng De Leon, The Corporation
Code oj the Philippines Annotated, p. 606 (1999).
‘Both the Revised Rules of Court and the Revised Corporation Code do not require
annotation on the stock and transfer books for the attachment of the shares of stock to be
valid and binding on the corporation and third party, (see Chemphil Export and Import
vs. Court of Appeals, 251 SCRA 257 [1995].)

Sec 73

651

TITLE Vin. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

have force and effect as against third persons. Attachment of shares
are not considered "transfer". (Ferrero Chemicals, Inc. vs. Garcia,
804 SCRA 528 [2016].)
As a rule, only those whose ownership of stock is duly recorded
or registered in the stocks and transfer book are considered
as stockholders of record and are entitled to all the rights of a

stockholder.

—

(2) Where failure to make entry attributable to the corporation.
Where a stockholder in good faith sells his stock does all that he
believes is necessary to effect a transfer and requests the corporate
officers having charge of the books, to do all that is necessary to
that end, he is released from statutory liability, if any, to creditors.
(Braken v. Nicol, 124 Ky. 628, L.R.A. [N.S.] 818.)
Generally, the sale of shares is ineffectual against the claims of
attaching creditors of the vendor until transferred to the vendee
on the books. The rule is otherwise when the failure to make the
transfer is attributable only to the corporation and its officers, (see
Fisher, op. cit., pp. 150-151.) Neither the transferor nor transferee can
be adversely affected by the failure to make an entry of the transfer
on the books of the corporation. (Earle v. Carson, 188 U.S. 42, 44; 47
L. ed. 373.)
The corporate secretary is under obligation to record in the
stock and transfer book any and all alienation involving the shares
of stocks of the corporation as mandated by Section 73. (Ferro
Chemicals, Inc. vs. Garcia, G.R. Nos. 168134, 168183 & 168196,
October 5, 2016.)

—

(3) Entry where stockholder unknown or cannot be located. Where
the stockholder is unknown or cannot be identified or located (see
Sec. 139, par. 3.), a trust relation is impliedly created between the
corporation and the unknown stockholder. In such case, his shares
of stock shall be entered in the corporate books and in the certificate
of stock in the name of the corporation as "trustee."
The corporation shall continue to hold the stock in a fiduciary
capacity, until the real owner appears or the stock is escheated in
accordance with law. (SEC Opinions, Dec. 1, 1988; July 13, 1993.)
(4) Entry made without Certificate Authoring Registration.
Section 11 of Revenue Regulations No. 06-08, as clarified by
Revenue Memorandum Circular No. 37-2012 requiring the issuance
of a Certificate Authorizing Registration (CAR). It states:

—

652

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 73

—

"Section 11. Effect of Non-Payment of Tax. No sale, exchange,
transfer or similar transaction intended to convey ownership of,
or title to any share of stock shall be registered in the books of the
corporation unless the receipts of payment of the tax herein imposed
is filed with and recorded by the stock transfer agent of secretary
of the corporation. It shall be the duty of the aforesaid persons to
inform the Bureau of Internal Revenue in case of non-payment of
tax. Any stock transfer agent or secretary of the corporation of the
stockbroker, who caused the registration of transfer of ownership
or title on any share of stock in violation of the aforementioned
requirements shall be punished in accordance with the provisions
of Title X, Chapters I and II of the Tax Code, as amended."

The SEC has opined that ". .. the above-quoted provides that the
recording of sales and transfer of shares of stock in the STH without
presenting or submitting the CAR from the BIR to the corporate
secretary or other transfer agent is not valid. Hence, in the same
vein, to be proof of being a stockholder of record, the presentation of
documents evidencing sales and transfer of shares of stocks should
be made together with the CAR." (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-15,
July 3, 2015.)
Beneficial ownership transparency guidelines.

To prevent the misuses of corporations for illicit activities
through measures designed to promote transparency of beneficial
ownership, the SEC issued SEC Memorandum Circular No. 1-21,
which imposed these requirements.
(1) Beneficial ownership as part of corporate records.
All
corporations registered with the SEC shall keep and preserve in its
principal office adequate, timely, and accurate information relating
to its beneficial owner or owners to be identified in the manner
provided for in SEC Memorandum Circular No. 15, Series of 2019
or any amendments thereof.
The information on beneficial ownership is adequate when the
corporation has the complete names, specific residential addresses,
dates of birth, nationalities, tax identification numbers, if any, and
percentage of ownership, if applicable, of all its beneficial owners.

—

TITLE vm. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

Sec. 73

653

It is timely if the beneficial ownership information or any
change thereto is promptly reflected on record within three (3) days
from the time the information becomes available or is reasonably
expected to be available to the corporation with the exercise of due
diligence.
It is accurate if the information is correct in all its details.
A beneficial owner is a natural person or persons who ultimately
owns or controls or exercises ultimate effective control over the
corporation as defined and required to be disclosed in the general
information sheet pursuant to SEC Memorandum Circular No. 15,
Series of 2019 or any amendment thereto.5 (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 0121, January 27, 2021.)

—

(2) Prohibition Against the Issuance/Sale/Public Offering of Bearer
Shares/Bearer Share Warrants.
No person or entity shall issue,
sell or offer for sale or distribution bearer shares and bearer share

warrants.

The term "bearer shares" refers to equity securities owned by
the person or entity that holds the physical certificate which enables
the transfer of ownership of shares of stock by mere delivery of
such certificate. It shall likewise refer to instruments that accord
ownership in a juridical person to the person or entity who possesses
or is the holder of the bearer share certificate.
The term "bearer share warrant" refers to a document certifying
that the bearer is entitled to a certain amount of the fully paid shares
of stock of a corporation
(3) Disclosure and Recording of the Alienation, Sale, or Transfer of
Shares. Except as provided for under any of the rules of the SEC,
the alienation, sale, or transfer of shares of stock, the date thereof,
by whom and to whom made, shall be disclosed and recorded in
the stock and transfer nook of the issuing corporation within thirty
(30) days from date of such alienation, sale, or transfer,
subject to
compliance with the requirements for the recording or registration
of transfers under applicable regulations. Unless thus
disclosed

—

’See Appendix G: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 15-19 (Amendment of SEC Memorandum

No. 17, Series of 2018 on the Revision of the General Information Sheet (GIS) to
J-lrcular
include Beneficial Ownership Information).

654

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 73

and recorded, the same shall not bind the issuer. No transfer or
assignment of ownership or rights over shares of stock shall be
effective unless the name of the transferee /purchaser /assignee
is properly indicated and said transferee /purchaser /assignee is
properly identified and the transaction is recorded in the stock
and transfer nook or the appropriate registry book of the issuing
corporation.
Sales or transfers of shares of publicly-listed companies through
the facilities of the Philippine Stock Exchange are not covered by
this requirement, without prejudice to the requirement to disclose
beneficial ownership information in the GIS which shall remain
applicable to all registered corporations as well as the disclosure
of beneficial ownership of shares in accordance with pertinent
provisions of the 2015 implementing rules and regulations of the
Securities Regulation Code
(4) Payment of Dividends.

—

Except for dividend payments made
by publicly-listed companies to the PCD Nominee or any similar
entity authorized to act as depository and custodian of shares for
purposes of trading in the stock exchange and operating under the
same rules, no dividends shall be paid to any person or entity unless
his/her/its name appears in the records of the corporation as the
owner of the shares of stack for which dividends are being paid.
(5) Mandatory Disclosure of the Person on Whose Behalf the
Corporation is Registered and the Nominators/Principals of Nominee
Incorporators/First Directors/Trustees and Shareholders of Corporations
Applying for Registration.
Except as otherwise provided under
existing laws, rules, and regulations, the incorporators of a
corporation shall disclose to the SEC, within thirty (30) days from
the issuance of the company's certificate of registration, the person
or persons on whose behalf the registration of the corporation was
applied for. Nominee incorporators or applicants for registration, as
well as the nominee directors/ trustees and nominee shareholders
of the applicant corporation shall in the same manner disclose to
the SEC their respective principals or nominators. The disclosure
shall include the full names, country of residence, nationality, and
tax identification numbers (TIN), or in the absence of such TIN, the
passport numbers of their nominators or principals and the person
on whose behalf the corporation was registered. Otherwise, they
shall submit to the SEC a declaration within the same period that

—

Sec. 73

TITLE Vin. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

655

they are not nominee incorporators /nominee applicants /nominee
directors /nominee subscribers, if such be the fact, and that they are
not acting as such for and on behalf of another person.
(6) Mandatory Disclosure of Nominators/Principals/Persons on
Whose Behalf One Acts as Director/Trustee/ Shareholder of Existing
Except as otherwise provided by law, rules and
Corporations.
regulations, nominee shareholders as well as nominee directors/
trustees of registered corporations shall disclose to the SEC their
nominators and principals or persons on whose behalf they act
as such shareholders /directors /trustees. Such information shall
likewise be disclosed to the corporation in which they are or act
as nominee shareholders or directors/ trustees. The disclosure shall
include the full names, country of residence, nationality, and tax
identification numbers, or in the absence of such TIN, the passport
numbers of their nominators or principals. If the nominator or
principal is a corporation, the registered name of the corporation,
its country of registration, names of its incorporators and directors,
its beneficial owner, its TIN, if any, shall in the same manner
be disclosed. If the nominator or principal is a trust, the names,
nationality and country of residence, and TIN or passport number
of the trustor /s, trustee /s and beneficiary /ies of the trust shall in
like manner be disclosed. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 01-21, January 27,
2021.)

—

Beneficial ownership of foreign corporations.
The requirement of disclosure of beneficial ownership applies to
SEC-registered foreign corporations, both stock and nonstock.
(a) If after due notice and hearing, the SEC finds that the
reporting foreign corporation failed to disclose, without any lawful
cause, its beneficial owner, it shall be penalized in accordance with
Section 11 (i) of SEC Memorandum Circular No. 15, Series of 2019.
(b) If the SEC, after due notice and hearing, finds that the
resident agent, country or regional head of the reporting corporation,
without any lawful cause, failed to exercise the due diligence
required in ensuring compliance with the requirement to disclose
beneficial ownership information resulting in no beneficial owner(s)
being timely disclosed in the general information sheet or in the
non-submission of the general information sheet containing such

656

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 73

information within the prescribed period, they shall be penalized in
accordance with Section 11 (ii) of SEC Memorandum Circular No.
15, Series of 2019. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 30-20, October 13, 2020.)
Books and records, and entries therein
as evidence.

The records of a private corporation, even those required to be
kept by statute, are not in any sense public records. They are merely
private records, and as such, subject to the general rules of evidence
applicable to documentary evidence.

—

(1) Probative value.
It is generally held, however, that the
records and minutes of a corporation are not conclusive even
against the corporation, but are prima facie evidence only of the
matters recorded therein. Thus, parole or extrinsic evidence may be
admitted to supply omissions in the records or explain ambiguities,
or to show what transpired where no records were kept, and
according to some cases, to contradict such records.

Corporations are not bound by false and simulated entries on
their records unless, knowing them to be such, they have neglected
to correct them and some innocent third person has relied thereon
to his prejudice. (Ibid.)
(2) Resort to other documents.
The quorum is based on the
totality of the shares subscribed and issued, whether it be founders
shares or common shares, (see Secs. 51, 173.) The stock and transfer
book cannot be the sole basis for determining the quorum as it
does not reflect the totality of shares subscribed, more so when the
articles of incorporation show a larger amount of shares issued and
outstanding as compared to that listed in the stock and transfer
book. This is one instance where resort to documents other than the
stock and transfer book is necessary.
One who is actively a stockholder cannot be denied his right to
vote by the corporation merely because the corporate officers failed
to keep its records accurately. A contrary rule would work injustice
to the owners and/or successors in interest of the shares. (Lanuza
vs. Court of Appeals, 454 SCRA 54 [2005].)

—

Sec. 73

TITLE VUI. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

657

Persons given/not given the right to Inspect
corporate books.
While the right of inspection of corporate books is granted as a
matter of precedent or practice in other jurisdictions, it is recognized
by express provision of our corporation law.
(1) Any director, trustee, or stockholder or member.
Section 73
states that "corporate records, regardless of the form in which they
are stated shall be open to the inspection of any director, trustee, or
stockholder or member of the corporation, or by a representative
at reasonable hours on business days." (par. 2.) The right to inspect
is granted to all stockholders since Section 73 has not required any
specific amount of interest for the exercise of the right to inspect.
(Terelay Investment and Development Corporation vs. Yulo, 765
SCRA 1 [2015].)

—

If the trustee's only link to the corporation is the trusteeship
agreement between him and the owner of the stock over which
the trust agreement is executed, then upon the revocation by the
trustor, or upon expiry of the trust agreement, and its recording
in the corporate books, the connection between the trustee and
the corporation is severed, and the trustee's rights as regards the
corporation ceases to exist. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 29-11, June 8,

2011.)

—

(2) Voting trust certificate holder. The word "stockholder,"
as used in Section 73, means not only a stockholder of record; it
includes a voting trust certificate holder who has become merely the
equitable owner of the shares transferred, (see Sec. 58, par. 3.)
(3) Stockholder of a sequestered company.
Pursuant to said
provision, a stockholder of a sequestered corporation retains the
right to inspect and/or examine the records of the corporation.
The act of sequestration of property does not import or bring
about a divestment of title over the property. In relation to the
property sequestered, frozen or provisionally taken over, the
sequestrating authority is a conservator, not an owner. (Republic
vs. Sandiganbayan, 199 SCRA 39 [1991]; Africa vs. Presidential
Commission on Good Government, 205 SCRA 39 [1992].)
(4) Beneficial/legal owner of shares.
While not provided
expressly in Section 73, a beneficial owner of shares (e.g., buyer
from record owner), pledgee, or judgment debtor may also be given
the right of inspection, within the parameters of Sections 73
and 74
provided his interest is clearly established by
evidence. A trustee of
shares of stock under a trusteeship agreement has also the right to

—

—

658

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 73

inspect corporate books but this right shall cease upon revocation
by the trustor or upon expiration of the trust agreement.
(5) Requesting party, not a stockholder, etc. A requesting party
who is not a stockholder or member of record, or is a competitor,
director, officer, controlling stockholder or otherwise represents its
interests of a competitor shall have no right to inspect or demand
reproduction of corporate records. (Sec. 73, par. 3.)
A stockholder who shall abuse the rights granted under Section
73 shall be penalized under Section 158 without prejudice to the
provision of the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines (R.A.
No. 8293, as amended.) and the Data Privacy Act. (R.A. No. 10173.)

—

Remedies and sanctions to
enforce right.

—

(1) Grounds. Under SEC rules,6 these grounds are violations
of the right to inspect and/or reproduce corporate records:
(a) Outright refusal to allow the director, trustee, stockhold¬
er, or member of the corporation to inspect any of the corporate
records in person, or by a representative;
(b) Failure to take, within a reasonable amount of time, the
necessary steps that would allow the director, trustee, stock¬
holder, or member of the corporation to inspect any of the cor¬
porate records in person, or by a representative;
(c) Failure to give the director, trustee, stockholder, or mem¬
ber a reasonable amount of time to inspect any of the corporate
records in person, or by a representative;
(d) Outright refusal to allow the director, trustee, stock¬
holder, or member of the corporation to reproduce any of the
corporate records in person, or by a representative, at his/her
own expense;
(e) Failure to take, within a reasonable amount of time, the
necessary steps that would allow the director, trustee, stock¬
holder, or member of the corporation to reproduce any of the
corporate records in person, or by a representative, at his/her
own expense; or
6

See Appendix H: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 25-20, August 20, 2020 (Guidelines in the
Filing, Investigation, and Resolution of Complaints for Violation of the Right to Inspect
and/or Reproduce Corporate Records).

Sec. 73

TITLE VUI. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

659

(f) Failure to give the director, trustee, stockholder, or mem¬
ber a reasonable amount of time to reproduce any of the corpo¬
rate records in person, or by a representative, at his/her own
expense. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 25-20, [August 20, 2020])

—

(2) Filing of verified complaint with the SEC.
An aggrieved
party may file a report, in the form of a Verified Complaint, with the
Company Registration and Monitoring Department ("CRMD"), or
any of the Extension Offices of the SEC, if a corporation, or any of its
officers or agents, denies or does not act on a demand for inspection
and/or reproduction of corporate records. (SEC Memo. Circ. No.
25-20, August 20, 2020.)

—

(3) Civil and criminal liability.
Under Section 73 (par. 5.),
any officer or agent of the corporation who shall refuse to allow
any director, trustee, stockholder or member of the corporation to
examine and copy excerpts from its records or minutes, in accordance
with the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code/ shall be liable
to such director, etc. for damages, and, in addition, shall be guilty
of an offense which shall be punishable under Section 161 of the
Revised Corporation Code. However, if such refused is pursuant to a
resolution or order of the board of directors or trustees, the liability
for such action shall be imposed upon the directors or trustees who
voted for such refusal.

Basis and purpose of right to inspect
corporate books.

—

(1) Beneficial ownership of corporate assets. The right to inspect
corporate books and records is a right personal to each stockholder
or member. Those in charge of the corporation are merely the
stockholders' or members' agents concerning whose good faith
in discharging their duties the stockholders or members have an
interest and right to be informed. (5 Fletcher, p. 571.)
The stockholder's right of inspection of the corporation's books
and records is based upon his ownership of shares in the corporation
and the necessity for self-protection. After all, a shareholder has
the right to be intelligently informed about corporate affairs. Such
AU the rights guaranteed to corporators under Sec. 73 are mandatory
for the
corporation to respect. There is no cogent reason why Sec. 144 (now
Sec. 158.) cannot be
to apply to violations of other rights of a stockholder or member
granted under Sec.

~a^c(Yujuico vs. Quiambao, 724 SCRA 262 (2014].)

660

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 73

right rests upon the stockholder's underlying ownership of the
corporation's assets and property. (Puno vs. Puno Enterprises, Inc.,
G.R. No. 177066, September 11, 2009.)
(a) The law is based on the principle that the stockholders
or members have a right to be fully informed as to the condition

of the corporation, in the manner its affairs are conducted,
and how its capital stock to which they have contributed is
employed and managed. (SEC Opinion, April 29, 1970, citing
Stone v. Kellog, 46 N.E. 22.)
(b) The right of stockholders to inspect the books of the
corporation rests on the fact of beneficial ownership of the
corporate property and assets through ownership of shares. With
reference to his right of inspection, the relation of a stockholder
to the corporation is analogous to that of a partner to the firm.
(18 Am. Jur. 2d 710; Art. 1803, Civil Code.)
(c) The right is predicated not only upon being stockholders
in the corporation and ownership of the corporation's assets but
also ownership of the corporations' assets but also upon the
necessity of self-protection. (Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and
Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA 336 [1979].)

(d) The stockholders' right to inspect corporate records
subsists during the period of liquidation of the corporation
during which it shall continue as a body corporate. (Sec. 139.)
Liabilities incurred by corporate officers are not removed or
impaired by the subsequent dissolution of the corporation.
(Chua vs. People, 801 SCRA 436 [2016].)

(2) Protection of stockholders and general public from mismanagement,
fraud, and other wrongful acts. There is no question that stockholders
are entitled to inspect the books and records of a corporation to
investigate the conduct of the management, determine the financial
condition of the corporation, and generally take an account of the
stewardship of the officers and directors. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 718.)
(a) The evident purpose of the law in granting stockholders
the right is to protect small and minority stockholders from
the power of the majority and from mismanagement by its
officers and to ascertain, establish, and maintain their rights
and intelligently perform their corporate duties. (SEC Opinion,
April 29, 1970, citing Stone v. Kellog, 46 N.E. 22.)

—

Sec 73

TITLE Vin. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

661

(b) It has also been stated that the purpose of the law
which requires corporations to keep books of account and gives
stockholders the right to examine the records of their corporation
is not only to protect the interests of stockholders but also to
protect the public from monopolies, unlawful combinations,

and unreasonable exactions from corporations. (Ibid., p. 710.)
Right to inspection not absolute.
There are limitations on the right which can be set up by way of
defense in actions filed under Section 73.
(1) Purpose of inspection.
The stockholder's (or member's)
right of inspection is given to him as such and must be exercised
by him with respect to his interest as a stockholder and for some
purpose germane thereto (such as where the purpose is to find
out the actual financial condition of the corporation and how his
investment is being used) or in the interest of the corporation, (see
Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 89 SCRA
336 [1979].) The right can only be exercised for a legitimate purpose.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-16, October 5, 2016.)
(a) Ground for denial of right. The right should be denied
on the ground that "the person demanding to examine and
copy excerpts from the corporation's records and minutes

—

—

has improperly used information secured through any prior
examination of the records or minutes of such corporation or
of any other corporation, or was not acting in good faith or
for a legitimate purpose in making his demand to examine
or reproduce corporate records, or is a competitor, director,
officer, controlling stockholder or otherwise represents the
interests of a competitor" (Sec. 74, par. 3.), or has an ulterior
purpose or improper ends prejudicial to the corporation (Acufia
v. Parlatone, [C.A.] O.G. Suppl., Oct. 17, 1941, p. 28.), such as
where the purpose is merely to gratify his curiosity or for a
speculative use. (Gutherie v. Harkness, 199 U.S. 148.) However,

the right of the shareholder to inspect the books and records of
the corporation should not be made subject to the condition of
showing any particular dispute or proving any mismanagement
or other occasion rendering an examination proper. (Terelay
Investment & Development Corp. vs. Yulo, 765 SCRA1 [2015].)

662

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 73

—

(b) Burden of proof that purpose is illegitimate or improper.
On the application for mandamus to enforce the right, it is proper
for the court to inquire into and consider the stockholder's
good faith and his purpose and motives in seeking inspection.’
(Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, supra,
citing 5 Fletcher, p. 716.) The presumption is that the purpose of
the stockholder or member is legitimate or proper (i.e., related to
his being a stockholder).
Once the stockholder alleges a proper purpose (e.g., to determine
the worth of a shareholder's holding, to seek reasons for a decline
in profits, to ascertain whether there has been mismanagement or
anomalous transactions, or any purpose reasonably relevant to
the shareholder's interest), the burden of proving otherwise, by

way of defense, rests on the corporation which refuses to grant the
right of inspection, (see Republic vs. Sandiganbayan, 199 SCRA
39 [1991]; see Ping Wee vs. Lee Hiong Wee, 629 SCRA 145 [2010];
Philippine Associated Smelting and Refining Corporation vs. Lim,
804 SCRA 600 [2016].) He may, therefore, demand an examination
of the corporate books and records without disclosing his reasons.’
(7 R.C.L. 326.) In a criminal complaint for violation of Section 73, the
*To ascertain the value of petitioner's shares for sale is generally regarded as a proper
motive. It is frequently combined with a purpose to inquire into and possibly initiate
litigation with respect to mismanagement. (Gothrie v. Harkness, 199 ILS. 148 (19051.)
Mandamus has been denied, however, where the corporation alleged that the petitioner's
purpose was to bring groundless suits in order to force the corporation or its principal
shareholder to purchase his shares. (State ex rel. Linihan v. United Brokerage Co., 101
A433 (Del. Sup. Ct 1917], dted in W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on Corporations, 1969
Ed., p. 1022.)
’In a case, however, the Supreme Court ruled: "Although the petitioner has claimed
that he has justifiable motives in seeking the inspection of the books of the respondent
bank, he has not set forth the reasons and the purposes for which he desires such
inspection, except to satisfy himself as to the truth of the published reports regarding
certain transactions entered into by the respondent bank and to inquire into their validity.
The circumstances under which he acquired one share of stock in the respondent bank
purposely to exercise the right of inspection do not argue in favor of his good faith
purposely to argue in favor of his good faith and proper motivation. Admittedly, he
sought to be a stockholder in order to pry into transactions entered into by respondent
bank even before he became a stockholder. His obvious purpose was to arm himself with
materials which he can use against the respondent bank for acts done by the latter when
the petitioner was a total stranger to the same. He could have been impelled by a laudable
sense of dvic consciousness, but it could not be said that his purpose is germane to his
interest as a stockholder." (Gonzales vs. Philippine National Bank, 122 SCRA 490 [1983].)

Sec. 73

TITLE Vm. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

663

defense of improper user or motive is in the nature of a justifying
circumstance that could exonerate those who raise and are able to
prove the same. (Ang-Abaya vs. Ang, 573 SCRA 129 [2008].)
(2) Penalty for violation.
Under the old Corporation Code,
an officer or agent of the corporation who unjustifiably refuses
the right of inspection may be punished by imprisonment (see old
Corporation Code, secs. 74, 144.) Under the Revised Corporation
Code, violation is penalized by a fine, (see Secs. 73, 161.)
(3) Books of foreign corporation. The right does not
apply where
the corporation is not organized under the Philippine law as in such
a case, the right of the stockholder is governed by the inspection
requirements in the jurisdiction in which the foreign corporation
was organized. (Philpotts vs. Phil. Manufacturing Co., 40 Phil. 471
[1919]; Grey vs. Insular Lumber Co., 67 Phil. 139 [1939]; see Sec,
129.)
(4) Confidentiality rules/trade secrets.
The inspecting or
reproducing party shall remain bound by confidentiality rules under
prevailing laws, such as the rules on trade secrets or processes, (see
Sec. 73, par. 2.)

—

—

—

There are some things which a corporation may
undoubtedly
keep secret notwithstanding the right of inspection
stockholders, as where a corporation, engaged in the given to
business of
manufacture has acquired a formula or process not generally
known,
which has proved of utility in the manufacture of its
products. The
corporation or its board of directors may
for the protection of such process from properly adopt measures
publicity. (Philpotts vs. Phil.

Manufacturing Co., supra.)

—

(5) Certified copies of minutes.
A
any absolute right to secure certified stockholder does not have
copies of the minutes of the
corporation until these minutes have been
written up and approved
by the directors. (Veraguth v. Isabela
Sugar Co., 52 Phil. 266 [1928].)
(6) Place of inspection. The
Corporation Code requires
every stock corporation to keep Revised
its stock and transfer books in the
principal office of the corporation or in the office
of its stock transfer
agent. (Sec. 73, par. 7.)
By implication, such books can only be
inspected at such office.

—

664

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 73

—

(7) Reasonable regulations re inspection. The right of inspection
is subject to regulation as to time, place, and proper purpose which

the corporation through the bylaws may prescribe, provided such
regulations are reasonable and not contrary to law. (see Sec. 45, par.
1.) It cannot in substance be denied or made exercisable only at the
whim or discretion of those in charge of the corporation. Of course,
the right may only be exercised at reasonable hours on business
days. (Sec. 73, par. 2.)
Reasonable hours must be understood to mean reasonable hours
on business days throughout the year and not merely during some
arbitrary period of a few days chosen by the directors, e.g., for 10
days before the annual meeting for the year. (Pardo vs. Hercules
Lumber Co., 47 Phil. 964 [1925].)
Extent of the right of inspection.

—

The right to inspect
(1) Copies, abstracts and memoranda.
the books and records of the corporation includes, as an incident
thereof, the right to make copies, abstracts and memoranda of then-

contents (Sec. 72, pars. 3, 4.) but a stockholder (or member) cannot,
without order of the court, be allowed to take books from the office
of the corporation. (Veraguth vs. Isabela Sugar Co., Inc., supra.)
Under the Section 74, any stockholder or member has the right
to receive the corporation's most recent financial statement.
(2) Agent or representative. The right of inspection is personal
in the sense that it may be exercised by the director, trustee,
stockholder, or member himself but the inspection and examination
may be made by any proper representative or attomey-in-fact, and
either with or without the attendance of the director, etc.; otherwise,
the right would be futile or unavailing in many instances where
through lack of knowledge necessary to exercise it, he is debarred
from procuring in his behalf the services of one who could exercise
it. (Philpotts vs. Phil Manufacturing Co., 40 Phil. 471 [1919].)
(3) All pertinent books, papers, etc. Section 73 includes records
of business transactions, records of resolutions of the board of
directors and stockholders, and the minutes of all meetings of
stockholders or members or the board of directors.
In general, the right of the stockholder (or member) extends
to all pertinent books, papers, contracts, minutes, books or other

—

—

Sec. 73

TITLE Vin. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

665

instruments from which he can derive any information relating to
the corporation" and "corporate records regardless of the form in
which they are kept" that will enable him to better protect his

interest.
A stockholder cannot be denied access to the corporate books
simply because they contain, along with information to which he
is entitled, other information to which he has no right to demand,
where the right is given by statute. (SEC Opinion, April 27, 1970,
citing 7 R.C.L. 225.)
Right of stockholder to demand a list
of stockholders.

—

(1) Right only to inspect and make own list. Under the
Revised
Corporation Code, there is no express provision making it as duty
of a corporation to supply any stockholder, upon his request, with
a
list of its stockholders showing their respective subscriptions. To
do
so would result to the corporation's great inconvenience,
especially
when there are thousands of stockholders. It seems, therefore,
unnecessary for a stockholder to request that he be supplied with a
list of stockholders with their shareholdings because he can
directly
inspect the stock and transfer book of the corporation,
subject to
such limitation as to proper time, place, purpose, and
conditions of
inspection. (Ballantine, p. 385.)
The Revised Corporation Code impliedly
recognizes the
solicitation of proxies as a right (see Sec. 57.) and a proxy-seeking
stockholder must have access to the corporation's list of stockholders
before he can solicit proxies.

—

(2) Non-liability of corporation for allowing
right. As to whether
a stockholder can sue a corporation
for revealing the names of
stockholders and their stockholdings, it is the opinion of the SEC
that a corporation in allowing a shareholder to
get the list of
stockholders in the exercise of his right to inspection, cannot
be
held liable by the other stockholders who did not
so
request,
for
that would be inconsistent with the express provision
of the law
granting stockholders the right to inspection of corporate
books and
records including the list of stockholders. (SEC
Opinion, Aug. 11,

666

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 73

Right of stockholder to demand a detailed
auditing of business operations.
The Revised Corporation Code is silent as to whether a
stockholder can demand a detailed auditing of the business
operations of a corporation upon his discovery of probable anomalies
and irregularities as appearing in the books of the corporation and
other sources of information.
The weight of authority in the United
(1) Power of courts.
however,
is to the effect that the courts do not have the
States,
a
power to order full and complete audit where no good reason is
shown that the same is necessary. (Merchants Brown Co. v. Butler,
70 Fla. 397, 70 So. 383.) But while the court does not have authority
to command in mandamus the corporation to allow an audit made, it
does have the power to allow a reasonable time for the inspection of
the books and records and if the auditor can accomplish the making
of an audit during that time, there is no reason why he may not do
so. (Florida Military Academy, Inc. v. Sate Ex rel Moya, 127 Fla. 381,
174 Sc. 3, 5.)
A stockholder is entitled to
(2) Liability for expenses of audit.
an inspection and audit to ascertain the value of his stock and the
correctness of an inventory or audit in order to exercise an option
to purchase. (Dreyfuss and Sons v. Benson, 239 S.W. 347.) It has also
been said that all expenses of the investigation or audit are to be
defrayed by the applicant unless the court orders them to be paid or
shared by the corporation. (Ballantine, p. 390.)

—

—

Right of stockholder to examine books
of corporation’s subsidiary.

While the right of a stockholder to examine the books and
records of a corporation for a lawful purpose is a matter of law,
the right of such stockholder to examine the books and records
of a wholly-owned subsidiary of the corporation in which he is a
stockholder is a different thing.
Some U.S. state courts recognize the
(1) Right recognized.
right under certain conditions, while others do not.
(a) Thus, it has been held that where a corporation
owns approximately no property except the shares of stock

—

Sec. 73

TITLE VIU. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

667

of subsidiary corporations which are merely agents or
instrumentalities of the holding company, the legal fiction of
distinct corporate entities may be disregarded and the books,
papers, and documents of all the corporations may be required
to be produced for examination, and that a writ of mandamus
may be granted, as the records of the subsidiary were, to all
intents and purposes, the records of the parent even though the
subsidiary was not named as a party.
(b) Mandamus was likewise held proper to inspect both the
subsidiary's and the parent corporation's books upon proof
of sufficient control or dominion by the parent showing the
relation of principal or agent or something similar thereto.
(c) Stockholders were also held entitled to
inspect the
records of a controlled subsidiary corporation which used
the same offices and had identical officers and directors.
(Gokongwei, Jr. vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 89
SCRA 336 [1979], citing American cases.)
The Supreme Court has held that where the foreign subsidiary
is wholly-owned by a holding company, and, therefore,
under its
control, it would be more in accord with equity, good faith
and fair
dealing to construe the statutory right of a stockholder of the parent
corporation to inspect the books and records of the
corporation as
extending to books and records of such wholly-owned subsidiary
which are in the parent corporation's possession and control. (Ibid.)
(2) Right refused.
On the other hand, mandamus at the suit
of a stockholder was refused where the
subsidiary corporation is
a separate and distinct corporation
domiciled and with its books
and records in another jurisdiction, and
is not legally subject to the
control of the parent company, although it owned
a vast majority
of stocks in the subsidiary. Likewise,
inspection of the books of an
allied corporation by a stockholder of the
company which
owns all the stock of the subsidiary has beenparent
refused
on the ground
that the stockholder was not within the class
"persons having an
interest." (Ibid.)

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

668

Sec 74

—

Sec. 74. Right to Financial Statements. A corporation
shall furnish a stockholder or member, within ten (10)
days from receipt of their written request, its most recent
its financial statement In the form and substance of the
financial reporting required by the Commission. (SA)
At the regular meeting of stockholders or members,
the board of directors or trustees shall present to such
stockholders or members a financial report of the
operations of the corporation for the preceding year,
which shall include financial statements, duly signed and
certified in accordance with this Code, and the rules the
Commission may prescribe. (A)
However, If the total assets or total liabilities of
the corporation are less than Six hundred thousand
pesos (P600,000.00), or such other amount as may
be determined appropriate by the Department of
Finance, the financial statements may be certified
under oath by the treasurer and the president. (SA)
Right of stockholder or member
to financial statements.

This additional right given to a stockholder or member reinforces
his right of inspection and examination of corporate books and
records.
(1) The financial statements shall be in the form and substance
required by the SEC. It usually includes: (a) a balance sheet' as of the
end of the last taxable year and (b) a profit and loss statement’ for
'It presents data related to the financial condition of a business as of a specific period
of time (e.g., December 31, 2019.) This statement of financial position shows the assets
of the business, its liabilities, and the owners' equity. The totals of the amounts listed in
each of these three (3) major categories of the statement conform to the basic accounting
equation:
Assets Liabilities and Owners' Equity
If the total assets of a corporation exceed the liabilities (claims of creditors), the
excess of the assets (net worth or net assets) belongs to the stockholders. Such excess
represents the stockholders' equity and is in the form of capital invested in stock and
surplus (retained earnings).
Thus, the term "net asset value" Indicates the amount of assets exceeding the
liabilities as differentiated from "total assets" which include the liabilities. (Adamson vs.
Court of Appeals, 232 SCRA 602 [1994].)
’It shows the results of operations of a business over a period of time, usually one
(1) year (e.g., January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019). Other alternative terms used are

-

TITLE VTII. CORPORATE BOOKS AND RECORDS

Sec 74

669

the year, showing in reasonable detail its assets and liabilities and
the result of its operations. It shall be in the form and substance
of the financial reporting required by the SEC.
(2) The financial statements shall be included in the financial
report of the operations of the corporation for the preceding year;
(3) The Revised Corporation Code requires the filing with the
SEC of the corporation's annual financial statements audited by
an independent certified public accountant; if the total assets or
total liabilities are less than P600,000.00 or such other amount as
may be determined appropriate by the Department of Finance, the
certification of the financial statements under oath by the treasurer
and president of the corporation is sufficient. (Sec. 177.)
Duty of board to present annual
financial report.

A financial report of the operations of the corporation for
the preceding year is required to be presented to stockholders or
members at every annual regular meeting of such stockholders or
members when directors or trustees are voted for.
(1) According to the SEC, the presentation of a
financial
of the operations of the corporation is required. The use of report
the word
"shall" in the Section 74 indicates that the requirement is
mandatory.
Such requirement is based on the principle that all
have the right to be fully informed as to the financial stockholders
condition of
the corporation, and how their investments (capital contribution)
are employed or managed. (SEC Opinion, July 15, 1996.)
(2) This annual report includes the
financial
together with the accompanying supplementary notes statements
the financial data which cannot be conveniently shown explaining
on the body

"statement of earnings," "statement of operations," and "income
statement." The net
results of operations can be represented
by the
Receipts Expenses = Net income (net loss).equation:
With respect to alleged losses, it hasbeen held
that where a profit and loss statement
•hows a loss, the statement
must show income and items of expenses to explain the
method of determining such loss.
weight where "the amounts are A profit and loss statement is devoid of any evidentiary
conclusions without premises, its bases left to speculation,
conjectures, assertions and euesswork.''
(Nicolas vs. Court of Appeals, 287 SCRA 307
119981.)

—

670

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 74

of the statements (see Sec. 177.), the corporation's performance
and other activities of the year in review, and the prospects and
other plans that the corporation may wish to undertake. It contains
the auditor's report which is a two-paragraph declaration of an
independent certified public accountant following the completion
of his examination of the corporation's financial statements.3 It may
be prepared in detailed or condensed manner, depending on the
specific needs of the corporation.

I

•

•

.

•

*

’

.

J

Title IX

MERGERAND CONSOLIDATION
Sec. 75. Plan of Merger of Consolidation.— Two (2) or
more corporations may merge into a single corporation
which shall be one of the constituent corporations or may
consolidate into a new single corporation which shall be
the consolidated corporation.

The board of directors or trustees of each corporation
party to the merger or consolidation, shall approve a plan
of merger of consolidation setting forth the following:
(a) The names of the corporations proposing to merge
or consolidate, hereinafter referred to as the
constituent
corporations;
(b) The terms of the merger of consolidation
and the
mode of carrying the same into effect;

(c) A statement of the changes, if any, in the
articles
of incorporation of the surviving corporation in
case of
merger; and, in case of consolidation, all the
statements
required to be set forth in the articles of incorporation
for
corporations organized under this Code; and
(d) Such other provisions with respect to the
proposed
merger or consolidation as are deemed necessary

desirable.
Sec. 76. Stockholders' or Members' Approval.

—

—

—

Upon
board of directors
or trustees of the constituent corporations
of the plan of
merger or consolidation, the same shall be
submitted for
approval by the stockholders or members
of each of such
corporations at separate corporate meetings
duly called
for the purpose. Notice of such
meetings shall be given to
all stockholders or members of the
respective corporations
approval by majority vote of each of the

*The report simply renders an opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the
of the
financial statements chiefly the balance sheet and the income statement
corporation within the context of generally accepted accounting principles. Thus, it does
not certify that a corporation is in good financial condition or is a good credit risk.

or

671

672

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 77

in the same manner as giving notice of regular or special
meetings under Section 49 of this Coote- The notice shall
state the purpose of the meeting and include a copy or a
summary of the plan of merger or consolidation.
The affirmative vote of stockholders representing at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock of
each corporation in the case of stock corporations or
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members in the case of
nonstock corporations shall be necessary for the approval
of such plan. Any dissenting stockholder may exercise the
right of appraisal in accordance with this Code: Provided,
That if after the approval by the stockholders of such plan,
the board of directors decides to abandon the plan, the
right of appraisal right shall be extinguished. (A)

Any amendment to the plan of merger or consolidation
may be made: Provided, That such amendment is approved
by a majority vote of the respective boards of directors
or trustees of all the constituent corporations and ratified
by the affirmative vote of stockholders representing at
least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock or of
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of each of the constituent
corporations. Such plan, together with any amendment,
shall be considered as the agreement of merger or

consolidation.
After the
Sec. 77. Articles of Merger or Consolidation.
approval by the stockholders or members as required by
the preceding section, articles of merger or articles of
consolidation shall be executed by each of the constituent
corporations, to be signed by the president or vicepresident and certified by the secretary or assistant
secretary of each corporation setting forth:
(a) The plan of the merger or the plan of consolidation;
(b) As to stock corporations, the number of shares
outstanding, or in the case of nonstock corporations, the
number of members;
(c) As to each corporation, the number of shares or
members voting for or against such plan, respectively;
(d) The carrying amounts and fair values of the assets
and liabilities of the respective companies as of the agreed
cut-off date;

—

Secs. 75-78

TITLE DC MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

673

(e) The method to be used in the merger or

consolidation of accounts of the companies;

(f) The provisional or pro-forma values, as merged or
consolidated, using the accounting method; and
(g) Such other information as may be prescribed by
the Commission. (N, from [d] to [g])
Sec. 78. Effectivity of Merger or Consolidation.
The
articles of merger or of consolidation, signed and certified
as required by this Code, shall be submitted to the
Commission for Its approval: Provided, That In the case of
merger or consolidation of banks or banking institutions,
loan associations, trust companies, insurance companies,
public utilities, educational Institutions and other special
corporations governed by special laws, the favorable
recommendation of the appropriate government agency
shall first be obtained. If the Commission is satisfied that
the merger or consolidation of the corporations
concerned
is consistent with the provisions of this Code and
existing
laws, it shall issue a certificate approving the
articles
and plan of merger or of consolidation, at which
time the
merger or consolidation shall be effective. (A)
If, upon investigation, the Commission
has reason
to believe that the proposed merger or
consolidation
is contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions
of
Code or existing laws, it shall set a hearing to give this
the
corporations concerned the opportunity to be
heard.
Written notice of the date, time and place of hearing
shall
be given to each constituent corporation
at least two
(2) weeks before said hearing. The
Commission shall
thereafter proceed as provided In this Code.

—

Corporate combinations in general.

Changes may be made in the

corporate organization by various
ways. The most common are by merger
and

consolidation:

(1) Under previous laws.
In the Philippines,
the
enactment of the old Corporation Code, no laws expresslybefore
permitted
the merger or consolidation of
business corporations except of
railroads (Act No. 2772, as amended by Act No.
2789.) and of banks.
(P-D. Nos. 71 and
117, infra.)

—

674

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 75-78

(a) Nevertheless, our Supreme Court has held that
authority to merge or consolidate can be derived from Section
28 1/2 (now Sec. 39.) of the former Corporation Law (Act
No. 1459, as amended.) which provides, among others, that a
corporation may "sell, exchange, lease or otherwise dispose of
all or substantially all of its property and assets" if the board
of directors is so authorized by the affirmative vote of the
stockholders holding at least 2/3of the voting power. The words
"or otherwise dispose of," according to the Supreme Court, is
very broad and covers a merger or consolidation. (Reyes vs.
Blouse, 91 Phil. 305 [1952].)
(b) To encourage bank mergers or consolidations, Pres.
Decree No. 71, in amending certain provisions of the General
Banking Act (R.A. No. 8791.), exempts merged or consolidated
banks from the application of Section 28 (now Sec. 23; see Sec.
14[6].) of the former Corporation Law which limits the number
of directors in a corporation.
(c) For the sole purpose of facilitating bank mergers and
consolidations duly approved by the Monetary Board of the
Central Bank, any bank is allowed under Pres. Decree No. 117, to
merge or consolidate with another bank by theaffirmative vote of
the stockholders representing at least a majority of the subscribed
capital stock of the respective merging or consolidating banks,
in a meeting called for that purpose, and the capital stock of
the bank may be increased to the extent necessary to effect such
merger or consolidation notwithstanding Sections 17 and 18 1/2
(now Secs. 37 and 39.) of Act No. 1459.
Both
(2) Under the old and the Revised Corporation Codes.
of
corporations.
or
consolidation
Codes expressly allows merger
Only stock or nonstock corporations can merge or consolidate into
a single corporation. Hence, a partnership may not merge with a
corporation but the partnership may transfer all its assets and
liabilities to the corporation which will issue its shares of stock to be
distributed to the partners in proportion to their respective interest
in the partnership, provided the partnership shall be dissolved in
accordance with the Civil Code. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 3, 1984.)

—

Secs. 75-78

TITLE DC MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

675

Common forms of corporate combinations.

These are the common forms of corporate combinations.
(1) Sale of assets. A union of corporations may be affected by
one corporation selling all or substantially all of its assets to another,
(see Sec. 39.) Such sale is usually, though not necessarily, made in
the course of the dissolution of the vendor corporation.
(a) In a strict legal sense, the mere sale of all its property
by a corporation and the distribution of its assets do not work
a dissolution of the corporation inasmuch as possession of
property is not essential to corporate existence.1 (Re Fulton, 178
N.E. 766.)

—

(b) Generally, where one corporation sells or
otherwise
transfers all its assets to another corporation, the latter is not
liable for the debts and liabilities of the transferor. (Edward
J. Neil Co. vs. Pacific Farms, Inc., 15 SCRA 415 [1965].) If in
the agreement, a new corporation acquired the assets and
properties, and assumed the obligations and liabilities of an old
corporation which it succeeded, the former cannot excuse itself
from the obligations and liabilities on the theory that the
two
corporations are distinct and separate? (see Rivera vs. Litam &
Co., Inc., 4 SCRA 1072 [1962].)

'“Generally, a sale of assets does not constitute a dissolution requiring liquidation
unless it is so labelled. Winding up a separate transaction,
though it may be submitted to
the stockholders at the same time.
A merger-like result may be achieved by the
sale-of-assets method if the buying
corporation is permitted to finance the purchase by
issuing its own stock to the selling
corporation. The latter may then distribute the stock
in such instances, the buying company may assume as its Liquidating dividend. Normally,
may not take on the risks of the contingent and the bulk of the seller's debt, but it still
liabilities and may insist that
there will be funds to pay them if the seller plansunknown
to
stock by the acquiring company may entail a charterliquidate. The issuance of additional
amendment to increase the amount
of its authorized shares." (W.L Cary, supra,
op. cit., p. 1703.)
2
As a rule, a corporation that purchases
the assets of another will not be liable for
the debts of the selling corporation,
provided the former acted in good faith and paid
adequate considerations for such assets,
except when any of the following circumstances
is present (1) Where the
(2) Where the transaction purchaser expressly or impliedly agrees to assume the debts;
amounts to a consolidation or merger of the corporations; (3)
Where the purchasing corporation
is merely a continuation of the selling corporation;
and (4) Where the selling
corporation fraudulently enters into the transaction to
escape
liability for those debts. (Mcleod
vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 512 SCRA
[2007]; Jiao vs. National Labor Relations
222
Commission, 670 SCRA 184 [2012].)

I
676

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 75-78

—

barring
(c) In a sale of assets, the acquiring corporation
fraud of creditors need assume only those obligations set forth
explicitly in the agreement. (W.L. Cary, Cases and Materials on
Corporations, 1969 Ed., p. 1702.)

—

(d) The sale of the assets for stock, if followed by dissolution,
has the effect of a merger.

ILLUSTRATION:
X Inc., a shoe manufacturing company, sell all its assets to
Inc.,
another shoe manufacturing company. In consideration
Y
for the transfer of all its assets, X Inc. receives shares of stocks
from Y Inc.
Thus, X Inc. becomes a stockholder of Y Inc. By the terms
of the sale, the shares of stock of Y Inc., may be issued directly
to the stockholders of X Inc. based on their shareholdings.
In such case, X Inc. will have no more stockholders. It may
subsequently be dissolved. The above transaction is a sale of
assets for stock in name but may be found by the courts to be
really a de facto merger.
Y Inc. is not liable for liabilities of X Inc. unless Y Inc.
expressly or impliedly assumed said liabilities, or Y Inc. is
merely a continuation of X Inc., especially where the sale to
Y Inc. was affected to further a fraudulent purpose, to evade
payment by X Inc. of its outstanding obligations the two
corporations being treated as one, or where the transaction
amounts to a de facto merger or consolidation. (Infra.)

—
—

(2) Lease of assets. In this case, a corporation, without being
dissolved, leases its property to another corporation for which the
lessor merely receives rental paid by the lessee. The lease of assets is
similar to the sale of assets except that under a lease, nothing passes
except the right to use the property leased.
(3) Sale of stock.
The purpose of a holding company is to
acquire a sufficient amount of the stock of another corporation
to acquire control.’ The acquiring corporation is called the parent
’The sale of stock normally does not require formal stockholder or director

authorization, since the acquired company is not directly involved. Either cash or

stock of the buying company may be used to finance the purchase. While the acquiring

Secs. 75-78

TITLE IX. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

677

or holding company. The corporation whose stocks are acquired is
known as the subsidiary corporation.
(a) A holding company has been defined as "a super
corporation which owns or at least controls such dominant
interest in one or more other corporations that it is enabled
to dictate their policies through voting power, or which is in
position to control or materially to influence the management
of one or more companies by virtue, in part at least, of its
ownership of securities in the other company or companies."
(18 Am. Jur. 2d 557.)

(b) A subsidiary corporation may be created by organizing
a new corporation out of the operating division or divisions
of an existing corporation which shall continue its existence
after the spin-off and act as a holding company of the new
corporation to which shall be transferred the net assets of the
operating divisions in exchange for the shares of stock of the
new corporation. This method of corporate combination is
effected when the corporation to be acquired refuses to approve
a sale of assets, a merger, or consolidation.
In all the foregoing three (3) cases of corporate combinations,
the legal identity of each corporation is retained.
(4) Merger.
Here, two (or more) corporations unite, one
corporation which retain its corporate existence absorbing or
merging in itself the other (or others) which disappears as a separate

—

corporation does not become directly responsible for debts of the selling company, the
spectre of unknown and contingent liabilities still remains. In a purchase and sale of
stock, there are no actual 'dissenters' and hence, no appraisal rights.
Several special problems may arise which are peculiar to the stock acquisition
method of fusion. First of all, since the offer is to the shareholders directly rather than
to the corporation, registration may be required under the Securities Act wherever a
public offering is made. At the same time, there is no likelihood of inequitable treatment
of selling shareholders so long as adequate disclosure is made to them, and so long as
the controlling stockholders do not receive a premium or other special consideration for
their shares. Finally, this may pose for the acquiring company a problem of operating
a subsidiary with a possibly hostile minority interest. Whether or not dissident, die
outsiders may have legitimate expectations quite different from those of the buyer; and
the buyer may not ignore its fiduciary responsibility in dealing with its newly-acquired

subsidiary.

A merger-like result may be achieved by the sale-of-stock approach, by liquidating
or merging the acquired company when a controlling interest in its stock has been
obtained. Stock purchase may In fact be the first step in acquiring assets. Dissident
minority interests may then be eliminated, although care must be exercised to ensure
proper treatment of them under the plan. (W.L. Cary, supra, op. cit., p. 1704.)

678

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 75-78

corporation. It is the absorption of one (or more) corporation by
another which survives and retains its identity and continues the
combined business.
(a) Merger, as actually observed and practiced in the
Philippines/ necessitates a transfer of the rights, privileges,
assets and the assumption of debts and liabilities of the absorbed
corporation by the acquiring corporation as if it had itself
incurred them (see note 3.), followed by a separate action on the
part of the absorbed corporation of dissolving itself, generally by
amendment of its articles of corporation shortening its term of
existence, (see Sec. 39.) The surviving corporation automatically
assumes the employment contracts of the absorbed corporation.
(Philippine Geothermal, Inc. Employees Union vs. Unocal
Philippines, Inc., 804 SCRA 286 [2016]; see note 12.)
In return for the transfer of all the assets and assumption
of the liabilities of the absorbed corporation (the latter with the
consent of the creditors), the acquiring entity issues a block of
shares equal to the net asset value transferred, which stocks are
distributed to the stockholders of the absorbed corporation.
(SEC Opinion, Nov. 9, 1961.)
(b) Where the merger is effected under Section 39 and
not under the "statutory merger" authorized under Title IX,
although the merger would result in dissolving the absorbed
corporation, the dissolution is not legally effected by operation
of such merger as the Revised Corporation Code (see also Sec.
15.) provides for the means of achieving this end. A corporation,
being a legal creation, can be dissolved only in the manner
prescribed by the law which gave it life, (see SEC Opinion, Jan.
10, 1975.)
(c) No provision in the Revised Corporation Code prohibits
the merger of a corporation whose term is about to expire with
another corporation where the purpose is merely to continue
the operations of the old entity, even if such other corporation is
organized by a group of stockholders as the merged corporation.
(SEC Opinion, April 19, 1960.)

‘Before the enactment of the old Corporation Code which authorized merger and
consolidation, the most distinguishing features of which are that they accomplish several
steps simultaneously and that a prescribed statutory procedure must be observed for
their consummation.

TITLE DC. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

Secs. 75-78

679

(d) The consent of the creditors of a corporation is
unnecessary in merger or consolidation, it being authorized
by law. (see Sec. 79[e].) Where the merger or consolidation
involves a foreign corporation licensed to transact business in
the Philippines, Section 149 applies.
(5) Consolidation.
Here, two (or more) corporations unite,
new
a
corporate body and dissolving the constituent
giving rise to
corporation which cease to exist as separate corporations.

—

ILLUSTRATION:
A Inc. and B Inc. are existing corporations. They unite to
form C Inc. to which they transfer all their assets. A Inc. and
B Inc. are dissolved by the consolidation. The title to their
property passes to C Inc. and all their rights and liabilities are
assumed by C Inc.
The dissolved corporations, A Inc. and B, Inc., are
the constituent corporations. They are also the original
corporations. C Inc., the new corporation, is called the
consolidated corporation. The stockholders of A Inc. and B Inc.
become stockholders of C Inc.
The consolidation shall be effective upon issuance by the
SEC of a certificate of consolidation. (Sec. 78, par. 1.)

The legal effects of the merger or consolidation accomplished
under Title IX are provided in Section 79. Both methods involve a
transfer of the assets of the constituent corporations in exchange for
securities in the new or surviving corporation but neither involves
the winding up of the affairs of the constituent corporations in
the sense that the assets are distributed to the stockholders. Note
that there is automatic assumption of liabilities of the absorbed
corporation or constituent corporations (Sec. 79[e].) which are
dissolved. (Sec. 79[a, b].)

Advantages of stock acquisition
over asset acquisition.
A number of further reasons has been given why a sale of stock,
or merger or consolidation, may be preferable to a sale of assets (see
Sec. 39.):

—

(1) Where assets of corporation to be acquired, not assignable without

consent.

Sometimes the corporation to be acquired possesses

680

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 75-78

valuable franchises, leases, or contracts which are not assignable
without consent.
(a) In such case, a statutory merger or consolidation or, if
consent to assignment would even then be required, a stock
acquisition has an advantage over an asset acquisition because
the need to obtain consent to assignment may be eliminated.
(b) Moreover, if assets are to be acquired, the task of
attending to all of the details involved in the transfer, such as
the preparation and execution of deeds, would be simplified if
the acquisition were by a statutory merger or consolidation.
(c) Again, state bulk sales law either would be of no concern
or would not apply to an acquisition by statutory merger or
consolidation.
(2) Where restrictions upon a merger or consolidation or transfer of
assets exist. On the other hand, existing loan indentures or other
agreements contain restrictions upon a merger or consolidation or
transfer of assets.
(a) If one or more mortgages are involved, after-acquiredproperty clauses therein might cause difficulty if a statutory
merger or consolidation, or an asset acquisition, were attempted.
(b) Undesirable leases or contracts including burdensome
patent-license agreements may constitute an obstacle to a
statutory merger or consolidation or a stock acquisition.
(c) Labor union problems the consequence, for example,
of bringing a union or a different union into the picture may
present an obstacle to statutory merger or consolidation or an
asset acquisition but not to a stock acquisition.
(d) Problems of reconciling and meshing deferredcompensation plans of the corporations (including pension,
profit-sharing, and stock option and individual employment
contracts and bonus policies) may present similar obstacles.
(e) Finally, the corporate charter of the corporation to be
acquired may itself be important to preserve, as in the case of
a banking corporation; or the preservation of the organization
and its customers or even of an existing stock exchange listing
may make it desirable that the corporation to be acquired be

—

—

—

Secs. 75-78

681

TITLE IX. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

technically the acquiring or surviving corporation or that its
stock be acquired.
(3) Where asset acquisition will give rise to greater tax liability.
Not infrequently, an asset acquisition, unlike a stock acquisition, will
give rise not only to national or local excise taxes in connection with
the transition but will also involve some duplication of national or
local franchise, business, and property taxes, including sales, use,
transfer, or license taxes, and fees applicable to real estate, personal
property, and motor vehicles. Sometimes some of these extra taxes
can be avoided when the transfer is effected by operation of law
through statutory merger or consolidation. (W.L. Cary, supra, op. cit.,

—

pp. 1704-1705.)
Procedure for effecting a plan of merger
or consolidation.
Section 35(h) expressly grants authority to a corporation "to
enter into with other corporations merger or consolidation"’ in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by Sections 75-79.
(1) Approval of plan. The board of directors or trustees of each
corporation, party to the merger or consolidation, shall approve a
plan of merger or consolidation setting forth the matters mentioned
in Section 75;
(2) Submission to stockholders or members for approval. The plan
shall be submitted for approval by the stockholders or members
of each of such corporations at separate corporate meetings duly
called for the purpose with proper notice. (Sec. 76.) Even holders of
non-voting shares or non-voting members as the case may be, are
entitled to vote on the plan (Sec. 6, par. 6[f].);
(3) Execution of formal contract.
After approval by the
prescribed vote of the stockholders or members (Ibid.), a formal

—

—

—

’According to the Report of the Federal Trade Commission (Report on Corporate
Mergers and Acquisitions, 40 [1955].), the terms "merger" and "consolidation" are often

employed to describe fusions involving concerns of relatively equal size and importance,
hi accounting terminology, such a combination might be referred to as a
pooling of
interests. If, on the other hand, a relatively small firm is being absorbed into a larger
one, an "acquisition," or in the terminology of the Accounting Bulletin (No. 48) (1957),
a
purchase," is said to have been made, (cited in W.L. Cary, supra, op. at., p. 1622.)

682

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE Ofn THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 75-78

contract known as articles of merger or of consolidation4 shall be
executed by each of the constituent corporations, to be signed by
the president or vice-president and certified by the secretary or
assistant secretary of each corporation setting forth the matters
stated in Section 77 (a to f).

—

(4) Submission to SEC for approval. The articles shall then be
submitted for approval to the SEC in quadruplicate for its approval,
provided that in the case of merger or consolidation of corporations
governed by special laws, the favorable recommendation of the
appropriate government agency shall first be obtained. (Sec. 78,

par. 1.)
The SEC Rules require that the resolutions of the respective
boards of the constituent corporations or that of the stockholders
approving the merger or consolidation, duly signed and attested by
their respective presidents and secretaries, must state the reasons or
causes for such action;
(5) Conduct of hearing by SEC.
The SEC shall conduct a
hearing with proper notice if, upon investigation, it has reason to
believe that the proposed merger or consolidation is contrary to or
inconsistent with the Revised Corporation Code or existing laws
(see Sec. 176.) to give the corporations concerned the opportunity
to be heard. (Sec. 78, par. 2.) The SEC may or may not conduct a
hearing; and

—

—

(6) Issuance of certificate by SEC. The SEC shall issue a certificate
of merger or of consolidation, as the case may be, "at which time the

merger or consolidation shall be effective," if satisfied that the same
is not inconsistent with the Revised Corporation Code and existing
laws. (Ibid., par. 1.)

(a) The merger or consolidation does not become effective
upon the mere agreement of the parties. Since it involves

‘"Usually in merger agreements today, authority is given to the directors of either
board to abandon it at any time before the effective date and after submission to the
shareholders upon the happening of certain events, if in their judgment for example
(1) any material litigation or government proceedings have been instituted against
one of them, or (2) one company has suffered substantial loss as a result of catastrophe
or any material adverse change in its condition, or (3) the merger would be impracticable
because of the number of stockholders who assert the right to have their stock appraised
and to receive payment." (W.L Cary, supra, op. at., p. 1699.)

—

—

Sec 79

TITLE DC MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

683

fundamental changes in the corporation, and in the rights of
stockholders and creditors, there must be an express provision
of law authorizing them. The effectivity date is crucial for
determining when the merged or constituent corporations
cease to exist and when their rights, privileges, properties and
liabilities pass on to the surviving corporation. (Associated Bank
vs. Court of Appeals, 291 SCRA 511 [1998]; Philippine National
Bank vs. Andrada Electric & Engineering Company, 381 SCRA
244 [2002]; Poliand Industrial Limited vs. National Development
Co., 467 SCRA 500 [2005]; Mindanao Savings and Loan Assoc.,
Inc. vs. Wilkom, 634 SCRA 291 [2010]; Bank of Commerce vs.
Heirs of de la Cruz, G.R. No. 211519, August 14, 2017.)
(b) Under Section 79, the merger shall be effective only
upon the issuance of the certificate of merger by the SEC.
However, notwithstanding Section 79, the parties may stipulate
a specific "effective date of merger (or consolidation)" where no
third party will be prejudiced by such stipulation. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 13-09, July 1, 2009; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 8-19,
March 13, 2019; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 04-06, January 17, 2006.)

—

Sec. 79. Effects of Merger or Consolidation. The merger
or consolidation shall have the following effects:
(a) The constituent corporations shall become a
single corporation which, in case of merger, shall be the
surviving corporation designated in the plan of merger;
and, in case of consolidation, shall be the consolidated
corporation designated in the plan of consolidation;

(b) The separate existence of the constituent
corporations shall cease, except that of the surviving or
the consolidated corporation;
(c) The surviving or the consolidated corporation shall
possess all the rights, privileges, immunities and powers
and shall be subject to all the duties and liabilities of a
corporation organized under this Code;
(d) The surviving or the consolidated corporation
shall possess all the rights, privileges, immunities and
franchises of each constituent corporation; and all real

684

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 79

or personal property, all receivables due on whatever
account, including subscriptions to shares and other
choses in action, and all and every other interest of,
belonging to, or due to each constituent corporation, shall
be deemed transferred to and vested in such surviving or
consolidated corporation without further act or deed; (A)
and
(e) The surviving or consolidated corporation shall
be responsible for all the liabilities and obligations of
each constituent corporation as though such surviving
or consolidated corporation had itself incurred such
liabilities or obligations; and any pending claim, action
or proceeding brought by or against any constituent
corporation may be prosecuted by or against the surviving
or consolidated corporation. The rights of creditors or
liens upon the property of such constituent corporations
shall not be impaired by the merger or consolidation. (A)

Legal effects of merger and consolidation.
(1) Section 70 provides the
effects of the merger or
consolidation. Unlike in the sale of assets under Section 39, there
is automatic assumption by the surviving or new corporation of all the
rights, privileges, powers and liabilities of the absorbed corporation or
constituent corporations, which are dissolved. There is no winding up
of their affairs or liquidation of their assets.
(2) Because of Section 79(b), the absorbed or constituent
corporations are ipso facto dissolved by operation of law, without necessity
of any further act or deed (SEC Opinion, July 16, 1981.) but there
is no winding up of their affairs or liquidation of their assets, for

the surviving corporation automatically acquired all the rights and
liabilities of the constituent corporations.
(3) An advantage of merger or consolidation, from the viewpoint
of the selling corporation, is that it permits the transfer of the assets to
the purchaser and the distribution of the consideration received in a single
operation pursuant to the plan of merger or consolidation, whereas
a sale requires as a separate subsequent step the dissolution and
liquidation of the vendor. (C. Rohrlich, op. cit., p. 285.)
(4) Both merger and consolidation involve exchanges of
properties, a transfer of the assets of the constituent corporations

Sec. 79

TITLE IX. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

685

in exchange for securities in the new or surviving corporation but
neither involves the winding up of the affairs of the constituent corporations
in the sense that their assets are distributed to the stockholders.
(5) Dissolution of the constituent corporations consolidated
into a new corporation cannot be made to retroact to a date before
the ratification or approval by their respective stockholders of a
consolidation agreement approved by the respective boards of
directors of the constituent corporations and the new corporation,1
but the transfer of the assets and liabilities of the constituent corporations
could be made effective retroactively as of the date the said board of
directors so resolved. (SEC Opinion, March 4, 1975.)
(6) The consent of the creditors of a corporation is unnecessary
in merger or consolidation, it being authorized by law. At any
rate, neither their rights nor any lien upon the property of any of
each constituent corporation shall be impaired by such merger or
consolidation. (Sec. 79[4].) In view of Section 79(e), good faith is
not an excuse to exempt the new or surviving corporation from the
liabilities of the absorbed corporation or constituent corporations.
(Ong vs. BPI Family Savings Bank, Inc., 852 SCRA 614 [2018].)
(7) Where, in its articles of incorporation, a new corporation
acquired the assets and properties, and assumed the obligations and
liabilities of an old corporation which it succeeded, the former cannot
excuse itself from those obligations and liabilities on the argument
that the two corporations are distinct and separate? (Rivera vs.
Litam & Company, Inc., 4 SCRA 1072 [1962].)

'Under Sec. 78 (par. 1.), the merger or consolidation shall be effective only upon
issuance by the SEC of a certificate of merger or consolidation, as the case may be.
The stipulated cut-off date (before or after date of Issuance of certificate), however;
with respect to transactions of the absorbed corporation and surviving corporation shall
be binding on the parties to the merger agreement, (see SEC. Opinion, June 15, 2004.)
’In a case, the main issue is whether the surviving bank (AB) may enforce the
promissory note made by private respondent in favor of the absorbed bank (CBTC)
after the merger agreement has been signed but prior to the issuance of a certificate of
merger by the SEC. AB has a valid cause of action even assuming that the effectivity date
of the merger was the date of execution. The agreement itself clearly
provides that all
contracts, irrespective of the date of execution, entered into in the name of CBTC shall
be understood as pertaining to AB. The clause must have been deliberately
included in
me agreement in order to protect the Interests of the combing banks, specifically,
to avoid
giving the merger agreement a farcical Interpretation aimed at evading fulfillment of a
due obligation. (Associated Bank vs. Court of Appeals, 291 SCRA 511 [1998].)

686

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 79

(8) Dissenting stockholders may exercise their right of
appraisal (Sec. 80[c].) only after the plan of merger or consolidation
is approved by the SEC. If before such approval the plan is
abandoned by the board of directors, the appraisal shall be

extinguished. (Sec. 76, par. 1.)
(9) The merger of a corporation with another does not operate
to dismiss the employees of the corporation absorbed by the
surviving corporation. This is in keeping with the nature and effects
of a merger as provided under law and the constitutional policy
protecting the rights of labor. The employment of the absorbed
employees subsists. Necessarily, these absorbed employees are not
entitled to separation pay on account of such merger absent any
other ground for its award. (Philippine Geothermal, Inc. Employees
Union vs. Unocal Philippines, Inc., G.R. No. 190187, September 28,
2016.)

Merger and consolidation distinguished
from sale of assets.

They are:
(1) In the former, there is automatic assumption by the surviving
or consolidated corporation of the liabilities of the constituent
corporations,1 while in the latter the purchasing corporation is not
generally liable for the debts and liabilities of the selling corporation;
’“One of the principal concerns in a merger is over unknown or hidden liabilities
which the acquired company fails to disclose or in fact is unaware of. A tax deficiency
is one of the most frequent to arise. Other types of obligations which may be significant
stem from collective bargaining agreement with unions, provisions under pension plans,
and outstanding stock option or executive compensation arrangements.” (W.L. Cary,
supra, op. at., p. 1702.)
Under the principle of absorption, a bona fide buyer or transferee of all, or substantially
all the properties of the seller or transferor is not obliged to absorb the latter's employees.
(Barayoga vs. Asset Privatization Trust, 473 SCRA 690 1 2005].) In fact, the Corporation
Code does not mandate the absorption of the employees of the non-surviving corporation
by the surviving corporation in the case of merger. The rule is that unless expressly
assumed, labor contracts such as employment contracts, and collective bargaining
agreements are not enforceable against a transferee of an enterprise, labor contracts being
in personam, thus binding only between the parties. In legal parlance, human beings are
never embraced in the term "assets and liabilities" of an enterprise. The employees of the
absorbed corporation retain the prerogative to allow themselves to be absorbed or not,
otherwise, that would be tantamount to involuntary servitude. (Bank of the Phil. Islands
vs. BPI Employees Union, 627 SCRA 590 [2010].)

Sec. 79

TITLE IX. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

687

(2) In the former, there is a continuance of the enterprise and
of the stockholders therein though in the altered form, while in the
latter, the selling corporation ordinarily contemplates a liquidation

of the enterprise;
(3) In the former, the title to the assets of the constituent
corporations is by operation of law transferred to the new
corporation, while in the latter, the transfer of title is by virtue of
contract; and

(4) In the former, the constituent corporations are automatically
dissolved, while in the latter, the selling corporation is not dissolved
by the mere transfer of all its property.

Reorganization of a corporation.

Generally, reorganization4 of a corporation is a means whereby
those variously interested financially in a distressed business’ seek,
through continuance of that business as a going concern, to work
out of the difficulty for themselves and thus gain more than they
could by a sale of the assets or of the business to others. (19 Am. Jur.

2d 895.)

—

(1) Distinguished from merger or consolidation. A reorganization
differs from a merger or consolidation.
It is not ordinarily the combination of several existing
corporations, but is simply the carrying out by proper agreements
and legal proceedings of a business plan or scheme for winding
up the affairs of, or foreclosing a mortgage or mortgages upon, the
property of insolvent corporations, and the organization of a new
corporation to take over the property and business of the distressed

corporation.* (Ibid., 895.)

*This is not to be confused with that involving a mere change in structural
organization or management, in business policy, or in production or trading methods in
a corporation. The reorganization here is "internal."
’E.g., the corporation's total assets are less than its total liabilities or it has a liquidity
problem (Le, it cannot pay its debts as they become due), or it has been
judicially declared
insolvent or in a state of suspension of payments.
*The reorganization typically involves a recapitalization or revision of the capital
structure of the corporation commonly effected by amendment of the articles of
^corporation or merger with a subsidiary.

688

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 79

—

(2) Distinguished from sale.
It differs from a sale where the
vendor corporation parts with its interest for cash and receives

nothing more.
The mere acquisition by one corporation of the capital stock
of two others, without impairment of the corporate existence or
function of any of the three corporations, is not a reorganization. The
mere selling of authorized but unissued stock is not, in any sense, a
reorganization. (Ibid.) A "sale" is the transfer of property from one
person to another for a consideration of value. As a "mere purchase
by one corporation of the properties of another corporation," it is not
included in the term "reorganization," because the term "imports a
continuity of interest on the part of the transferor or its stockholders
in the properties transferred." (C. Rohrlich, op. cit., pp. 278-279.)
(3) Distinguished from reincorporation. Reorganization, as the
term is usually used, means the creation of a new company to take
over the assets of a new corporation, while reincorporation, as this
term is ordinarily used, more closely resembles the amendment of a
charter, and is usually resorted either to correct errors in the original
incorporation or to obtain the benefits of a statute enacted after
the original incorporation or to extend the corporate life. (Sulpicio
Guevara, The Philippine Corporation Law, 1967 Ed., p. 210, citing
Fletcher, Sec. 4839.) To reincorporate, the incorporators must comply
with the provisions on incorporation under Sections 10-16 of the
Revised Corporation Code.
Both involve the creation of a new corporation in place of
another corporation which ceases to exist.
(4) Distinguished from bankruptcy. A "corporate reorganization"
is not a bankruptcy proceeding, but is a special proceeding which
has for its object the rehabilitation of a debtor-corporation. It differs
from a "bankruptcy" in that it contemplates conservation of the
corporation and continuity of its business and not a liquidation of
its assets. (9-A Words and Phrases 406.)

—

—

Quasl-reorganizatlon of a corporation.

—

The term quasi-reorganization has been defined
as a "procedure recognized in accounting by which the accounts
of the corporation may be restated to the same extent they would
be if a new corporation were created and acquired the business of
(1) Meaning.

Sec. 79

TITLE DC MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

689

the existing corporation; a new basis for accountability of assets,
liabilities, and capital is established."7 (SEC Opinion, Aug. 18, 1967,
citing Montgomery's Auditing, 8th Ed., p. 396.)

ILLUSTRATION:
The proposed quasi-reorganization of X Corporation as
submitted to the SEC involved these steps:
(a) Reduction of par value of common stock from PIO.00
to P7.50 per share. The present authorized capital stock of
P20,000,000 divided into 2,000,000 shares of the par value of
P10.00 each will correspondingly be reduced to 15,000,000
divided shares of the par value of P7.50 each. The amount of
issued and outstanding capital stock will be reduced from
about P10,300,000 to P7,725,000 but the number of issued and
outstanding shares (i.e., 1,030,000) will remain unchanged. The
reduction in par value of issued and outstanding shares will
create a reduction surplus of P2,575,000. (see comments under
Sec. 37.)

—

’ll has been defined: 'A recapitalization, a principal feature of which has been
absorption of a deficit; specifically, the procedure whereby a corporation, without the
creation of a new corporate entity or the intervention of a court, eliminated an operating
deficit resulting from the recognition of other losses or both, and establishes a new retained
earnings (earned surplus) account for the accumulation of new income subsequent to the
effective date of such action." (E.L. Kohler, A Dictionary For Accountants, p. 388.)
A quasi-reorganization as a type of capital readjustment (see SEC Guidelines for
Quasi-Reorganizations.) has been described as follows:
"C. Readjustments of balance sheet valuations resulting in the revision of the stated value
of the capital stock and of the surplus. This type of capital readjustment arises when the
management realizes that radical changes have occurred in the value of a corporation's
property - changes in value which are not reflected in periodic adjustments to the
book surplus accounts. These changes are prompted by the realization on the part of
management that the property of the corporation has radically increased or radically
decreased beyond anything that is apparent from the book entries in the surplus
accounts. These book entries representing either surplus or deficit must, therefore, be
restated to reflect the fundamental changes that have affected the substantive values of
the corporation. In the process of revaluation, it may be necessary to read just-stated
values standing against the capital stocks, and these changes may or may not involve
restatement of the surplus accounts. Quite frequently too, other alterations in the
capital structure are introduced to bring the outstanding security issues in line with
acknowledged changes in the corporation's property values. As a group, they may be
called revaluation readjustments, and these valuations are indicated by changes in the
capital accounts." (Ibid., citing II Dewing, Financial Policy of Corporations, 5th
Ed.,

-

690

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

(b) Restatement of assets consisting of.

Sec 79

—

(i) Write-off of fixed assets (property plant and
equipment) from original cost of P20,155,000 to the
appraised value of P27,551,000, approximately, thereby
reflecting an appraisal surplus of P7,396,000. (see comments
under Sec. 43.) The great bulk of this surplus (almost P7
million) is attributable to the appreciation in the value of
X's factory site consisting of six (6) parcels of land with an
aggregate area of 177,242 square meters. The appraisal was
made by an independent firm of high standing.
(ii) Write-off of development and start-up costs of

about P754,000.

—

(c) Write-offs against surplus.
The accumulated deficit
estimated at P8,978,000 (as of September 30, 1967) and the
development and start-up costs at about P754,000 to be written
off, or a total of P9,732,000 will be charged to the capital surplus
created totaling P9,971,000, consisting of reduction surplus of
P2,575,000 and an appraisal surplus of P7,396,000. The balance
of about P239,000 will be set up as a capital surplus account.

Disclosure of the quasi-reorganization will be made by
appropriate notations in the audited financial statements of X.
It appears from the project study made on the matter, that
if the plan is carried out, the company would be able not only
to rehabilitate itself but also realize profits. Conversely, if the
company cannot pursue its plan, it may not be able to solve its
financial difficulties and thus, may result in its total collapse.
Considering all the foregoing, the SEC did not object subject to
these conditions:
(1) Only the appreciation in the value of the company's
six (6) parcels of land with an aggregate area of 177,242
square meters shall be considered, the increase in appraisal
value of the rest of the company's property being excluded.
This is because the increase in value of the parcels of land
is, in the opinion of the SEC, realizable. As to those of the
other kinds of property, the SEC does not feel it necessary
to pass upon this matter at this time;
(2) It is not deemed proper to write-off the development
and start-up costs amounting to approximately P754,000;

Sec. 79

TITLE IX. MERGER AND CONSOLIDATION

691

(3) The appraisal surplus created shall be used to
write-off deficit, and shall not be utilized for the declaration
of dividends;
(4) The plan shall be submitted to the stockholders
in a special meeting duly called for the purpose and
approved by the vote representing at least two-thirds of
the subscribed capital stock;
(5) Appropriate notice of the plan shall be given to the
creditors of the corporation within a reasonable time prior
to the submission of the papers reducing the company's
authorized capital stock to the SEC;
(6) Proper publication of the plan shall be made in at
least one newspaper of general circulation throughout the
Philippines, twice a week for two (2) consecutive weeks;
and

(7) Appropriate notations in the company's audited
financial statements of the utilization of the appraisal
surplus to write-off deficits shall be made for at least five
(5) years after the effectivity of the quasi-reorganization.
(SEC Opinion, Aug. 8, 1967.)

Quasi-reorganization as a corporate practice has been employed
with some frequency in the United States, so much so that the U.S.
Federal Securities and Exchange Commission has prescribed the
conditions under which the same may be effected. (Ibid.)
(2) Guidelines or conditions for approval of quasi-reorganization.
(a) That only companies which are financially in distress,
may be allowed to undergo quasi-organization.
(b) That the company has substantial increment in the
market value of its fixed assets as appraised by a reputable
licensed appraiser which is adequate to absorb its accumulated
past losses.
(c) That the appraisal increment to be considered in the
plan shall be limited to real properties, permanently installed
fixed assets, and other machineries and equipment directly
needed and actually used in the operations of the company.

—

I

692

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 79

(d) That the appraisal increment of fixed assets undergoing
repair or will require repair before the same can be put into
productive use shall not be included in the appraisal of assets
for purposes of quasi-reorganization.
(e) That the company shall present a project study on its
future operations to support its quasi-reorganization.
(f ) That the remaining appraisal surplus set up in the books
of the company after the deficit shall have been offset will not
be used to wipe out losses that may be incurred in the future
without prior approval of the SEC.
(g) For purposes of dividend declaration, the retained
earnings of the company shall be restricted to the extent of
the deficit wiped out (and not recovered by accumulated
depreciation on appraisal increment by the appraisal surplus).
(h) That after the quasi-reorganization of the company has
been effected and approved by the SEC, the company shall
disclose in all its financial statement for a minimum period
of three (3) years the mechanics, purpose and effect of such
quasi-reorganization on the financial condition of the company,
(see undated SEC Guidelines for Quasi-Reorganization; SEC
Opinion, August 19, 1994.)

— —
oOo

Title X

APPRAISAL RIGHT
Sec. 80. When the Right of Appraisal May Be ExercisedAny stockholder of a corporation shall have the right
to dissent and demand payment of the fair value of the
shares in the following instances:

—

(a) In case an amendment to the articles of
incorporation has the effect of changing or restricting
the rights of any stockholder or class of shares, or of
authorizing preferences in any respect superior to those
of outstanding shares of any class, or of extending or
shortening the term of corporate existence;
(b) In case of sale, lease, exchange, transfer, mortgage,
pledge or other disposition of all or substantially all of the
corporate property and assets as provided in this Code;
(c) In case of merger or consolidation; and
IdLln case of Investment, of corporate funds for anv
purpose other than the primary purpose of the corporation-

Appraisal right of a stockholder.
(1) Meaning.
The appraisal right of a stockholder refers
to his right to demand payment of the fair value of his shares,
after dissenting from a proposed corporate action involving a
fundamental change in the charter or articles of incorporation in the
cases provided by law.
(a) Unanimous/less than unanimous vote. Any
fundamental
change in the corporate charter would require the consent of
the stockholders, inasmuch as it would impair the obligation of
the contact between the corporation and its stockholders, (see
Sec. 15.) However, to meet the situation whereby an
arbitrary
minority group of stockholders could prevent advantageous
corporate action, the Revised Corporation Code authorizes

—

—

693

694

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea 80

the making of changes in the corporate structure in specified
instances, by less than the unanimous vote, and to prevent any
injustice to the minority, gives them the right to an appraisal
and payment of their stock. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 49.)
The appraisal right of
(b) Small/big corporation.
stockholder is more important where the corporation is a small
one and there is no ready market for its stock. In big corporations
whose stocks are actively traded in exchanges, the dissatisfied
stockholder can easily sell his stocks.
The appraisal right enables the
(2) Importance of right.
dissenting stockholders to have his interests purchased and to retire
from the corporation. (18 CJS 642.)

—

—

Instances when appraisal right available.
The appraisal right does not normally belong to a stockholder
as a matter of absolute right; otherwise, a stockholder can withdraw
from a corporation anytime by returning his share and getting
back his capital, which is truly violative of the trust fund doctrine.
(SEC Opinion, Jan. 11, 1982; see Sec. 40.) It does not vest unless
objectionable corporate action is taken. (18 CJS 641.)

(1) Section 80 lists the four (4) instances when the right may be
exercised as provided in Sections 11, 36, 39, and 76.
(2) It is also available to a dissenting stockholder if the
corporation decides to invest its funds in another corporation or
business for any purpose other than its primary purpose as provided
in Section 41.

(3) Under Section 104, any stockholder of a close corporation
may, for any reason compel said corporation to purchase his shares
at their fair value, which shall not be less than their par or issued
value, when the corporation has sufficient assets in its books to
cover its debts and liabilities exclusive of capital stock.
(4) The revival of the corporate existence is without prejudice
to the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders under the Revised
Corporation Code. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 23-19, Nov. 21, 2019.)

Sec. 80

TITLE X. APPRAISAL RIGHT

695

Amendment of articles of incorporation
changing stockholders’ rights.

—

(1) Stockholders to consent in advance.
Statutes authorizing
amendments of articles of incorporation upon a vote of a prescribed
majority of its stock are as effectively a part of the certificates of
stock as though printed thereon. Such statutes become a part of the
stockholder's contract with the corporation. A stockholder will be
deemed to consent in advance to the making of such changes as
die statutes permit and as are designed to enable the corporation to
conduct its business in a more profitable manner.

Upon acceptance of his stock, he is bound by prior amendments
and subsequent amendments, provided there is no abuse of
amendatory power. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 643-644.)
(2) Right of dissenting stockholders.
Stockholders dissenting
from a particular corporate change in their rights, though bound
by such change, are given by the Revised Corporation Code some
form of remedy. They may withdraw from the corporation by an
appraisal and payment of their stock. (Ibid., 646.)
(3) Amendment for legitimate purpose or purposes.
One of
the limitations on the power of corporations to amend is that the
amendment must be "for legitimate purposes."

—

—

Limitations on the exercise of appraisal
right

The limitations are:
(1) Any of the instances provided by law for the
exercise of
right by a dissenting stockholder must be present (Secs. 80, 41.); the
(2) The dissenting stockholder must have voted
against the
proposed corporate action. (Sec. 81, par. 1.) The right is not
available
to a stockholder who was absent at the
meeting where the corporate
action was approved, or was present at such
meeting but abstained
from casting his vote;
(3) A written demand on the corporation

for

payment of his
shares must be made by him within 30 days after the
date the vote
was taken (Ibid.)-,
(4) The price must be based on the fair
value of the shares as of
the day before the date on which the vote was taken
(Ibid.);

i

696

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 81

(5) Such fair value must be determined as provided in Section
81 (Ibid., par. 2.);

(6) Payment of the shares must be made only out of the
unrestricted earnings of the corporation (Ibid.); and
(7) Upon such payment, the stockholder must transfer his
shares to the corporation. (Ibid.)

—

The dissenting
Sec. 81. How Right is Exercised.
stockholder who votes against a proposed corporate
action may exercise the right of appraisal by making a
written demand on the corporation for the payment of the
fair value of shares held within thirty (30) days from the date
on which the vote was taken: Provided, That failure to make
the demand within such period shall be deemed a waiver
of the appraisal right. If the proposed corporate action is
implemented, the corporation shall pay the stockholder,
upon surrender of the certificate or certificates of stock
representing the stockholder’s shares, the fair value
thereof as of the day before the vote was taken, excluding
any appreciation or depreciation in anticipation of such
corporate action.
If within sixty (60) days from the approval of the
corporate action by the stockholders, the withdrawing
stockholder and the corporation cannot agree on the fair
value of the shares, it shall be determined and appraised
by three (3) disinterested persons, one of whom shall be
named by the stockholder, another by the corporation, and
the third by the two (2) thus chosen. The findings of the
majority of the appraisers shall be final, and their award
shall be paid by the corporation within thirty (30) days after
such award is made: Provided, That no payment shall be
made to any dissenting stockholder unless the corporation
has unrestricted retained earnings in its books to cover
such payment: Provided, further, That upon payment by the
corporation of the agreed or awarded price, the stockholder
shall forthwith transfer the shares to the corporation.

Sec. 81

i

1 ' TITLE X. APPRAISAL RIGHT

697

Procedure for exercise of right.
Section 81 prescribes a uniform procedure for the exercise by a
dissenting stockholder of his appraisal right:
(1) The dissenting stockholder shall make a written demand on
the corporation within 30 days after the date on which the vote was
taken for payment of the fair value of his shares. The failure of the
stockholder to make the demand within the 30-day period shall be
deemed a waiver of his appraised right;
(2) If the proposed corporate action is implemented or effected,
the corporation shall pay to such stockholder, upon surrender of the
corresponding certificate(s) of stock within 10 days after demanding
payment for his shares (Sec. 85.), the fair value thereof; and
(3) Upon payment of the agreed or awarded price, the
stockholder shall transfer his shares to the corporation.
Determination of fair value
of shares.

—

(1) Appraisal of stockholder’s shares.
If the withdrawing
stockholder and the corporation cannot agree on the fair value of
the shares, it shall be determined and appraised as provided in the
second paragraph of Section 82. In such case, either the dissenting
stockholder or the corporation is entitled to demand an appraisal
of the former's shares, and to compel such appraisal, if the
other
refuses to have it effected.
(2) Valuation date. The fair value of the shares of the
dissenting
stockholder is determined as the day before the date on which the
vote was taken notwithstanding any appreciation or depreciation in
value of the shares in anticipation of such corporate action. This
rule
avoids controversy on the valuation date, and prevents speculation
on the shares.
Payment shall be made only if the corporation has unrestricted
retained earnings in its books to cover the same, (see Sec. 42.) This
is
in consonance with the trust fund doctrine.
(3) Underlying theory of valuation. The term
"fair value," as
used in the Revised Corporation Code, is said to
mean the intrinsic
worth of the stock, which is to be arrived at after an appraisal
of all
the elements of value.

—

—

698

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 82

The underlying theory is one of compensating the owner of the
stock for his property right, and, therefore, no method of valuation
should be relied upon exclusively; and since the theory of appraisal
is to compensate the dissenting stockholder for the value of his stock
as it was originally constituted, the valuation of his shares should be
determined without regard to the effect of the corporate action. (19
Am. Jur. 2d 55-56.)

—

Sec. 82. Effect of Demand and Termination of Right.
From the time of demand for payment of the fair value of
a stockholder’s shares until either the abandonment of
the corporate action involved or the purchase of the said
shares by the corporation, all rights accruing to such
shares, including voting and dividend rights, shall be
suspended in accordance with the provisions of this Code,
except the right of such stockholder to receive payment
of the fair value thereof: Provided, That if the dissenting
stockholder is not paid the value of the said shares within
thirty (30) days after the award, the voting and dividend
rights shall Immediately be restored.

Effect of exercise of right.

Once the dissenting stockholder demands payment of the fair
value of his shares
(1) All rights accruing to such share including voting and
dividend rights shall be suspended; and

—

(2) He shall be entitled to receive payment of the fair value of
his shares as agreed upon between him and the corporation or as
determined by the appraisers chosen by them.

Payment of shares.
(1) If he is not paid the value of his shares within 30 days after
the award, his voting and dividend rights shall be immediately
restored until payment of his shares. (Sec. 82.) Accordingly, even if
his rights as stockholder are suspended after his demand in writing
is made, he cannot be considered as an ordinary creditor of the
corporation. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 11, 1982.)

.

Sec 83

TITLE X. APPRAISAL RIGHT

699

(2) Upon such payment, all his rights as stockholder are
terminated, not merely suspended, (see Sec. 81, last sentence.) But
if before he is paid the proposed corporate action is abandoned, his
rights and status as a stockholder shall be permanently restored.
(Sec. 83.)
Sec. 83. When Right to Payment Ceases. — No demand
for payment under this Title may be withdrawn unless the
corporation consents thereto. If however, such demand for
payment is withdrawn with the consent of the corporation,
or if the proposed corporate action is abandoned or
rescinded by the corporation or disapproved by the
Commission where such approval is necessary, or If
the Commission determines that such stockholder is
not entitled to the appraisal right, then the right of the
stockholder to be paid the fair value of the shares shall
cease, the status as the stockholder shall be restored, and
all dividend distributions which would have accrued on
the shares shall be paid to the stockholder.

Extinguishment of right to payment
(1) Cases. A dissenting stockholder who
demands payment of
his shares is no longer allowed to withdraw from his decision unless
the corporation consents thereto. These cases will have the effect of
extinguishing the withdrawing stockholder's right to payment of
his shares:

—

(a) The stockholder withdraws his demand for
payment
and the corporation consents thereto;

(b) The proposed corporate action is
abandoned or
rescinded by the corporation;
(c) The proposed corporate action is disapproved
by the
SEC where its approval is necessary; or
(d) The SEC determines that the stockholder is
not entitled
to appraisal right.

—

(2) Restoration of status as stockholders.
If
of the above
cases arise, the stockholder shall not be paid theany
fair value

shares, his status as stockholder shall thereupon be restored,of his
and
all dividend distributions which would have
accrued on his shares
shall be paid to him.

700

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 84-85

Sec. 84. Who Bears Cost of Appraisal. — The costs and
expenses of appraisal shall be borne by the corporation,
unless the fair value ascertained by the appraisers is
approximately the same as the price which the corporation
may have offered to pay the stockholder, in which case
they shall be borne by the latter. In the case of an action
to recover such fair value, all costs and expenses shall be
assessed against the corporation, unless the refusal of the
stockholder to receive payment was unjustified.
Liability for costs and expenses of appraisal.

The cost and expenses of appraisal shall be borne:
(1) By the corporation.

—

(a) Where the price which the corporation offered to
pay the dissenting stockholder is lower than the fair value as
determined by the appraisers named by them;
(b) Where an action is filed by the dissenting stockholder
to recover such fair value and the refusal of the stockholder to
receive payment is found by the court to be justified.
(2) By the dissenting stockholder.

—

(a) Where the price offered by the corporation is
approximately the same as the fair value ascertained by the
appraisers;
(b) Where the same action is filed by the dissenting
stockholder and his refusal to accept payment is found by the
court to be unjustified.
Sec. 85. Notation on Certificates; Rights of Transferee.

— Within ten (10) days after demanding payment for

his shares held, a dissenting stockholder shall submit
the certificates of stock representing the shares to the
corporation for notation that such shares are dissenting
shares. Failure to do so shall, at the option of the
corporation, terminate the rights under this Title. If shares
represented by the certificates bearing such notation are
transferred, and the certificates consequently cancelled,
the rights of the transferor as a dissenting stockholder

Sec. 85

TITLE X. APPRAISAL RIGHT

701

under this Title shall cease and the transferee shall have
all the rights of a regular stockholder; and all dividend
distributions which would have accrued on such shares
shall be paid to the transferee.

Notation on certificate of shares
of dissenting stockholder.
Section 85 requires the dissenting stockholder to submit to the
corporation within 10 days after demanding payment for his shares,
the corresponding certificate(s) of stock for notation thereon that

such shares are dissenting shares.
With the notation, the secretary of the corporation will be
guided; for under Section 82 all rights accruing to such shares
including voting and dividend rights shall be suspended except as
provided in the section and Section 83.
Transfer of dissenting shares.

The shares represented by the certificate(s) bearing such notation
may be transferred or sold by the dissenting stockholder. In such
case:
(1) The transferee shall become a regular
stockholder
the right to receive all dividend distributions which would with
have
accrued to such shares; and
(2) The right of the transferor as a
dissenting stockholder to
be paid the fair value of the shares shall cease. By
transferring his
shares, he ceases to be a stockholder.

Secs. 86-87

.’ll

election campaign or partisan political activity. (SEC Opinion, April

10, 1985.)

'

Characteristics of nonstock
»

—

For purposes of this Code,
Sec. 86. Definition.
and subject to its provisions on dissolution, a nonstock
corporation is one where no part of its income is
distributable as dividends to its members, trustees,
or officers: Provided, That any profit which a nonstock
corporation may obtain incidental to its operations shall,
whenever necessary or proper, be used for the furtherance
of the purpose or purposes for which the corporation was
organized, subject to the provisions of this Title.

The provisions governing stock corporations, when
pertinent, shall be applicable to nonstock corporations,
except as may be covered by specific provisions of this
Title.
Nonstock corporations may be
Sec. 87. Purposes.
formed or organized for charitable, religious, educational,
professional, cultural, fraternal, literary, scientific, social,
civic service, or similar purposes, like trade, industry,
agricultural and like chambers, or any combination thereof,
subject to the special provisions of this Title governing
particular classes of nonstock corporations.

—

Definition of nonstock corporation.
The definition of a nonstock corporation in Section 86 refers to
an ordinary nonstock corporation formed for any of the purposes
mentioned in Section 87. Thus, a nonstock corporation organized
to promote educational objectives may not be an educational
corporation as contemplated in Sections 105 to 106 of the Revised
Corporation Code.
In the enumeration of the purposes for which nonstock
corporations may be organized, "political" purpose is not
702

703

specifically included. In view thereof, the SEC may reject the articles
of incorporation if the purpose of the corporation is to engage in

Title XI

NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

corporations.

The most common characteristics of a nonstock corporation:
(1) Any profit derived by it from any authorized
activity cannot
be distributed as dividends to its members;1
(2) It may not lawfully engage in any business
activity for profit
as it would run counter to its very nature as a non-profit entity;
(3) When incidental to the objects and
purposes of the
corporation and without the end of making profits to be distributed
to the members, it may engage in certain economic activities
stated
in its articles of incorporation;
(4) Do not issue stock and distribute dividends to
their members;
they are created not for profit but for public good and welfare;
and
(5) That a nonstock corporation may earn profit
does not make
it a profit-making corporation where such profit
or income is used
to carry out the purposes in the articles of incorporation
and is not
distributed to its incorporators, members, trustees or officers. (SECOGC Opinion No. 31-11, July 13, 2011.)

Thus, where the members of an association (the
purpose of
constitution is to "provide for its members and their dependentswhich according to its
recreational activities
and a source of food and other
items at minimum
service and efficient management") do not receiveprices that are consistent with good
dividends in the form of cash, but
they receive benefits in the form of
commissary privileges, such as the importation of
goods duty-free, purchase of food and
other items at minimum or reduced prices, and
return or refund of capital at the end of
membership or upon dissolution of the corpora¬
tion, its constitution likewise
providing that profits the association will be kept at a
minimum and at the end of each fiscal period 10% ofof the
net earnings will be put into
a Reserve Fund if this funds
below $50,000 in value, to be used at the discretion of the
Board of Directors for capital improvements and
to absorb operating defidts or any kind
of loss, such an entity is
one created
operated for profit. (US. Employees Assodation
Employees Assodation [USEAEA] and
vs. U.S. Employees Assodation [USEA], 107
87 (1981); SEC-OGC
Opinion, October 22, 2002, dting De Leon, Corporation Code SCRA
of the
Philippines, p. 590 [1993].)

704

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 86-87

1' • t
Power to make profits and engage
in business.
A nonstock
(1) Incidental profits obtained from operations.
corporation is not empowered to engage in business with the
object of making income or profits directly or indirectly. It is not
empowered to venture primarily in business activities. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 11-11, March 8, 2011.) However, it is not prohibited
to make income or profits as an incident to its operation. (Sec. 86,
par. 1.) But, unlike stock corporations, any profit derived by it from
any authorized activity cannot be distributed as dividends to its
members. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 31-11,’ July 13, 2011; SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 29-06,’ June 7, 2006.)
Incidental profits obtained from its operations shall, whenever
necessary or proper, be used to further the purpose or purposes
for which the corporation was organized as provided in its articles
of incorporation.4 It is in this sense that a nonstock corporation is
considered a non-profit corporation.
The granting of financial assistance to its members out of its
profits cannot be considered in the advancement of its purpose.
(SEC Opinion No. 31-11, July 31, 2011.)
A
(2) Profits obtained from investment of accumulated funds.
nonstock corporation may not lawfully engage in any business
activity for profit as it would run counter to its very nature as a
non-profit entity (see Sec. 13[b].) unless it is necessary to carry out
the purpose or purposes for which it was organized. However,
it may invest its accumulated funds for profit purposes. Thus,
it may subscribe to the capital stock of a corporation or invest in
commercial papers such as money instruments, but such power
must be included in its articles of incorporation in order that the
investment may not be considered ultra vires, (see Sec. 44.)

—

—

’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 675 [2002].
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 675 [2002].
‘While a religious organization may sell copies of the Bible or other religious

literature since such activity can be considered reasonably necessary and incidental to
its purpose of propagating the word in Christ, it may not engage in franchising; neither
may it amend its articles of incorporation to include "relating" and "franchising" in its
incidental power as the two (2) words connote business activities for profit. (SEC Opinion

No. 12-11, March 9, 2011.)

Secs. 86-87

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

705

Nonstock corporations are not empowered to venture primarily
in business activities. However, when incidental to the objects and
purposes of the corporation and without the end of making profits
to be distributed to the members, it may engage in certain economic
activities stated in its articles of incorporation.
(3) Powers necessary or incidental to further purposes.
Though
nonstock, non-profit corporations, as a rule, are not authorized
to
pursue commercial business activities, they may do so when such
income generating activities are essential, incidental or reasonably
necessary to enable the corporation to carry out powers expressly
granted and to further the purpose(s) for which the corporation was
established, and provided that income realized or derived
therefrom
shall not be distributable to members or officers but are used to
further the purpose(s) for which the corporation was organized.
However, activities merely convenient or useful are not
implied if
they are not essential, having in view the nature and object of
the
corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 39-19, Sept. 18, 2019.)
Thus, while nonstock corporations are not
empowered to
venture on profitable business activities, they may, as
to their purposes, engage in such business activities incident
necessary or essential to carry out the purposes for whichreasonably
they were
organized, provided that any profit that may be derived
therefrom
are not distributable to the members but are used to
corporate
purposes. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 12-11, March 9, further
2011.)
(4) Determination of actual purpose or
object.
A nonstock
corporation is a non-profit corporation, while a stock
corporation
is
a for-profit corporation. What determines
whether a corporation is
engaged in business is its object or purpose as stated in its
articles of
incorporation and bylaws.
It is a familiar rule that the actual purpose of a
corporation is
not controlled by the corporate form or the
by
commercial
aspect of
the business prosecuted but may be shown
by extrinsic evidence,
including its bylaws and the method of its
its capital stock is divided into shares (see operation. Hence, that
Sec. 2.), does not detract
from it not being engaged in business for profit
if such is the case.
(Collector of Internal Revenue
vs. Club Filipino, Inc. de Cebu, 5

—

—

SCRA321 [1962].)

706

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 88

—

No part of its
(5) Prohibition against distribution of dividends.
income is distributable as dividends to its members, trustees or
officers (Sec. 86, par. 1.), meaning, no pecuniary benefits shall inure
in favor of the members although they may avail of, or derive other
forms of, assistance from the corporation. (SEC Opinion, April 10,
1985.) Thus, a board cannot legally pass a resolution giving some
benefits to the active members of the corporation, among others, in
the form of grocery items and the like. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 17, 1987;
(SEC Opinion, August 22, 2002.)
Applicable provisions.
Nonstock corporations are now governed by Title XI of the
Revised Corporation Code.
They shall be governed by the general provisions on stock
corporations only in the absence of applicable specific provisions
in Title XI.* (Sec. 86, par. 2.) Thus, a nonstock corporation cannot
be converted into a stock corporation by mere amendment of the
articles of incorporation. It can be dissolved only under the methods
specified in Title XIV, Sections 133-139. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 19,
1998.) Also, inasmuch as there is no special provision relating to
hold-over term of the trustees of nonstock corporations in Title XI,
the provision of Section 22 allowing hold-over in stock corporations
also applies to nonstock corporations by virtue of Section 86.
Chapter I

— MEMBERS

—

The right of the members of
Sec. 88. Right to Vote.
any class or classes to vote may be limited, broadened or
denied to the extent specified in thearticles of incorporation
or the bylaws. Unless so limited, broadened or denied,
each member, regardless of class, shall be entitled to one
(1) vote.
Unless otherwise provided In the articles of
incorporation or the bylaws, a member may vote by
*The Anti-Dummy Law (C-A. No. 108.) applies only to entitles engaged in wholly
or partly nationalized economic business activities, that is, where there is a constitutional
or statutory provision requiring Philippine citizenship as a requisite for the exercise or
enjoyment of a right, franchise, or privilege. Only when there is an existing law (presently
none) limiting foreign membership in a particular kind or type of nonstock corporation
will its provisions apply thereto. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 22, 1922.)

Secs. 89-92

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

707

proxy In accordance with the provisions of this Code.

The bylaws mav likewise authorize voting through remote
communication and/or in absentia.
Sec. 89. Nontransferability of Membership. Membership

—

In a nonstock corporation and all rights arising therefrom
are personal and nontransferable, unless the articles of
incorporation or the bylaws otherwise provide.
Sec. 90. Termination of Membership. — Membership shall
be terminated in the manner and for the causes provided in
the articles of incorporation or the bylaws. Termination of
membership shall extinguish all rights of a member in the
corporation or in its property, unless otherwise provided
in
the articles of incorporation or the bylaws.

Chapter II

— TRUSTEES AND OFFICERS

Sec. 91. Election and Term of Trustees.
— The number
of trustees shall be fixed in the articles of incorporation
or bylaws which may or may not be more than fifteen (15).
They shall hold office for not more
than three (3) years
until their successors are elected and Qualified. Trustees

elected to fill vacancies occurring before the expiration
of
a particular term shall hold office only for the
unexpired
period.
Except with respect to Independent
trustees of
nonstock corporations vested with public interest, only a
member of the corporation shall be elected as

trustee.
Unless otherwise provided in the articles of
incorporation or the bylaws, the members mav
directly
filfifit officers of a nonstock corporation.
Sec. 92. List of Members and Proxies Place of Meetings.
The corporation shall, at all times, keep a
list of its
and their proxies in the form the Commission mavmembers
reguire.
Thelist shallbe updated to reflect the members and proxies
aLrecord twenty (2Q) days prior to anv scheduled election.
The bylaws may provide that the members of
a
corporation may hold their regular or special nonstock
meetings at
any place even outside the place where the
principal office
of the corporation is located: Provided,
That proper notice
Is sent to all members Indicating
the date, time and place

—

708

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 93-94

of the meeting: Provided, further, That the place of meeting
shall be within Philippine territory.
Chapter III — DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS

IN NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS
Sec. 93. Rules of Distribution.

— The assets of a nonstock

corporation undergoing the process of dissolution_for

reasons other than those set forth in Section 139 oLthis
Code shall be applied and distributed as follows:

(a) All liabilities and obligations of the corporation
shall be paid, satisfied and discharged, or adequate
provision shall be made therefor;
(b) Assets held by the corporation upon a condition
requiring return, transfer or conveyance, and which
condition occurs by reason of the dissolution, shall be
returned, transferred or conveyed in accordance with such
requirements;
(c) Assets received and held by the corporation
subject to limitations permitting their use only for
charitable, religious, benevolent, educational or similar
purposes, but not held upon a condition requiring return,
transfer or conveyance by reason of the dissolution, shall
be transferred or conveyed to one (1) or more corporations,
societies or organizations engaged in activities in the
Philippines substantially similar to those of the dissolving
corporation according to a plan of distribution adopted
according to this Chapter;

(d) Assets other than those mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs, if any, shall be distributed in accordance with
the provisions of the articles of incorporation or the bylaws,
to the extent that the articles of incorporation or the bylaws
determine the distributive rights of members, or any class
or classes of members, or provide for distribution; and
(e) In any other case, assets may be distributed to
such persons, societies, organizations or corporations,
whether or not organized for profit, as may be specified in
a plan of distribution adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

Sec. 94. Plan of Distribution of Assets. — A plan providing
for the distribution of assets, consistent with the provisions

Secs. 88-94

I

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

709

of this Title, may be adopted by a nonstock corporation in
the process of dissolution in the following manner:
(a) The board of trustees shall, by majority vote, adopt
a resolution recommending a plan of distribution and
directing the submission thereof to a vote at a regular or
special meeting of members having voting rights;
(b) Each member entitled to vote shall be given a
written notice setting forth the proposed plan of distribution
or a summary thereof and the date, time and place of such
meeting, within the time and in the manner provided in this
Code for the giving of notice of meetings; and

(c) Such plan of distribution shall be adopted upon
approval of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members having
voting rights present or represented by proxy at such
meeting.

Rules applicable only to nonstock
corporations.

These rules apply to a nonstock corporation.
(1) Right to vote. The right to vote of members may be limited,
broadened, or even denied in the articles of incorporation or the

—

bylaws. (Sec. 88, par. 1.)
(a) The bylaws may declare whoshall beentitled to vote and
how they shall be entitled to vote, or impose other restrictions
such as limiting the right to vote of each member to a maximum
number of votes irrespective of the amount of his capital
contribution, or authorizing the chairman to vote the remaining
balance after deducting the total votes of the members /proxies
(SEC Opinion, April 23, 1987; see SEC Opinion,' March 11, 2002.),
or restraining proxies from participating directly in the election
of trustees at the annual meeting of members (SEC Opinion,
Aug. 25, 1987.), or limiting the right vote only to members of
good standing, in which case delinquent members shall not be
included in determining the existence of the required quorum.
(b) Unless otherwise provided by the articles of
incorporation, a member may vote by proxy in accordance with
1

Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 590 (1993).

no

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sets. 88-94

the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code. (Sec. 88, par. 2;
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 25-14, Sept. 4, 2014.) If proxy voting may
be denied outrightly in the articles of incorporation or bylaws,
it follows that the qualifications on who should be appointed
proxies or limitations on proxy may also be made therein. (SEC
Opinions, July 23, 1981 and Sept. 20, 1994.)
(c) Each member shall be entitled only to one vote in the
election of trustees unless cumulative voting is authorized in the
articles of incorporation of the bylaws. (Sec. 88, par. 1.) He may
cast as many votes as there are trustees to be elected but may
not cast more than one vote for one candidate. (Sec. 23.) By way
of exception, a nonstock corporation may adopt other modes of
casting votes, including, but not limited to, cumulative voting, if
the same is authorized in its articles of incorporation or bylaws.

(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 10-14,2 June 2, 2014.)
(d) In a nonstock corporation, the general rule is that each
member shall be entitled to one vote, regardless of the amount
of contribution. The exception is when the right of members of
any class to vote is limited, broadened, or denied to the extent
specified in the articles of incorporation or the bylaws.
An example of this exception is when a nonstock corporation
provides in its bylaws that the voting rights of the members
shall be in proportion to the area ownership in the building
or that the members or unit owners be entitled to one vote per
unit. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 36-19, Sept. 13, 2019; SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 5-15, July 21, 2015.)
(e) Section 88, par. 2, should be treated as a general
provision
for nonstock corporations applicable only absent a specific
provision in the Revised Corporation Code on a particular subject
matter. In the case of founders' shares in nonstock corporation,
Section 7 of the Revised Corporation Code specifically provides
for their rights, privileges and limitations. (Forest Hills Golf and
Country Club, Inc. vs. Kings Properties Corp., G.R. No. 212833
(Notice), August 7, 2019.)
(f) Regional elections for directors or trustees may be
allowed if it is the mode of election provided in the nonstock
2

Sting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 246 [2006].

Secs. 88-94

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

711

corporation's bylaws. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 05-12, April 2,
2012.)

(g) Under Section 88, the right of members to vote by
proxy may be denied entirely by appropriate provisions in the
articles of incorporation or bylaws of a nonstock corporation.
If the law allows proxy voting to be denied in the articles of
incorporation or bylaws of nonstock corporations, it follows
that qualifications or limitations on the appointment of proxies
may also be provided therein. Thus, unless proxy voting is
denied in the articles of incorporation or bylaws, a member of a
nonstock corporation who cannot attend in person may appoint
a proxy to represent him/her in the membership meeting. For all
intents and purposes, a proxy holder is an agent of the member
clothed with the authority to exercise the latter's rights in the
membership meeting as if the member was personally present
(SEC Opinion No. 12-05, Oct. 24, 2005.)
(h) The voting rights of members can be based on the
amount of their annual contribution. (SEC Opinion No. 42-03,
Aug. 28, 2003.)
(i) The articles of incorporation or bylaws may provide that
only members of good standing or those who are up-to-date in
the payment of their dues or other obligations may vote. (SEC
Opinion, Feb. 4, 1988.)

(j) Voting through remote communication and/or in
absentia may be authorized by the bylaws. (Sec. 88, par. 2.)
This is necessary where a nonstock corporation has numerous
members located in various parts of the country, but it must be
specifically provided for in the bylaws before the same can be
availed of.
(2) Governing boards.
Nonstock corporations may, through
their articles of incorporation or their bylaws, designate their
governing boards by any name other than as board of trustees. (Sec.
174.) Trustees of nonstock corporations have duties similar to those
of stock corporations.
(a) The number of trustees who must be members of the
corporation (Sec. 91, par. 2.), may or may not be more than 15
(Sec. 91, par. 1.), but the number of incorporating trustees shall
not be more than 15. (see Sec. 13[f].)

—

712

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sea. 88-94

(b) Although nonstock corporations are allowed to have
more than 15 trustees, under the principle of delegation of
corporate management, the board is supposed to be small in
number so that it may easily muster a quorum to act on urgent
matters. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 26, 1997.)

(c) Except with respect to independent trustees of nonstock

corporations, only members of the corporation can be elected
to sit in the board. (Sec. 91, par. 2; see Sec. 26.) Hence, to be
eligible as trustee, a candidate should meet the qualifications
for membership of the corporation as prescribed by its bylaws.
(d) A corporation, being a juridical person, is not qualified
to occupy the position of a director or trustee. (Sec. 24.)
Accordingly, absent of an express provision in the bylaws
stating that authorized representatives of juridical persons or
corporate members are also to be considered as "members" of
the corporation for purposes of qualifying them to be elected as
members of the board, they cannot be elected as trustees. (SEC
Opinion, Sept. 2, 1991.)
(e) Officers other than trustees may be directly elected by
the members (not by the board) unless otherwise provided in
the articles of incorporation or the bylaws. (Sec. 91, last par.)

—

(3) Meetings. Meetings of the board of trustees of a nonstock
corporation may be held anywhere in or outside the Philippines,
unless the bylaws provide otherwise. (Sec. 52, par. 4.)
(a) The bylaws may provide that the members may hold
their meeting at any place even outside the place where the
principal office of the corporation is located, provided that such
place is within the Philippines. (Sec. 92; see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 10-11, March 7, 2011; SEC Opinion, Aug. 14, 1981.)
Thus, meetings may coincide with conventions of the
nonstock corporation in any place of the country.
(b) Where the bylaws expressly provide for the holding
of members' meeting at the principal office of a nonstock
corporation conformably with the rule in Section 50, meetings
may not take place anywhere else without first amending said
bylaws in accordance with Section 47.

Sea. 88-94

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

713

(c) If the bylaws do not indicate the place of meeting, the
members cannot hold their meetings outside the place where
the principal office of the corporation is located. The authority
to transfer the place of member's meetings outside the place
where the principal office of the corporation is located must be
expressly granted by the bylaws. (SEC Opinions, Dec. 26, 1991
and Sept. 24, 1997.)
(4) Membership books.
While a stock and transfer book is
required of stock corporations, nonstock corporations are required
by the SEC to maintain their respective membership books, to have
a reliable record of their membership at any given time.
After membership in the corporation is duly acquired in the
manner provided in the bylaws, the entry of the name of each
member in the membership book may be done, and it is unnecessary
that the entry be made by the members themselves, unless the
bylaws so provide. It is usually the corporate secretary who makes
the entry. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 10-11, March 7, 2011.)
(5) Dissolution.
In case of dissolution, its assets shall be
applied and distributed in accordance with certain specific rules
laid down by law (Sec. 93.) or as may be specified in a plan of
distribution adopted by the corporation, provided it is consistent
with such rules. (Sec. 94.) It is not allowed to distribute any of
the assets of the corporation or any incidental income or profit
made by the corporation during its existence. The stockholders or
members merely have inchoate rights over the corporate assets,
and until the corporation is dissolved and its assets are applied and
distributed in accordance with the law i.e., Section 93 or 94 of the
Revised Corporation Code, no stockholder or member could claim
ownership or interest of any of the specific properties owned by the
corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 13-13, Dec. 5, 2013.)
Distribution or liquidation of assets of a dissolved corporation
is a matter of internal concern to the corporation and falls within
the power of the directors and stockholders or duly appointed
liquidation trustee. Should there be substantial issues, the same may
be brought to court. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-16, June 1, 2016.)
(6) Conversion into stock corporation. A nonstock corporation
cannot be converted into a stock corporation by mere amendment
of the articles of incorporation. It must be dissolved first under the

—

—

—

714

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs, 88-94

methods specified in Title XIV, and thereafter, the members may
organize as a stock corporation? (SEC Opinion, Feb. 24, 1989.)
Membership in a nonstock corporation.
(1) Manner or mode of acquisition.
Section 35(0 empowers a
nonstock corporation to admit members. Membership in a nonstock
corporation cannot be acquired except in the particular manner or
mode of acquiring the same, as provided for in its valid bylaws.
(12-A Fletcher, pp. 579, 583-585.) While a stock and transfer book is
required of stock corporations under Section 73, the SEC requires
nonstock corporations to maintain membership books for reliable
recording of the names of their members. (SEC Opinion No. 10-11,
March 7, 2011.)
Transfer of membership rights by virtue of inheritance is not
provided for and is not, therefore, considered as a valid mode of
acquiring membership in the corporation. Furthermore, the rights
of members of a nonstock corporation which usually are evidenced
by a certificate or policy showing that the person named therein or
the holder is entitled to the rights of membership, are not necessarily
transferable although they may be made so. (Ibid., p. 579.)
(2) Approval of admission of new members.
Admission of
members is one corporate power granted under Section 35(f) of the
Revised Corporation Code. In the absence of any express provision
in the bylaws as to what body the admission of corporate members
is lodged, it must logically be in the board of trustees because it is
the board which exercises the corporate powers of all corporations
formed under the Revised Corporation Code, and the approval of
the members of the corporation shall not be necessary, (see Sec. 22.)
(3) Mode adopted in the bylaws. The manner of admitting new
members to a nonstock corporation is governed by the bylaws and
may not, therefore, be uniform in all corporations. The bylaws may
either provide that new members may be admitted by a majority of

—

—

—

*rhe conversion of an existing nonstock, non-profit corporation Into a "stock
corporation" by mere amendment of the articles of incorporation would be tantamount to
distribution of the corporate assets or income of the corporation to its members inasmuch
as thereafter they automatically become stockholders thereof. This scheme might defraud
the public who might have contributed donations or grants to the nonstock, non-profit
corporation since after its conversion the donated corporate assets would in effect be
treated as paid-in capital or subscription payments of the stockholders. (SEC Opinion,
March 20, 1995.)

Secs. 88-94

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

715

the members of the board of trustees or a committee on membership.
Once adopted, such mode of admitting new members must be
observed until a new procedure is adopted by the corporation
through an amendment of the bylaws. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 26, 1969.)
If the corporation wishes a certain process for the acquisition
of membership, this process must also be indicated in the bylaws,
because membership in nonstock corporations cannot be acquired
except in the particular mode provided in the bylaws. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 10-11, March 7, 2011.)
(4) Qualifications for membership. Under Section 6 of R.A. No.
7192 otherwise known as the "Women in Development and NationBuilding Act," "women shall enjoy equal access to membership in
all social, dvic and recreational dubs, committees assodations, and
similar other organizations devoted to public purpose.
. (italics
supplied.) The right refers to "equal access to membership," not to
"equal membership." It would be absurd to construe it in the terms
of equality membership, as there are types or kinds of organizations
wherein not all sexes or persons, by the nature of their objectives,
are acceptable or qualified to become members.
It is a matter of general knowledge that corporations may validly
prescribe certain qualifications necessary for membership and the
mode of procedure in which membership can be acquired. It is also
dear from the above provision that women are given equal access
to membership only to assodations or organizations "devoted to
public purpose." (SEC Opinion, June 14, 1993.)
Neither is the equal protection guarantee of the Constitutions
violated. (Art. HI, Sec. 1 thereof.) The guarantee does not require
that persons different in fact be treated in law as though they were
the same. Where there are reasonable grounds for so doing, persons
or their properties may be grouped into dasses to each of which
spedal legal rights and liabilities may be attached. No violation is
committed as long as the classification is reasonable, not arbitrary
or capridous. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 4, 1993, dting Textbook on the
Philippine Constitution by Hector S. De Leon.)
(5) Admission before adoption of corporate bylaws.
A private
corporation has corporate existence and juridical personality
and is deemed incorporated from the date of issuance of
its certificate of incorporation. (Sec. 18.) If it is a nonstock
corporation, it has the power and capadty to admit members. (Sec.

—

..

—

35M.)

716

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 88-94

The above provisions do not require the adoption of corporate
bylaws before a corporation can commence its operation by
accepting membership. Hence, it may accept members in addition to
the incorporating members even before the adoption of its bylaws,
notwithstanding a provision in its articles of incorporation stating
that additional members may be accepted pursuant to the bylaws of
the corporation. (SEC Opinion, March 8, 1993.)
(6) Amendment of bylaws.
The board of trustees of the
corporation may not increase the membership fee by mere resolution,
without first properly amending the bylaws of the corporation. The
trustees do not have the power to make such step in their capacity
alone as members of the board of trustees, as it need an amendment
of the bylaws of the corporation, if the matter is expressly treated
therein.
Under Section 47 (par. 1.) of the Revised Corporation Code,
bylaws may be amended by vote of a majority of die members of
a nonstock corporation. Absent a due delegation by the members
of such power to the board of trustees, the latter cannot amend
the bylaws nor circumvent the law by adopting a resolution to the
effect. (SEC Opinion, March 3, 1969.)
(7) Nature of membership rights.
Membership in a nonstock
corporation is a property right and as such, public policy demands
that its termination must be done in accordance with substantial
justice. (Valley Golf & Country Club, Inc. vs. Reyes, 774 SCRA 214
[2015].) Membership and all rights arising therefrom are personal
and nontransferable unless otherwise provided in the articles of
incorporation or the bylaws. (Sec. 89.)
Membership in a nonstock corporation has personal elements
accompanied by social ties, hence, it cannot be transferred to other
persons who wish to be members. However, this general rule
admits of an exception as when the articles or bylaws so provide
that membership and rights arising therefrom may be subject to
transfer. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 36-19, Sept. 13, 2019.) Indeed, in
the absence of restrictions, it may act arbitrarily, and exclude any
person it may see fit and the courts have no power to interfere. (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 3, 1991, citing 12-A Fletcher, Sec. 5687.)
(8) Power of courts.
Courts are without power to strip a
member of a nonstock, non-profit corporation of his membership
without cause; otherwise, that would be an unwarranted and
undue interference with the well-established right of a corporation

—

—

Secs. 88-94

TITLE XI. NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS

717

to determine its membership. (Chinese YMCA of the Phil. Islands
vs. Ching, 71 SCRA 460 [1976].)
(9) Payment of dues and other assessments. The term "dues" are
obligations payable at recurring intervals for maintenance of an
organization. It is different from "assessment" which always implies
a burden imposed in invictum and a single act as distinguished from

—

a recurring act. (SEC Opinion, Nov. 12, 1986.)
(a) Membership corporations, such as sports clubs, may pro¬
vide in its articles of incorporation for the payment by its mem¬
bers of monthly dues called "club dues" as may be prescribed in
the bylaws or by the board of directors to meet the expenses for
the general operations of the club and for the maintenance and
improvement of its premises and facilities. (Ibid.)
(b) A nonstock corporation is authorized by law to accept
members and may collect reasonable membership dues and
other assessments for accomplishing the purposes or objectives
for which the corporation was organized. (SEC Opinion, March
27, 1995.)
(10) Termination of membership.
Membership shall be
terminated only in the manner and for the causes provided in the
articles of incorporation or by the bylaws. (Sec. 92.) The right of a
nonstock corporation to expel a member through the forfeiture of
the share must be established in the articles or bylaws. (Valley Golf
& Country Club, Inc. vs. Vda. de Caram, G.R. No. 158805, April 16,
2009; but see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-09, March 16, 2309.)
Termination must follow the procedure prescribed in the
bylaws. (Agdao Landless Residents Association, Inc. vs. Maramion,
G.R. Nos. 188642, 189425 & 188888-89, October 17, 2016.)
Nevertheless, it is essential that the expulsion or suspension of
a member must be based on just and reasonable ground (e.g., acts
of disloyalty, non-payment of dues, dishonesty) after notice and
hearing of die charge against him. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-09/
March 16, 2009.) Absent a waiver, the member is entitled to due
process. Its denial will entitle the member to an award of damages.

—

—

4

Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 687 (2002].

Sec. 95

TITLE xn. CLOSE CORPORATION

719

(2) It has also been defined as one in which the directors and
officers have the power to fill vacancies in their own number,
without allowing to the general body of stockholders any choice or
vote in their elections. (Black's Dictionary, 4th ed., p. 410.)

Title XII

CLOSE CORPORATION

Peculiarity of a close corporation.

—

A close
Sec. 95. Definition and Applicability of Title.
corporation, within the meaning of this Code, is one
whose articles of incorporation provides that: (a) all the
corporation’s issued stock of all classes, exclusive of
treasury shares, shall be held of record by not more than
a specified number of persons, not exceeding twenty (20);
(b) all the issued stock of all classes shall be subject to
one (1) or more specified restrictions on transfer permitted
by this Title; and (c) the corporation shall not list in any
stock exchange or make any public offering of its stocks
of any class. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a corporation
shall not be deemed a close corporation when at least
two-thirds (2/3) of its voting stock or voting rights is owned
and controlled by another corporation which is not a dose
corporation within the meaning of this Code.

Any corporation may be incorporated as a close
corporation, except mining or oil companies, stock
exchanges, banks, insurance companies, public utilities,
educational institutions and corporations declared to
be vested with public interest in accordance with the
provisions of this Code.

The provision of this Title shall primarily govern close
corporations: Provided, That other Titles in this Code shall
apply suppletorily except as otherwise provided under this
Title.

(1) The outstanding peculiarity of a close corporation is the
identity between stock ownership and active management. In a close
corporation, all the outstanding stock (there being no publicity held
securities of any other class) is owned by the persons (or members
of their immediate families) who are active in the management and
conduct of the business. (C. Rohrlich, Law and Practice in Corporate
Control, p. 96.)
(2) It is essentially an incorporated partnership in which the
stockholders consider each other as partners but which the law
treats as corporation. Thus, stockholders in a close corporation are
much like members in a partnership. They owe to one another the
same duty of utmost good faith and diligence that partners owe
one another. This strict duty applies particularly to controlling

stockholders.

Meaning of term under the Revised Corporation Code.

Within the meaning of the Revised Corporation Code, a close
corporation is one whose articles of incorporation provide that
(1) All its issued stock, exclusive of treasury shares, shall be
held of record by not more than a specified number of persons, not
exceeding 20;
(2) All its issued stock shall be subject to one or more restrictions
on transfer permitted by the Revised Corporation Code (see Sec.

97.); and

Definition of close corporation.

(3) The corporation shall not list in any stock exchange or
make
any public offering of its stock of any class.

A close corporation has been defined as a corporation in which
the stock is held in a few hands, or in few families, and which the
stocks is not at all or only rarely dealt in buying and selling. (Words
and Phrases, p. 498.)

incorporation for a corporation to be classified as a close corporation
within the meaning of the Revised Corporation Code, (see SEC
Opinion, May 24, 1999.) A narrow distribution of ownership does

718

All the three (3) features must be specified in the articles of

not, by itself, make a close corporation. Courts must look

into

720

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 95

the articles of incorporation to find provisions expressly stating
that (1) the number of stockholders shall not exceed 20; or (2) a
preemption of shares is restricted in favor of any stockholder or of
the corporation; or (3) the listing of the corporate stocks in any stock
exchange or making a public offering of those stocks is prohibited.
(Bustos v. Millians Shoe, Inc., G.R. No. 185024, April 24, 2017; San
Juan Structural & Steel Fabrication, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 296
SCRA 631 [1998]; Andaya vs. Rural Bank of Cabadbaran, Inc., G.R.
No. 188769, August 23, 2016.)
The main difference between a close corporation and other
corporations is the identity of stock ownership and active
management, that is, all or most of the stockholders of a close
corporation are active in the corporate business either as directors,
officers or other key men in management. Where business associates
belong to a small, closely-knit group, they usually prefer to keep
the organization exclusive and would not welcome strangers. Since
it is through their efforts and managerial skill that they expect the
business to grow and prosper, it is understandable why they would
not trust outsiders to come in and interfere with their management
of the business, and much less share whatever fortune, big or small,
that the business may bring. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-14, Aug. 26,
2014; SEC Opinion, Feb. 7, 1994.)

Corporations vested with public interest such as those
mentioned in Section 95 are not allowed to be incorporated as a
close corporation. (Sec. 95, par. 2; see Sec. 176, pars. 2, 3.)
I

•

Applicable provisions.

The rule in Title XII primarily governs close corporations. The
provisions of other Titles of the Revised Corporation Code apply in
a suppletory character, when not otherwise inconsistent with any
provision of the Title XII. (Ibid., last par.)
Need for the special rules for close corporation.

t

.

. -r-

In a close corporation, we are dealing essentially with an
incorporated partnership.' A close corporation has also been
'The dose corporation is organized primarily for the purpose of assuring limited
liability to all participants, at least to the very large extent that such limitation is available

See 95

-•

'

’ TITLE XU. CLOSE CORPORATION

721

described as a "corporation de jure" and a "partnership de facto." It
may be that the business began as a proprietorship or a partnership
and the parties then incorporated for various reasons, to insulate
themselves from liability, to obtain outside capital, or to meet
the problems of continuity and transferability which arise at the
death or retirement of one member. A close corporation then has a
special needs and problems different from those of a widely-held
corporation.1
In many situations, it may not be fair, nor practicable to apply
indiscriminately to the two (2) types of corporate enterprise the
same rules or principles of law applicable to corporation. Hence,
the need for special provisions to govern close corporations. On this
point, the following discussion is illuminating:
(1) Incorporated business enjoying the characteristics of a partnership.
"Forty years ago, the literature in the corporate field focus upon
the subject of 'corporate advantage without incorporation.' This
was in fact the title of a book published in 1929 by Professor Edward
H. Warren. Only recently has a noticeable interest developed in the
other direction, namely, how a business, once incorporated, can
nonetheless enjoy the characteristics of a partnership.
Let us assume that a group of three persons, having promoted
a business, or perhaps already operating a partnership, decide to
incorporate and to divide the stock equally among them. Their

—

to stockholders but not to partners. In view of the legal nature of the corporation, this
limitation of liability comes, however, inseparably tied to other characteristics which the
owners not only do not desire but also find affirmatively objectionable. (Rohrlich, op.
cil., p. 97.) Among the lesser "evils" are the formalities incident to the corporate status,
such as the requirements for the filing of incorporation documents, need for a board of
directors, for stockholders' meetings, and all other paraphernalia of corporateness. These
burdens are generally accepted as a price which must be paid for the privileges of being
a corporation, even if some of them are all too frequently neglected in practice. (Ibid.)
The very objective them of a close corporation form is to enjoy the advantages
of the corporate organization, like the limitation of personal liability, and at the same
time to retain internally the partnership form of doing business. Cose corporations are
usually small business corporations with few stockholders who participate actively in the

management of the business.
2In the field, for instance, a widely-held corporation may sell its securities to the
public or large institutional investors such as insurance companies. The question
of
shareholders' preemptive rights newly issued shares is considerably less significant
than in the case of a closely held corporation (see Secs. 39, 102.), which is unable to go
to the market for the issuance of securities but must pledge or mortgage its assets
and
even borrow on the personal notes of its principal stockholders. (W.L. Cary, Cases and
Materials on Corporations, 1969 Ed., pp. 19, 21.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

712

Sec. 95

reason for incorporation may be to achieve limited liability, to
assure continuity of the business upon their death, to obtain funds
more readily, or to escape from taxation at individual rates if
they are in high brackets. In reality, though not in law, theirs may
be an incorporated partnership. Despite certain advantages of
incorporation, they may nonetheless chafe at the rigid pattern of
internal control and management which is commonly associated
with it. They are still partners in spirit. For example, rule of majority
may be distasteful to them. They may all prefer to retain a veto
power to retain a veto power over major business decision. They
may be reluctant to have new 'partners' substituted without their
consent."
(2) Flexible standard operating procedure with respect to matters
of internal organization.
"The standard operating procedure for
corporation has been described as pyramidal in form, with the
shareholder at the base, the directors constituting the policy-making
body and managing the company's affair, and the officers executing
policies already formulated, (see Sec. 23.)
Typically, both shareholders and directors are expected to act
by majority vote, shares are freely transferable, and dissolution
is regarded as an extraordinary remedy. If there is any major
deviation from this established norm, by contract or otherwise,
doubt immediately arises whether it could be valid under the law.
Initially, in this area of the law, no effort was made consciously
to distinguish between the publicly held concern and the small
so-called close corporation. One natural inquiry is why such an
inflexible standard operating procedure
for all corporations
alike
should be treated as sacrosanct. Is it realistic in the case
of the closely held corporation? Does it accord with business
practice when the corporation is fundamentally the will and effort
of a few individuals? Is there any injury to outsider shareholders
or creditors
to the public generally, if the deviation is limited
to the internal organization of the corporation? These are some
of the questions which are being raised today and which may be
responsible for a noticeable tendency towards increasing corporate
flexibility in this country.
In America today, they are developing some recognition that a
closely held concern may in fact function upon an entirely different
basis than a public corporation. Its success may depend upon the

—

—

—

—

—

Sec. 96

TITLE XII. CLOSE CORPORATION

cooperative effort and mutual confidence of its shareholder owners.
Business practice here may play a major role in the development of
corporation law. Realistically, should public corporations on the one
hand, and chartered partnership on the other, be governed by single
inflexible standard operating procedure. Nevertheless, enthusiasm
for flexibility and the development of new legal concepts must be
tempered with competing practical considerations. If, for example,
unanimity is required for action by the shareholders or directors,
have we not thus encouraged the likelihood of a stalemate or
deadlock? At what point is a statutory solution available or even
feasible, if the 'partners' cannot agree?"
(3) Restriction of the freedom of the vote at the shareholders and at the
director level. "More specifically, let us return to the three partners.
Each of them will seek to implement his aims at the different levels
of corporate action. Each may want to insure concerted action
among the three of them, or perhaps that his own voice will carry
force, even to the point of veto. This is accompanied by restricting
the freedom of the vote at the shareholders and at the director level,
directly by the contract or indirectly by provisions in the charter or
bylaws requiring more than a majority for quorums and for policy
decisions. Each may want to obtain for himself a guaranteed position
as an officer of the company with a minimum salary. Each should
consider the possibilities for dissolving the corporation in the event
of a deadlock or of a serious clash of personalities. Finally, each will
want some control over the power of newcomers to buy stock in the
corporation." (W.L. Cary, Case and Materials on Corporations, 1969
Ed., pp. 362-363.)

—

Sec. 96. Articles of Incorporation. — The articles of
incorporation of a close corporation may provide for:
(a) Aclassiflcation of sharesorrights, the qualifications
for owning or holding the same and restrictions on their
transfers, subject to the provisions of the following
section;
(b) A classification of directors into one (1) or more
classes, each of whom may be voted for and elected solely
by a particular class of stock; and
(c) Greater quorum or voting requirements in meetings
of stockholders or directors than those provided in this

Code.

724

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 96

The articles of incorporation of a close corporation
may provide that the business of the corporation shall be
managed by the stockholders of the corporation rather
than by a board of directors. So long as this provision
continues in effect, no meeting of stockholders need be
called to elect directors; Provided, That the stockholders
of the corporation shall be deemed to be directors for the
purpose of applying the provision of this Code, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise; Provided, further, That
the stockholders of the corporation shall be subject to all
liabilities of directors.

Sec. 96

TITLE Xn. CLOSE CORPORATION

725

The classification of shares into common and founders' shares
and grant of founders' shares a 1:10 voting rights are valid. The 1:10
voting rights ratio for founders' shares is not subject to the limited
period under Section 7 of the Revised Corporation Code. The fiveyear limitation provided in Section 7 applies only to the grant of an
exclusive right to vote and be voted for in the election of directors.
(SEC Opinion No. 02-10, Jan. 15, 2010.)
(3) Management of the corporation by the stockholders. Where the
articles of incorporation provide that the business of the corporation
shall be managed by the stockholders themselves rather than by a
board of directors, then the stockholders shall be deemed to be the
directors with all liabilities imposed by the Revised Corporation
Code on directors, (par. 2.) In the ordinary stock corporation, the
management or conduct of the business and affairs thereof is
entrusted to the board of directors and cannot be turned over to the
stockholders except for few specified matters concerning its internal
affairs, (see Sec. 22.)
(a) Under Section 96 of the Revised Corporation Code, a
close corporation may task its stockholders with the manage¬
ment of business, essentially designating them as directors.
However, a close corporation must do so through a provision to
that effect in its articles of incorporation. (Ago Realty & Devel¬
opment Corp. vs. Ago, G.R. Nos. 210906 & 211203, October 16,

—

The articles of incorporation may likewise provide
than all officers or employees or that specified officers
or employees shall be elected or appointed by the
stockholders, Instead of by the board of directors.

Permissible provisions in articles
of incorporation.
Section 96 allows certain matters to be provided in the articles of
incorporation of a close corporation.
(1) Classification of directors into one or more classes.
An
illustration of letter (b) in paragraph 1, is where the articles of
incorporation provide for two classes of stock, "A" and "B,"
allocating a number of directors for each class, and the holders of
each class would be elected to the board of directors solely by the
holders of the same class regardless of the number of shares in each
class. But the number of the board of directors cannot be divided
into groups, with each group having different terms of office, (see
Sec. 22; for exceptions, see Secs. 91, 106.) It is not clear whether under
No. (3), unanimity requirements for stockholders' and directors'
resolution would be valid.
The classification of directors into one or more classes or groups
is not allowed in an ordinary or corporation.
(2) Quorum and voting requirements and voting requirements.
The articles of incorporation of a close corporation may provide for
quorum and voting requirements in meetings of stockholders or
directors greater than those provided in the Revised Corporation
Code.

—

—

2019.)
(b) Section 96 of the Revised Corporation Code

only speci¬
fies that "the stockholders of the corporation shall be subject to
all liabilities of directors." Nowhere in that provision is
there
any inference that stockholders of a close corporation are auto¬
matically liable for corporate debts and obligation. (Bustos vs.
Millians Shoe, Inc., G.R. No. 185024, April 24, 2017.)
(4) Election or appointment of officers
directly by the stockholders.
The articles may likewise provide that all or certain
specified
officers or employee shall be elected or appointed directly
by the
stockholders, instead of the board of directors. (Sec. 96, last par.)
In
the ordinary stock corporation, corporate officers are
elected by a
majority of all the members of the board of directors. (Sec. 24.)

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

726

Sec. 97
Sec. 97

Sec. 97. Validity of Restrictions on Transfer and Shares.
Restrictions on the right to transfer shares must
appear in the articles of incorporation, in the bylaws as
well as in the certificate of stock; otherwise, the same
shall not be binding on any purchaser in good faith. Said
restrictions shall not be onerous than granting the existing
stockholders or the corporation the option to purchase
the shares of the transferring stockholder with such
reasonable terms, conditions or period stated. If upon the
expiration of said period, the existing stockholders or the
corporation fails to exercise the option to purchase, the
transferring stockholder may sell their shares to any third

reasonable as to justify the restriction overriding the general policy
against restraint on alienation of personal property. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 19-06, March 13, 2006.)
Thus, a restriction fixing the purchase price much below
the
fair market value of the shares may be invalid.' Also invalid is a
prohibition against the transfer of stock without the prior consent of
the board of directors or of the other stockholders, (see SEC Opinion,
Aug. 28, 1995.)
n

’ .
i

•

727

the circumstances. The underlying test as to whether the restriction
is valid and enforceable is whether the restriction is sufficiently

—

person.

TITLE Xn. CLOSE CORPORATION

.

Li

i

Right of first refusal.

Restrictions on transfer of shares.
One of the three (3) distinguishing characteristics of a close
corporation is that all of its stock shall be subject to one or more
specified restrictions permitted by Title XII. (Sec. 95, par. 1.) It is
often justifiable, and at times imperative, for its stockholders to
protect themselves from future conflicts by placing restrictions on
the right of each one of them to transfer his share to an outsider. It is
perhaps for this reason that the Revised Corporation Code explicitly
allows such restriction in, and makes it an attribute of the close
corporation. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 19-06, March 13, 2006.)

If so provided in the articles of incorporation, the bylaws, and the
certificates if stock, the corporation or the stockholders have the right
of first refusal that is, the stockholders who want to sell his
shares to
any third person must first offer it to the corporation or to the other
existing stockholders usually under the same terms and conditions.
The rights pertain to shares already issued to stockholders. If
the
existing stockholders or the corporation fails to exercise the option
to purchase within the period stated, the transferring
stockholder
may sell his shares to the third person.1

Section 97 imposes two (2) conditions for the validity of
restrictions on the right to transfer shares, namely;
(1) Such restrictions must appear in the articles of incorporation
and in the bylaws, as well as the certificate of stock; otherwise, they
shall not bind on any purchaser thereof in good faith; (see Florete vs.
Florete, G.R. No. 22321, April 2, 2018.) and

'In an American case, there was a question as to the
"unreasonableness," that is,
"unfairness" of the price specified in die bylaws, namely, a price at which
the shares had
originally been purchased from the corporation. Reversing the
Appellate Division upon
this point, the court said (p. 543.): "Generally speaking
these reflections are employed by
the so-called 'dose corporations' as part of the
attempt
request the corporate structure to
a partnership by the giving the original
a sort of preemptive rights through
which they may, if they choose, veto thestockholder
admission of a new participants. Obviously, the
case where there is an easily ascertainable
market value for the shares of a dosely-held
corporate enterprise is the exception, not the rule,
and subsequently, various methods
or formulae for fixing the option price are
employed in a practice, e.g., book of appraisal
value, often exdusive of good will, or
then, the validity of the restriction a fixed price or the par value of the stock. In sum,
on
does not rest on any abstract notion of
intrinsic fairness of price. To be invalid,transfer
more than mere dispanty between option price
and current value of the stock must
be shown. Since the parties have in effect agreed on a
price formula which suited them,
and provision is made freeing the stock for outside
sale
should the corporation not make, or provide for, the
purchase, the restriction is reason¬
able and valid." (W.L., Cary, pp. 502-503,
dting Allen v. Biltmore Tissue Corp., 2 N.Y. 2d.,
534, 148 N.E. 2d 812 [1957].)
’The present policy of the
is to limit the period to one (1) month which is
deemed
"suffident for the stockholdersSEC
or for the corporation (not necessarily a closely-held one)
to signify their desire to
buy the shares of stock being offered for sale by

(2) They shall not be more onerous than granting the existing
stockholders or the corporation the option to purchase the shares of

the transferring stockholders with such reasonable terms, conditions
or period stated therein.
As a matter of policy, the SEC allows restrictions on transfer
of shares in the articles of incorporation if the same is necessary
and convenient to the attainment of the objective for which the
company was incorporated, unless palpably unreasonable under

stockholders."

728

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 97

Sec. 97

,
Need for stock transfer restrictions
In close corporations.
As noted earlier,
(1) Prevent changes in control of corporation.
one of the major objectives of the shareholders of a dose corporation
maybe remain dose, i.e., to choose new "partners" on the death
or retirement of the present shareholder partidpants. Although
restriction of the transfer of shares are occasionally adopted for
other reasons, the usual purpose of such restrictions is to prevent
changes in control of the corporation which might otherwise result
from the transfer of voting shares. (W.L. Cary, op. cit., p. 494.)
The shareholders of a close corporation, like partners, may wish
to ensure their own continuance as directors and officers if it is
permissible. (Ibid., p. 21.)
In contrast,
(2) Maintain delectus personae of partnership.
a widely-held corporation needs centralized management
distinguished from the owners which in a dose corporation may
not be needed or desired since, often, the same persons are both
managers and shareholders, with no clear differentiation separating
one capadty from the other. The idea that they must act as fiduciary
directors for the benefit of themselves as passive benefidal owners
will strike them as a legalistic nonsense.

TITLE XII. CLOSE CORPORATION

729

Corporation Law," 69 Harv. L. Rev. 1369 [1959].) They must prefer,
for obvious reasons, the delectus personae of the partnership. (C.
Rohrlich, op. cit., p. 100.)

—

Scope of restrictions.

In construing the full scope of the intended restrictions as
expressly set forth in the articles of incorporation and in the bylaws
as well as in the certificate of stock, the courts take the view that the
stated restrictions are "not to be enlarged by implication."
(1) Transfers covered. The articles of corporation, etc. should
make clear whether the restriction imposed upon transfers of
stock apply only to voluntary inter vivos sales or also to gifts or
to testamentary dispositions and devolution upon death or other
transfers by operation of law.
Ordinarily, option restrictions apply only to voluntary transfers.
Thus, it has been held that absent provisions to the
contrary, such
restraints do not prevent a shareholder from disposing of his shares
by testamentary provision (Stem v. Stem, 146 F [2d] 870.) nor
apply
to transfers by operation of law. (McDonald v. Farley &
Loetscher
Mfg. Co., 283 N.W. 261.) Neither do they apply to a sheriffs sale on
execution against a stockholder, nor to a sale of stock by a receiver
pursuant to an order of a court. (SEC Opinion, May 5, 1986.)
(2) Transferees covered.
Consideration should also be given
as to whether transfers to existing shareholders or to
members of
the transferor's immediate family should be included or
excluded,
totally or partially, from the scope of restriction. In this connection,
two considerations are involved. One, the limitation
upon the
admission in the corporation of new shareholders; and two, the
preservation of the initial proportionate
ownership as among the
original

—

—

—

Again, in the widely-held company, the shares of stock must
be freely transferable for the so-called "owners" demand a liquid
investment. In the dose corporation, this is not likely to be wanted
any more than it is in a partnership. The incorporators want to
continue as partners about with the advantages of corporate
personality; they do not want other people to be able to step into
the shoes of their co-partners. (Ibid., pp. 16-17, dting L.C.B. Grower,
in an article entitled "Some Contrast between British and American

shareholders.

(3) Optionees covered.

—

The articles of

etc.
should likewise set forth with precision whetherincorporation,
the option runs in
favor of all the stockholders or only to some of them, whether

(SEC Opinion, Oct. 13, 1964.) Under Sec. 97, an absolute restraint on transfer of stock
unlimited in time is valid. The SEC has held that the reasonable option period may range
from 30 to 60 days or even more, depending on the circumstances. Where the articles
of incorporation do not provide an option period, a clause that restricts the transfer
of stock by way of pledge or mortgage is not valid and enforceable because the effect
or
of the absence of such option period is to absolutely prohibit the mortgage, pledge,
(SECencumbrance of such stories without the written consent of the other stockholders.
OGC Opinion No. 19-06, March 13, 2006.)

there
is any entitled to be holder of record,
such person is conclusively
priority as among the optionees (e.g., the corporation and
the
other shareholders), the order of any such priority
and the extent
thereof, and the principle of participation as among the
optionees,

I

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE CHF THE PHILIPPINES

730

Sec. 98

i.e., whether they participate in the purchase equally, pro rata to the
existing holdings, or otherwise. (C. Rohrlich, op. cit., pp. 114-116.)
Sec. 98. Effects of Issuance or Transfer of Stock in Breach
of Qualifying Conditions.

—

(a) If a stock of a close corporation is issued or
transferred to any person who is not eligible to be a holder
thereof under any provision of the articles of incorporation
and of the certificate for such stock conspicuously shows
the qualifications of the persons entitled to be holders of
record thereof, such person is conclusively presumed to
have notice of the fact of the ineligibility to be a stockholder,
(a)

(b) If the articles of incorporation of a close
corporation states the number of persons, not exceeding
twenty (20), who are entitled to be stockholders of record,
and if the certificate for such stock conspicuously states
such number, and the issuance of transfer of stock to any
person would cause the stock to be held by more than
such number of persons, the person to whom such stock
is issued or transferred is conclusively presumed to have
notice of this fact. (A)
(c) If a stock certificate of a close corporation
conspicuously shows a restriction on transfer of the
corporation’s stock and the transferee acquires the
stock in violation of such restriction, the transferee is
conclusively presumed to have notice of the fact that the
stock was acquired stock in violation of the restriction. (A)
(d) Whenever a person to whom stock of a close
corporation has been issued or transferred has or Is
conclusively presumed under this section to have notice
of (1) the person’s ineligibility to be a stockholder of
the corporation; or (2) that the transfer of stock would
cause the stock of the corporation to be held by more
than the number of persons permitted under its articles
of incorporation; or (3) the transfer violates a restriction
on transfer of stock, the corporation may, at its option,
refuse to register the transfer of stock in the name of the
transferee. (A)
(e) The provisions of subsection (d) shall not be
applicable if the transfer of stock, though contrary to

99

,.

TITLE XU. CLOSE CORPORATION

731

subsection (a), (b), (c), has been consented to by all the
stockholders of the close corporation, or if the close
corporation has amended its articles of incorporation in
accordance with this Title.
(f) The term “transfer,” as used in this section is not
limited to a transfer for value.
(g) The provisions of this section shall not impair any
right which the transferee may have to either rescind the
transfer or recover the stock under any express or implied
warranty. (A)

Issuance or transfer of stock in breach
of qualifying conditions.
In the cases contemplated in Nos. 1, 2, and 3 of Section 99, the
transferee is conclusively presumed to have notice of the restriction
or condition and, therefore, he is not allowed to prove lack of notice
even if such is the fact. The corporation cannot be compelled to
register, although it may, at its option, register the transfer of the stock
in the name of the transferee. (No. 4.) The transfer, however,
shall
be binding upon the corporation notwithstanding such
conclusive
presumption, where it has been consented to by all the stockholders
of the close corporation or if the close corporation has
amended its
articles of incorporation as provided in Section 103. (No. 5.)
The term "transfer," as used above, includes donation as it is
not limited to a transfer for value. (No. 6.) Hence, the
conclusive
presumption of notice applies to a donee.
The breach of any restriction in the issuance or
of
is without prejudice to the right of the transfereetransfer stock
under existing
laws (i.e., Civil Code) to rescind the transaction or
recover under
applicable warranty, express or implied.

Sec. 99. Agreements by Stockholders. —
(a) Agreements duly signed and executed by
all and
among Stockholders before the formation
and organization
of a close corporation, shall survive the
Incorporation
and shall continue to be valid and binding
between
such stockholders, if such be their intent, to the
extent
that such agreements are consistent with the
articles of

1

I

732

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 99

Sec. 99

TITLE Xn. CLOSE CORPORATION

733

I
incorporation, irrespective of where the provisions of such
agreements are contained, except those required by this
Title to be embodied in said articles of incorporation.
(b) A written agreement signed bv two (2) or more
stockholders may provide that in exercising any voting
right, the shares held by them shall be voted as provided,
or as agreed, or in accordance with a procedure agreed
upon them.
(c) No provision in a written agreement signed by the
stockholders, relating to any phase of corporate affairs,
shall be Invalidated between the parties on the ground that
its effect is to make them partners among themselves.

(d) A written agreement among some or ail of the
stockholders in a close corporation shall not be invalidated
on the ground that it relates to the conduct of the business
and affairs of the corporation as to restrict of interfere with
the discretion or powers of the board of directors: Provided,
That such agreement shall impose on the stockholders
who are parties thereto the liabilities for managerial acts
imposed on directors by this Code.

(e) Stockholders actively engaged in the management
or operation of the business and affairs of a close
corporation, shall be held to strict fiduciary duties to each
other and among themselves. The stockholders shall be
personally liable for corporate torts unless the corporation
has obtained reasonably adequate liability insurance. (A)

Valid agreements by stockholders.

Section 99 considers the agreements mentioned valid between
the parties when executed by the stockholders of a close corporation.
Under paragraph (a), the pre-incorporation agreements among
stockholders shall continue to be valid and binding even after
incorporation if such be their intent, subject to the limitation that
they should not be inconsistent with the articles of incorporation.

Paragraph (a) refers to stockholders' agreement, while paragraph
(b) refers to voting or pooling agreements.

Paragraph (c) makes clear that even if the effect of a provision
in any written agreement relating to any phase of the corporate
affairs is to make the parties partners among themselves, the same
shall not be invalidated on that ground. This follows the modem
practice of allowing stockholders of a close corporation to operate
as a partnership among themselves but remaining as a corporation
with respect to third persons. Under paragraph (d), a stockholders'
agreement shall not be invalidated on the ground that it restricts or
interferes with the discretion or powers of the board of directors.
Paragraph (e) provides that the stockholders of a close
corporation shall be personally liable for corporate torts unless the
corporation has obtained reasonably adequate liability insurance. It
has been held that the president of a close corporation who actually
manages the business falls within the meaning of an "employed"
as contemplated by the Labor Code and may be held jointly and
severally liable for obligations of the corporation to its illegally
dismissed employees. Our jurisprudence is wanting as to the
definite scope of "corporate tort." Essentially, tort consists in the
violation of a right given or the omission of a duty imposed by law.
Simply stated, tort is the breach of a legal duty. (Naguiat vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 269 SCRA 553 [1997]; see Bustos vs.
Millans Shoe, Inc. vs. G.R. No. 185204, April 24, 2017.) According
to the Supreme Court, in cases of so-called corporate tort a
of close
corporation, it is the person "actively engaged" in the management
of the corporation who is held liable. In the absence of
clearly
identifiable officer(s) directly responsible for the legal infraction,
the Supreme Court considers the president of the
corporation as
such officer. (Kho vs. Magbanua, G.R. No. 237246, July 29, 2019;
Guillermo vs. Uson, G.R. No. 198967, March 7, 2016.)
Absent any factual basis that corporate tort was
the Supreme Court applied the general doctrine ofcommitted,
separate
juridical personality, which provides that a corporation
has a legal
personality separate and distinct from that of people comprising it.
By virtue of that doctrine, stockholders of a corporation
enjoy the
principle of limited liability: the corporate debt is not the debt of the
stockholder. Thus, being an officer or a stockholder of a corporation
does not make one's property the property also of the
corporation.
(Bustos vs. Millians Shoe, Inc., G.R.
No. 185024, April 24, 2017.)

734

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 100

Sec. 100. When a Board Meeting is Unnecessary or
Improperly Held. — Unless the bylaws provide otherwise,
any action taken by the directors of a close corporation
without a meeting called properly and with due notice shall
nevertheless be deemed valid if:
(a) Before or after such action is taken, a written
consent thereto is signed by all the directors; or
(b) All the stockholders have actual or implied
knowledge of the action and make no prompt objection in
writing; or
(c) The directors are accustomed to take informal
action with the express or implied acquiescence of all the
stockholders; or
(d) All the directors have express or implied knowledge
of the action in question and none of them makes a prompt
objection in writing.
An action within the corporate powers taken at a
meeting held without proper call or notice, is deemed
ratified by a director who failed to attend, unless after
having knowledge thereof, the director promptly files his
written objection with the secretary of the corporation.
;' f

Sec 101

TITLE XD. CLOSE CORPORATION

735

Sec. 101. Preemptive Right in Close Corporations. — The
preemptive right of stockholders in close corporations
shall extend to all stock to be issued, including reissuance
of treasury shares, whether for money, property or personal
services, or in payment of corporate debts, unless the
articles of incorporation provide otherwise.

Preemptive right of stockholders.

J

Action taken by directors without meeting
or at improperly called meeting.
In any of the four (4) cases specified, the action by the directors
of a close corporation without a meeting is deemed valid. The
exception is when the bylaws provide otherwise.
Under the last paragraph, ratification of the action cannot take
place where the meeting was held without proper call or notice or
the action is beyond the corporate powers of the corporation, (see
Sec. 44.)
Note that under the second paragraph, a written objection is
required, (see M.R. Dulay Enterprises, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 225
SCRA 678 [1993].) Under Section 52, an oral objection is sufficient to
preserve the right of a director to question the validity of any action
taken in a meeting held without proper notice.

In a widely-held corporation, the preemptive right extends to
new issues of shares out of an increase of the capital stock and to all
issues of unissued shares belonging to the authorized capital stock,
and even to treasury shares. (Sec. 9; see Sec. 38.)
In close corporations, the preemptive right of stockholders
(see Sec. 38.) extends to all stock to be issued, whether
common
or preferred, voting or non-voting, etc., newly authorized shares
or newly issued balance of originally authorized shares including
treasury shares;1 whether the consideration for the issuance of the
stock is cash or otherwise; and whether or not its denial will affect
their relative interest of position in the corporation.
In other words, the right of preemption is a matter of absolute
right on the part of the stockholders, except only when limited or
curtailed by the articles of incorporation. This is of vital importance
in closely-held corporations to keep the association
intact and
prevent the shifting of control from one faction to another or
to
unwelcome outsiders and thus, avoid deadlocks in the management
of the corporation, (see Sec. 103.)
The other exceptions provided in Section 38 are not
applicable.
Stockholders may waive their preemptive rights, (see SEC Opinion,
June 22, 1995.)

'"As long as they remain in the treasury (see Sec. 56.), they have
really the status
of unissued authorized shares
subject to "issues” (although "re issue" is the more
appropriate word) at some future time.

736

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 102-103

Sec. 102. Amendment of Articles of Incorporation. — Any
amendment to the articles of information which seeks to
delete or remove any provision required by this Title or
to reduce a quorum or voting requirement stated in said
articles of incorporation shall require the affirmative vote
of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock,
whether with or without voting rights, or of such greater
proportion of shares as may be specifically provided in
the articles of incorporation for amending, deleting or
removing any of the aforesaid provisions, at a meeting
duly called for the purpose.

Amendment of the articles
of incorporation.

Any amendment to the articles of incorporation must comply
with the requirements of Section 102. The amendment must be
approved at the stockholders' meeting duly called for the purpose.
Mere written assent of the stockholders allowed under Section 15 is
insufficient. The other provisions of Section 15 apply. (See Sec. 95,
last par.) Note that even those without voting rights are entitled to
vote.
The amendment may terminate the status of the corporation as
a close corporation.
Sec.

103.

Deadlocks.

— Notwithstanding any

contrary provision in the close corporation’s articles of
incorporation, or bylaws or stockholders agreement, If the
directors or stockholders are so divided on the management
of the corporation’s business and affairs that the votes
required for a corporate action cannot be obtained, with
the consequence that the business and affairs of the
corporation can no longer be conducted to the advantage

of the stockholders generally, the Commission, upon
written petition by any stockholder, shall have the power
to arbitrate the dispute. In the exercise of such power, the
Commission shall have authority to make such order as
It deems appropriate, including an order: (a) cancelling
or altering any provision contained In the articles of
incorporation, bylaws, or any stockholders' agreement;
(b) cancelling, altering or enjoining a resolution or act of
the corporation or its board of directors, stockholders,
or officers; (c) directing or prohibiting any act of the

Sec. 103

i

TITLE XD. CLOSE CORPORATION

737

corporation or its board of directors, stockholders, officers
or other persons party to the actions; (d) requiring the
purchase at the fair value of shares of any stockholder,
either by the corporation regardless of the availability
of unrestricted retained earnings in its books, or by the
other stockholders; (e) appointing a provisional director;
(f) dissolving the corporation; or (g) granting such other
relief as the circumstances may warrant.
A provisional director shall be an Impartial person who
is neither a stockholder nor a creditor of the corporation
or of any of its subsidiaries or affiliates, and whose
further qualifications, If any, may be determined by the
Commission. A provisional director is not a receiver of
the corporation and does not have the title and powers
of a custodian or receiver. A provisional director
shall
have ail the rights and powers of a duly elected director
including the right to be notified of and to vote at meetings
of directors until removed by order of the Commission
or
by all stockholders. The compensation of the provisional
director shall be determined by agreement between such
director and the corporation, subject to approval of the
Commission, which may fix the compensation absent an
agreement or in the event of disagreement between
the
provisional director and the corporation.

Arbitration of Intra-corporate deadlocks by the

—

SEC.
(1) Written petition by any stockholder.
If the directors of
stockholders of a close corporation are evenly divided on the
management of the corporation's business and affairs, and there
is no way to settle the dispute, they
may become deadlocked. The
situation may lead to the paralyzation of corporate operations which
may have grave consequences to the members of the
corporation.
To avoid these consequences, the SEC, upon
written petition by any

stockholder, shall have power to arbitrate the dispute.
(2) Action by the SEC.
The power given to the
SEC by the Section 103 may be exercised,
notwithstanding any
provision in the articles of
incorporation bylaws or agreement of

—

!
738

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 103

stockholders of a close corporation to the contrary. In the exercise
of its power, the SEC may make such order as it deems appropriate
under the circumstances including thedissolution of the corporation.
The SEC may order the dissolution of the corporation if it will
be beneficial to the stockholders and to creditors but where the
business is successful, it may appoint instead a provisional director
as additional member of the board.
The second paragraph specifies the qualifications, rights, and
powers of a provisional director who may be appointed by the SEC
in the exercise of the authority conferred upon it by Section 103.
Dissolution in the event of deadlock.
Some statutes (like Sec. 103.)
(1) Dissolution not favored.
expressly provide for dissolution in the event of a deadlock in
the board of directors and/or among the stockholders on the
management of the corporation's business and affairs (e.g., in
the election of the directors). They commonly refer to an "evenly
divided" board and are, therefore, not available when the board is
composed of an uneven number of directors unless the "odd man"
is a "dummy." The "sword of dissolution "cuts both ways, and
whether ease or difficulty of bringing about dissolution is "good"
or "bad" depends upon whose ox is being gored. All depends upon
which party is most seriously prejudiced by maintenance of the
status quo. It is, therefore, important in many situations to consider
means whereby the statutory power vested in a given percentage to
bring about dissolution is curtailed for the greater protection of the
minority who may be opposed to dissolution.
Section 103 provides a formula for
(2) Arbitration by SEC.
obviating dissolution upon disagreement among the stockholders
of a close corporation by authorizing the arbitration of their
differences by the SEC. Even where the law applies, the dissolution
of an operating corporation, especially if the disagreement does
not render it impossible for the corporation to continue operating,
should be the exception rather than the rule.
But while resort to statutory
(3) Dissolution by SEC.
XTV.)
are not precluded unless limited
dissolution proceedings (Ti tie
or waived by express provisions to such effect in an agreement of all
the stockholders (see Sec. 100.), the SEC has the power, in a proper

—

—

—

Sec 104

" TITLE xn. CLOSE CORPORATION

”

739

case, such as where there exists a fundamental deadlock causing
injury to the corporation, to order its dissolution when there is

no other way left to save the stockholders' investment from this
integration.1 (see C. Rohrlich, op. cit., pp. 137-139.)
Sec. 104. Withdrawal of Stockholder or Dissolution
In addition and without prejudice to
other rights and remedies available under this Title, any
stockholder of a close corporation may, for any reason,
compel the corporation to purchase shares
held at fair
value, which shall not be less than the par or issued
value,
when the corporation has sufficient assets in its books to
cover its debts and liabilities exclusive of capital stock:
Provided, That any stockholder of a close corporation
may, by written petition to the Commission, compel the
dissolution of such corporation whenever any acts of the
directors, officers or those in control of the corporation
are Illegal, fraudulent, or dishonest, or oppressive or
unfairly prejudicial to the corporation or any stockholder,
or whenever corporate assets are being misapplied or
wasted.
of Corporation.

—

Right of stockholder to withdraw or to have
the corporation dissolved.

The right of the stockholder to withdraw may be exercised "for
any reason" provided that the corporation has sufficient
assets to
cover its debts and liabilities exclusive of capital stock.
’"Such small corporations, being really
between two or three people
who contribute their capital, skills, experience,partnerships,
and labor,
equity as partnerships in many respects. A large corporationshould be treated by a court of
or one that has some prospect
of becoming large is really an institution
separate and distinct from its owners serving
a separate purpose in our society by
providing employment, accumulating capital for
proper purposes and adding community
or growing corporation is temporarily wealth and community service. Even if a large
operating at a loss, there may be quite reasonable
expectation that its position will improve. Not
so with the two-man corporation which
owns no valuable trade secrets, market advantages
or growth probabilities but simply
continues to exist as the form in which individuals pool their efforts.
When one of those
two dies and everything indicates that
the corporation can never do more than pay salary
to the survivor, the reason for
corporate existence is gone and the court of equity should
make a dissolution decree fashioned to fit
the facts and providing for an appropriate
form of dissolution and sale of assets whether
the survivors or by public auction or
otherwise as may appear just." (Desmond, ChieftoJudge
[dissenting!, in Kreiger v. Gerth,
16 N.Y. 2d 802, 210 N.E. 2d 355.)

740

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 104

On the other hand, his right to have the corporation dissolved by
written petition to the SEC must be founded on some legal grounds
mentioned, justifying dissolution by the SEC which shall order the
dissolution only after proper notice and hearing, (see Sec. 137.)

Title XIII

SPECIAL CORPORATIONS
Chapter I — Educational Corporations

Sec. 105. Incorporations. — Educational corporations
shall be governed by special laws and by the general
provisions of this Code.

Educational corporations defined.
An educational corporation is a stock or nonstock corporation
organized to provide facilities for teaching or instruction. Such
corporations normally maintain a regular faculty and curriculum
and normally have a regular organized body of pupil or students, or
attendance at the place where the educational activities are regularly
carried on. (see Oleck, Modem Corporation Law, p. 540.)
Laws applicable.

Educational corporations are classified by the Revised
Corporation Code as "special corporations" and are different
from an ordinary nonstock corporation formed or organized for
educational purpose, (see Sec. 87.)
Educational corporations1 are governed primarily by special
laws, and suppletorily, by the general provisions of the Revised
1

"Sec. 4(2). Educational institutions, other than those established by religious groups
and mission boards, shall be owned solely by citizens of the Philippines or corporations
or associations sixty per centum of the capital of which is owned by such citizens. The
Congress may, however, require increased Filipino equity participation in all educational
institutions. The control and administration of educational institutions shall be vested in
citizens of the Philippines. No educational institution shall be established exclusively for
aliens, and no group of aliens shall comprise more than one-third of the enrollment in
any school. The provisions of this subsections shall not apply to schools established for
foreign diplomatic personnel and their dependents, and, unless otherwise provided by
law, for other foreign temporary residents." (Constitution, Art XIV.)
741

742

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 106

Corporation Code, (see Sec. 105.) Those organized as stock
corporations are governed by the provisions on stock corporations
as to number and term of directors. (Sec. 106, last par.)
Incorporation.

Except insofar as may be provided by special laws, the
incorporation of educational corporations shall be governed by the
provision of the Revised Corporation Code, (see Secs. 10-18.)
The term of an educational institution incorporated under
the Corporation Law (Act No. 1459) is perpetual. However, if
the educational institution amended its articles of incorporation
specifically limiting its corporate term after its incorporation, the
fixed or definite term should be followed. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.

11-19, March 13, 2019.)

—

>

Sec. 106. Board of Trustees. Trustees of educational
institutions organized as nonstock corporations shall not
be less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15): Provided,
That the number of trustees shall be in multiples of five (5).
Unless otherwise provided In the articles of
incor-poration or the bylaws, the board of trustees of
incorporated schools, colleges, or other Institutions
of learning shall, as soon as organized, so classify
themselves that the term of office of one-fifth (1/5) of
their number shall expire every year. Trustees thereafter
elected to fill vacancies, occurring before the expiration of
a particular term, shall hold office only for the unexpired
period. Trustees elected thereafter to fill vacancies caused
by expiration of term shall hold office for five (5) years.
A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. The powers and authority of
trustees shall be defined in the bylaws.
For institutions organized as stock corporations, the
number and term of directors shall be governed by the
provisions on stock corporations.

1

Sec 106

TITLE Xm. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

Board of trustees or directors.
Section 108 lays down these rules:
(1) For nonstock educational corporations.

743

—

(a) The number of trustees shall not be less than five (5) nor
more than 15;

(b) The number of trustees shall be in multiples of five (5),
i.e., their number shall be five (5), 10, or 15;

(c) Unless otherwise provided in thearticles of incorporation
or the bylaws, the term of office of 1 /5 of the number of the
trustees shall be staggered with a one-year interval;1
(d) Trustees subsequently elected shall have a term of five
(5) years;
(e) Trustees elected to fill vacancies occurring before the

expiration of a particular term shall hold office only for the
unexpired period;
(f) A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business; and
(g) The powers and authority of trustees shall be defined in
the bylaws, subject to the provision of Section 22.
(2) For stock educational corporations. The number and term of
directors shall be governed by the provisions on stock corporations.
Educational corporations may, through their articles of
incorporation or their bylaws, designate their governing board by
any name other than a board of trustees. (Sec. 174.)

—

’"The second paragraph of the provision, although setting the term of the members
of the Board of Trustees, at five (5) years, contains a proviso expressly subjecting the
duration to what is otherwise provided in the articles of corporation or bylaws of the
educational corporation. That contrary provision controls on the term of the office."
(Barayuga vs. Adventist University of the Philippines, 655 SCRA 640 [2011].) The
"contrary provision" (1st sentence) refers only to the staggering of the terms of office to
expire every year. Nonetheless, articles of incorporation or bylaws may provide the term
of office of the trustees not exceeding five (5) years.

744

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 107-109

Chapter II — RELIGIOUS CORPORATIONS
Sec. 107. Classes of Religious Corporation. — Religious
corporations may be incorporated by one or more persons.
Such corporations may be classified into corporations
sole and religious societies.

Religious corporations shall be governed by this
Chapter and by the general provisions on nonstock
corporations insofar as applicable.

—

Sec. 108. Corporation Sole.
For the purpose of
administering and managing, as trustee, the affairs,
property and temporalities of any religious denomination,
sect or church, a corporation sole may be formed by the
chief archbishop, bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or other
presiding elder of such religious denomination, sect or

church.

—

Sec. 109. Articles of Incorporation.
In order to
become a corporation sole, the chief archbishop, bishop,
priest, minister, rabbi or presiding elder of any religious
denomination, sect or church must file withthe Commission
articles of incorporation setting forth the following:
(a) That the applicant chief archbishop, bishop, priest,
minister, rabbi or presiding elder represents the religious
denomination, sect or church which desires to become a
corporation sole;
(b) That the rules, regulations and discipline of the
religious denominations, sect or church are consistent
with his becoming a corporation sole and do not forbid it;
(c) That such chief archbishop, bishop,priest, minister,
rabbi or presiding elder, is charged with the administration
of the temporalities and the management of the affairs,
estate and properties of the religious denomination, sect
or church within the territorial jurisdiction, so described

succinctly In the articles of Incorporation;

(d) The manner by which any vacancy occurring in
the office of chief archbishop, bishop, priest, minister,
rabbi or presiding elder is required to be filled, according
to the rules, regulations or discipline of the religious
denominations, sect or church; and

Secs. 110-111

TITLE XIH. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

745

(e) The place where the principal office of the
corporation sole is to be established and located, which
place must be within the territory of the Philippines.

The articles of incorporation may include any other
provision not contrary to law for the regulation of the
affairs of the corporation.

Sec. 110. Submission of the Articles of Incorporation. —
The articles of incorporation must be verified by affidavit
or affirmation of the chief archbishop, bishop, priest,
minister, rabbi or presiding elder, as the case may be, and
accompanied by a copy of the commission, certificate of
election or letter of appointment of such chief archbishop,
bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or presiding elder, duly
certified to be correct by any notary public. (156a)
From and after filing with the Commission of the said
articles of incorporation, verified by affidavit or affirmation,
and accompanied by the documents mentioned in the
preceding paragraph, such chief archbishop, bishop,
priest, minister, rabbi or presiding elder shall become
a corporation sole and all temporalities, estate and
properties of the religious denomination, sect or church
theretofore administered or managed as such chief
archbishop, bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or presiding
elder shall be personally held in trust as a corporation
sole, for the use, purpose, exclusive benefit and on behalf
of the religious denomination, sect or church, including
hospitals, schools, colleges, orphan asylums, parsonages
and cemeteries thereof.

—

Sec. 111. Acquisition and Alienation of Property.
A
corporation sole may purchase and hold real estate and
personal property for Its church, charitable, benevolent
or educational purposes, and may receive bequests or
gifts for such purposes. Such corporation may sell or
mortgage real property held by it by obtaining an order for
that purpose from the Regional Trial Court of the province
where the property is situated upon proof that the notice
of the application for leave to sell or mortgage has been
made through publication or as directed by the Court, and
that it is In the interest of the corporation that leave to sell

or mortgage should be granted. The application for leave

746

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 112-113
Sec 114

to sell or mortgage must be made by petition, duly verified,
by the chief archbishop, bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or
presiding elder acting as corporation sole, and may be
opposed by any member of the religious denomination,
sect or church represented by the corporation sole:
Provided, That in case where the rules, regulations and
discipline of the religious denomination, sect or church,
religious society or order concerned represented by such
corporation sole regulate the method of acquiring, holding,
selling and mortgaging real estate and personal property,
such rules, regulations and discipline shall govern, and
the intervention of the court shall not be necessary.

Sec. 112. Filling of Vacancies. — The successors in
office of any chief archbishop, bishop, priest, minister,
rabbi or presiding elder in a corporation sole shall become
the corporation sole on their accession to office and shall
be permitted to transact business as such upon filing a
copy of their commission, certificate of election, or letters
of appointment, duly certified by any notary public with the

Commission
During any vacancy in the office of chief archbishop,
bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or presiding elder of any
religious denomination, sect or church incorporated as
a corporation sole, the person or persons authorized
by the rules, regulations or discipline of the religious
denomination, sect or church represented by the
corporation sole to administer the temporalities and
manage the affairs, estate and properties of the corporation
sole shall exercise all the powers and authority of the
corporation sole during such vacancy.

Sec. 113. Dissolution. — A corporation sole may be
dissolved and its affairs settled voluntarily by submitting
to the Commission a verified declaration of dissolution,
setting forth.
(a) The name of the corporation;
(b) The reason for dissolution and winding up;
(c) The authorization for the dissolution of the
corporation by the particular religious denomination, sect

or church; and

TITLE Xm. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

747

(d) The names and addresses of the persons who are
to supervise the winding up of the affairs of the corporation.
Upon approval of such declaration of dissolution by
the Commission, the corporation shall cease to carry on
its operations except for the purpose of winding up its
affairs.
Sec. 114. Religious Societies. — Unless forbidden by
the Constitution, pertinent rules,
regulations, or discipline of the religious denomination,
sect or church of which It is a part, anv religious society
or religious order, or anv diocese, synod, or district
organization of anv religious denomination, sect or church,
may, upon written consent and/or by an affirmative vote
at a meeting called for the purpose of at least two-thirds
(2/3) of its membership, Incorporate for the administration
of its temporalities or for the management of Its affairs,
properties and estate by filing with the Commission,

competent authority,

articles of incorporation verified by the affidavit of the
presiding elder, secretary, or clerk or other member of such
religious society or religious order, or diocese, synod, or
district organization of the religious denomination, sect or
church, setting forth the following:
(a) That the religious society or religious order, or
diocese, synod, or district organization is a religious
organization of a religious denomination, sect or church;

(b) That at least two-thirds (2/3) of its membership has
given written consent or has voted to incorporate at a duly
convened meeting of the body;
(c) That the incorporation of the religious society or
religious order, or diocese, synod, or district organization
Is not forbidden by competent authority or by the
Constitution, rules, regulations or discipline of the religious
denomination, sect or church of which it forms a part;
(d) That the religious society or religious order,
or diocese, synod, or district organization desires to
incorporate for the administration of its affairs, properties
and estate;
(e) The place within the Philippines where the principal
office of the corporation is to be established and located;
and

748

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 107-114

(f) The names, nationalities, and residence addresses
of the trustees, not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen
(15), elected by the religious society or religious order, or
the diocese, synod or district organization to serve for the
first year or such other period as may be prescribed by the
laws of the religious society or religious order, or of the
diocese, synod, or district organization.

Definition of religious corporation.
A religious corporation has been defined as a corporation
composed entirely of spiritual persons1 and which is organized
for the furtherance of a religion or for perpetuating the rights of
the church or for the administration of church or religious work or
property. (Oleck, Modem Corporation Law, p. 14.)

Secs. 107-114

TITLE Xin. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

749

incorporation under Section 107. (Iglesia Evangelista Metodista vs.
Figaro, 624 SCRA 224 [2010]; see Secs. 86, par. 2.)
Note that Sections 107 to 114 do not provide for the term of
existence of religious corporations, whether classified as corporation
sole or religious society.
(2) As a rule, the bylaws of a religious corporation must
conform with the general provisions affecting corporations. Any
inconsistency shall be resolved in favor of the special provisions
of Title XI on nonstock corporations and Title Xin, Chapter II on
religious corporations. Thus, since the special provisions pertaining
to religious corporations do not specify the mode of election of the
board of trustees of a religious corporation, its bylaws may provide
for the same in line with rules of the religious denomination of
which it is part. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 28, 1974.)

Applicable provisions.

Religious corporations are classified by the Revised Corporation
Code as "special corporations" and are not to be confused with an
ordinary nonstock corporation organized for religious purpose,
(see Sec. 87.) The Revised Corporation Code does not require
any religious group, sect, or denomination to be registered as a
corporation but the status of an unregistered religious group is that
of an ordinary organization or association without juridical or legal
personality separate and distinct from that of its members.
(1) Religious corporations are primarily governed by Sections
107 to 114 and suppletorily, by the general provisions of Title XI
on nonstock corporations (Secs. 86 to 94.) insofar as they may be
applicable. (Sec. 107, par. 2.) Thus, pursuant to Section 92, their
bylaws may provide that the members may hold their regular or
special meetings at any place even outside the place where the
principal office of the corporation is located. Although the Revised
Corporation Code provides no specific mechanism for amending
the articles of incorporation of corporation sole, it may be converted
into a corporation aggregate by mere amendment of its articles of
'The spiritual persons that may compose ecclesiastical corporation are bishops,

certain deans and prebendaries, all archdeacons, persons and vicars which are sole
corporations and those abbots and monks which may constitute corporations aggregate.
(1 Fetcher, p. 188.)

Classes of religious corporations.

Religious corporations may be classified into corporation sole
and corporation aggregate /religious society. They may also be
formed or organized as ordinary religious nonstock corporations.
(Sec. 87.)

—

(1) Corporation sole. A corporation sole is incorporated by one
person (Sec. 107, par. 1.) and consist of one member or corporator
only and his successor, such as a bishop.

Under Section 108, it may be formed by the chief archbishop,
bishop, priest, minister, rabbi or other presiding elder of a religious
denomination, sect or church for the purpose of administering and
managing, as trustee, the affairs, property and temporalities of such
religious denomination, sect or church. In a broad sense, the term
temporalities means the money revenue of a church, derived from
pew rents, subscriptions, donations, collections, cemetery charges,
and other sources. (Black's Law Dictionary [Rev. 4th Ed.], p. 1634.)
(a) Filing articles of incorporation and other documents.
In
order to be a corporation sole, the chief archbishop, etc. must
file with the SEC a verified articles of incorporation setting forth
the matters mentioned in Section 109, although it may include
any other provision not contrary to law for the regulation of the

—

750

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 107-114

affairs of the corporation. (Sec. 108.) Thus, a corporation sole may
include in its articles all matters which could be provided for in
the bylaws. Such articles must be accompanied by a copy of the
commission, certificate of election, or letter of appointment of
such chief archbishop, etc. as the case may be. (Sec. 110, par. 1.)
A corporation sole is not required to file bylaws with the
SEC. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 27, 1988; SEC Opinion, Oct. 17, 1988;
SEC Opinion, Jan. 25, 1984; SEC Opinion, June 5, 1982.)
(b) Effect of filing.
From and after filing, with the SEC
of the articles of incorporation the chief archbishop, etc.,
as the case may be, shall become a corporation sole,’ and
all the temporalities, estate, and properties of the religious
denomination, sect or church theretofore administered by him
as such chief archbishop, etc. shall be held in trust by him as a
corporation sole for the benefit of his religious denomination,
sect or church, including hospitals, schools, colleges, orphan
asylums, parsonages and cemeteries thereof. (Ibid., par. 2.) But
properties acquired by the corporation shall be registered in
the name of such chief archbishop, etc. or in the name of the
corporation, and not in the name of such archbishop, etc. "in
trust for the use, purpose, and exclusive benefit" of his religious
denomination.
The title to the property is in the corporation and the chief
archbishop, etc. is administering it as representative of that
corporation, (see Bishop of Nueva Segovia vs. Insular Gov't., 26
Phil. 300 [1913].)

—

Note that Section 110 does not expressly require the approval
by the SEC of the articles of incorporation.

—

(c) Acquisition and alienation of property.
A corporation
sole may purchase and hold property, real and personal, and
receive bequests or gifts for its church, charitable, benevolent
or educational purposes. However, authority from the Regional
Trial Court is required before it can mortgage or sell real

’ll is not required by law to file bylaws with the SEC; neither do the rules
and regulations of the SEC require such class of corporation to file any reportorial
requirements, such as the general information sheet and financial statements. (SEC
Opinion, Oct 17, 1988.)

Secs. 107-114

TITLE Xni. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

751

property but such authority is unnecessary where the religious
denomination, sect or church, religious society or order
concerned represented by the corporation sole has rules which
regulate the acquisition, mortgage, and selling of real estate and
personal property, in which case such rules shall control. (Sec.
Ill; see Republic vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 168 SCRA
165 [1988].)

—

(d) Filling of vacancies. The successors in office of any chief
archbishop, etc., as the case may be, shall become the corporation
sole on the filing with the SEC of a notarized copy of their
commission, certificate of election, or letters of appointment. In
case of any vacancy in the office of chief archbishop, etc., as the
case may be, the person or persons authorized by the rules of the
denomination to administer the affairs of the corporation sole
during such vacancy shall exercise all the powers and authority
of the corporation sole during such vacancy. (Sec. 112.)
(e) Term of existence.
The articles of incorporation of a
corporation sole does not have to state the term for which it is
to exist. Once incorporated, a corporation sole, unless otherwise
provided in the articles of incorporation, shall exist indefinitely
unless it is dissolved.
(f) Dissolution.
Under the Revised Corporation Code, a
corporation sole may be dissolved voluntarily by filing with the
SEC for approval a verified declaration of dissolution setting
forth the matters specified in Section 113. Upon such approved,
the corporation shall be deemed dissolved. (Sec. 113.)
(g) Merger. The SEC allowed a merger of a corporation
sole with a nonstock, non-profit charitable organization. (SECOGC Opinion No. 26-08, Nov. 21, 2008.)
(2) Religious society. Unlike a corporate sole consisting of one
member, a corporation aggregate (or a religious society) consists
of two or more persons. (Iglesia Evanglica Metodista en Las Islas
Filipinas (EMELIF), Inc. vs. Juane, G.R. No. 172447, September 18,
2009; Sec. 107, par. 1.) Under Section 114, any religious society or
religious order, or any diocese, synod, or district organization of
any religious denomination, sect or church, may generally, upon
written consent and/or by an affirmative vote at a meeting called

—

—

—

—

752

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 107-114

for the purpose, of at least 2/3 of its membership, incorporate for
the administration or management of its temporalities, affairs and
property.

—

(a) Filing of articles of incorporation.
To incorporate, the
religious society, etc. must file with the SEC, a verified article of
incorporation setting forth the matters mentioned in Section 114.
Note again that the law does not expressly require the approval
by the SEC of the articles of incorporation.

—

(b) Registration not mandatory.
The law does not require
religious societies or churches to register as a corporation but
they may do so to acquire legal personality for the administration
of their temporalities or properties. (SEC Opinion, April 6, 1968.)

Even if not registered, the members of a religious
organization, "by agreement", may perform acts not contrary
to law, morals, good customs, public order or public policy. But
since the status of an unregistered religious group is only that of
an "ordinary organization" which has no legal personality, the
members themselves, not the organization, may be sued and be
held "personally" responsible and liable for their acts, and those
who act or purport to act as the organization's representatives
or agents do so at their own risks. (SEC Opinion, June 15, 1988.)
(c) It is only upon incorporation that a religious society or
church can have juridical personality and may acquire properties
in its own name.3 (SEC Opinion, Feb. 28, 1974.) The Roman
Catholic Church is not registered like other religious societies or
churches in the Philippines, because it has been recognized as a
juridical person since time immemorial. (Barlin vs. Ramirez, 7
Phil. 41 (1906].)

’In a case, the aux of the controversy was who of the two (2) factions of a voluntary
religious group (of hermanas mayores) would be entitled to possession of the properties
(religious images) in litigation, all of them being members of the same association. It was
held that the right of such an organization (which was strictly independent of the church)
to the use o( its property must accordingly be determined by the ordinary principles
which govern voluntary association. "The use of properties of a religious congregation
in case of schism, is controlled by the numerical majority of the members. The minority
in choosing to separate themselves into a distinct body, and refusing to recognize the
authority of the government body, can claim no rights in the property from the fact that
they once had been members." (Cafiete vs. Court of Appeals, 171 SCRA 13 (1989].)

Secs. 107-114

•

TITLE XIII. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

753

—

(d) Terms of existence.
Section 114 (and as Sec. 160 of
the former Corporation Law) does not provide for a term of
existence of religious corporations whether classified as a
corporation sole or a corporation aggregate. As such, the law
intends that religious corporations may exist perpetually.
Accordingly, where the articles of incorporation of a religious
corporation does not provide a term of existence, it shall be
understood that the intention is for the corporation to exist
for an indefinite period, unless sooner dissolved or revoked in
accordance with law. (SEC Opinion No. 45-04/ Nov. 4, 2004; see
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 18-14, July 10, 2014; SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 14-11, March 9, 2011; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-08, June 6,
2008.)

According to the SEC: "The corporate term of a religious
corporation is not required to be specified in its articles of
incorporation under the old Corporation Law, the applicable law
when the church was incorporated. While the old Corporation
Code provides a term for corporations in general, this does not
apply to religious corporations. The [old] Corporation Code has
specific provisions for religious corporations, set out in Title XIH
on Special Corporations, particularly on Sections 110 and 116,
both of which do not provide for a term of existence of religious
corporations, whether classified as corporation sole or religious
society. The law never intended to limit the corporate life of
religious corporations. Hence, they may be allowed to exist
perpetually. The rule is the same under Chapter n, Title Xin
of the Revised Corporation Code on religious corporations."
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 38-19, Sept. 17, 2019.)
If the articles of incorporation of the religious corporation
had a fixed term that was not renewed before the expiration of
the term, the religions corporation is deemed legally dissolved.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 12-18, Aug. 6, 2018.)

4

Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 723 [2002],

754

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 107-114

Corporation sole.

—

(1) Components; purpose; power to hold and transmit property. A
corporation sole is a special form of corporation usually associated
with the clergy? It consists of one person only, and his successors
(who will always be one at a time), in some particular station, who
are incorporated by law to give them some legal capacities and
advantages particularly that of perpetuity which in their natural

persons they could not have had. (Republic vs. Intermediate
Appellate Court, 168 SCRA 165 [1988], citing Reid v. Barry, 93 Fla.
849, 112 So. 846.)
Through this legal fiction, church properties acquired by the
incumbent of a corporation sole pass by operation of law, upon
his death, not to his personal heirs but to his successor in office.
A corporation sole, therefore, is created not only to administer
the temporalities of the church or religious society where he
belongs, but also to hold and transmit the same to his successor
in the office. (Roman Catholic Apostolic Adm. of Davao, Inc. vs.
Land Registration Commission, 102 Phil. 596 [1957]; Republic vs.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 168 SCRA 165 [1988].)
(2) Merely the administrator of properties of church.
Both the
Revised Corporation Code (see Sec. 108.) and the Canon Law are
explicit in their provisions that a corporation sole or "ordinary"
is not the owner of the properties he may acquire but merely the
administrator and holds the same in trust for the church to which
the corporation is an organized and constituent part. Being mere
administrator of the temporalities or properties titled in his name,
constitutional provisions requiring 60 (or 100) per centum Filipino
ownership are not applicable, unless the control over the property
affected has been devised to circumvent the real purpose of the
Constitution.6 (Ibid.)

—

’Conceived and introduced into the common law by sheer necessity, the legal
creation which was referred to as "that unhappy freak of English law" was designed
to facilitate the exercise of the functions of ownership carried on by the clerics for and
on behalf of the church which was regarded as the property owner. (1 Bouvier's Law
Dictionary, pp. 682-683.)
‘Also, considering that there is no express provision conferring ownership
of properties of the Catholic Church on the Pope, although he appears to be the
administrator, nor on the head of the corporation sole, as he is a mere administrator of its
properties, the ownership thereof devolves upon the church or congregation acquiring
the same. A corporation sole can, therefore, purchase private lands in the Philippines

Sec. 115

TITLE XIII. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS ,

,

755

—

(3) Without nationality.
Although a branch of the Universal
Roman Catholic Apostolic Church, every Roman Catholic Church
in different countries, if it exercises its mission and is lawfully
incorporated in accordance with the laws of the country where it
is located, is considered an entity or person with all the rights and
privileges granted to such artificial being under the laws of that
country, separate and distinct from the personality of the Roman
Pontiff or the Holy See without prejudice to its religious relations
with the latter which are governed by the Canon Law or their rules
and regulations. The Roman Catholic Church in the Philippines has
no nationality. Corporations sole cannot be considered as aliens
because they have no nationality.’
In determining, therefore, whether constitutional provisions
requiring 60 (or 100) per centum Filipino capital apply to a
corporation sole, the nationality of the constituents of the diocese,
and not the nationality of the actual incumbent of the parish, must
be considered.* (Ibid.)
Chapter III

— ONE PERSON CORPORATIONS (N)

Sec. 115. Applicability of Provisions to One Person
Corporations. The provisions of this Title shall primarily
apply to One Person Corporations. Other provisions of
this Code apply suppletorily, except as otherwise provided
In this Title.

—

without violating the Constitution although its head is an alien, as long as it can be shown
that the religious denomination which he represents is owned at least 60% by Philippine

citizens. (SEC Opinions, Nov. 6, 1990 and Sept. 21, 1993.)
’ll has been held that the Iglesia ni Cristo, as a corporation sole or juridical person,
is disqualified to acquire or hold alienable lands of the public domain, except by lease,
because of the prohibition in Art. XIV, Sec. 11 of the Constitution (now Art. XII, Sec 2.) and
because the said church is not entitled to avail of the benefits of Sec. 48(b) of the Public
Land Law which applies only to the Filipino citizens or natural persons. A corporation
sole has no nationality. (Republic vs. Villanueva, 11 SCRA 875 [1982]; Republic vs.
Gonong, 118 SCRA 729 [1982]; Republic vs. Iglesia ni Cristo, 127 SCRA 687 [1984] and
128 SCRA 44 [1984].)
’it is not for the SEC to determine as to what should be the basis of determining the
60% citizenship requirement whether it should be based on the capital contribution or
on the number of membership. The question should be addressed to the Land Registration
Authority for a definite ruling. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 8, 1994.)

—

I

756

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 116

Applicability of other provisions.
(1) Chapter HI applies primarily to One Person Corporations
(OPCs).
(2) Other provisions (e.g., on perpetual existence, articles of
incorporation) apply suppletorily, except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter. Under Section 119, for example, the One Person
Corporation is not required to submit and file corporate bylaws.
(3) The Revised Corporation Code allows the conversion of
a corporation from an ordinary stock corporation to OPC and the
conversion from an OPC to an ordinary stock corporation. (SEC

Memo. Circ. No. 27-20, August 25, 2020.)

—

Sec. 116. One Person Corporation.
A One Person
Corporation is a corporation with a single stockholder:
Provided, That only a natural person, trust, or an estate
may form a One Person Corporation.

Banks and quasi-banks, preneed, trust, insurance,
public and publicly-listed companies, and non-chartered
government-owned and -controlled corporations may
not incorporate as One Person Corporations: Provided,
further, That a natural person who is licensed to exercise
a profession may not organize as a One Person Corporation
for the purpose of exercising such profession except as
otherwise provided under special laws.

Definition.

An OPC is a stock corporation with a single stockholder who can
only be a natural person, trust, or estate. It is truly, an incorporated
sole proprietorship. It has an "OPC" suffix that reflects its nature as
anOPC.

Sec 117

TITLE Xni. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

(3) If the single stockholder is a trustee, administrator, executor,
guardian, conservator, custodian, or other person exercising
fiduciary duties, proof of authority to act on behalf of the trust or
estate must be submitted at the time of incorporation, (see Sec. 1,
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 7-09, Series of 2019.)
(4) A natural person licensed to exercise a profession may not
organize as an OPC to exercise such profession except as otherwise
provided under special laws.
(5) Banks, nonbank financial institutions, quasi-banks,
preneed, trust insurance, public and publicly listed companies,

nonchartered GOCCs cannot incorporate as OPC.
(6) A foreign natural person may put up an OPC, subject to the
applicable capital requirement and constitutional and stationary
restrictions on foreign participation in certain investment areas
or activities. (Sec. 15, ibid.) The application to do business in the
Philippines shall be filed by the single stockholder under R.A. No.
7042, the Foreign Investments Act.
(7) There is no prohibition against a single stockholder to
organize more than one OPC.
Number and qualifications.
(1) To form a new domestic corporation under the Revised
Corporation Code, any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, singly or jointly with others but not more than 15, may
organize themselves and form a corporation.
(2) Only an OPC may have a single stockholder, and a sole
director. (Sec. 4, SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.) Its
registration must comply with the guidelines on the establishment
of an OPC. (SEC 1, Memo. Circ. No. 16, series of 2019.)

Incorporator.
(1) The incorporator of an OPC who is a natural person must be
of legal age and must sign the articles of incorporation and bylaws.
(SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.)'
(2) As an incorporator, the "trust," as used by the law, does not
refer to a trust entity, but the subject being managed by a trustee.

'See SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019 (Guidelines on the Establishment of

•One Person Corporation)

Sec. 117. Minimum Capital Stock Not Required for One
Person Corporation. — A One Person Corporation shall not
be required to have a minimum authorized capital stock
except as otherwise provided by special law.

Minimum capital stock not required.
An OPC is organized as a stock corporation.
(1) The OPC is not required to have a minimum authorized
capital stock except as otherwise provided by special law. Further,

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

758

Sec. 118

unless otherwise required by applicable laws or regulations, no
portion of the authorized capital is required to be paid-up at the
time of incorporation. (Sec. 8, SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25,

2019.)

(2) The rule is intended principally to encourage or help small
business enterprises to take advantage of the corporate form with its
separate juridical personality and Limited liability features. There is,
however, no prohibition against big businessmen, corporations, and
partnerships to incorporate as an OPC through a natural person,
trustee, or an estate.

Term of existence.
The term of existence of the OPC shall be perpetual. In other
words, there is no option to the OPC to adopt in its articles of
incorporation a corporate term for a specific period. In case of the
trust or estate, its term of existence shall be coterminous with the
existence of the trust or estate.
(1) The OPC under the name of the estate may be dissolved
upon proof of partition such as Order of Partition issued by the court
in case of Judicial Settlement and Deed of Extrajudicial Settlement
in case of summary settlement of the estate.
(2) The OPC under the name of the trustee may be dissolved
upon proof of termination of the trust, (see Sec. 2, SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.)
,

.

—

Sec. 118. Articles of Incorporation.
A One Person
Corporation shall file articles of incorporation in
accordance with the requirements under Section 14 of this
Code. It shall likewise substantially contain the following:
(a) If the single stockholder is a trust or an estate,
the name, nationality, and residence of the trustee,
administrator, executor, guardian, conservator, custodian,
or other person exercising fiduciary duties together with
the proof of such authority to act on behalf of the trust or
estate; and
(b) Name, nationality, residence of the nominee and
alternate nominee, and the extent, coverage and limitation of

the authority.

Secs. 119-122

TITLE Xin SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

759

Only articles of incorporation needed.

(1) The OPC shall file its articles of incorporation in accordance
with the requirements of Section 14. It shall substantially contain the

information in items (a) and (b) of Section 118.
(2) The articles of incorporation must set forth its primary
purpose, principal office address, term of existence, names and
details of the single stockholder, the nominee and alternate nominee
and the authorized, subscribed and paid-up capital and such other
matters consistent with law and which may be deemed necessary
and convenient. (Sec. 6, SEC Memo. Circ. No. 7-19, series of 2019.)
For facility of registration, the applicants may follow the
sample of articles of incorporation of an OPC attached to SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 7.

—

Sec. 119. Bylaws. The One Person Corporation Is not
required to submit and file corporate bylaws.
Bylaws not required.

The Revised Corporation Code does not require OPCs to submit
and file corporate bylaws. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25,
2019.)
Sec. 120. Display of Corporate Name. — A One Person
Corporation shall indicate the letters “OPC” either below or
at the end of Its corporate name.

Display of corporate name.

The suffix "OPC" is required to be indicated by the OPC either
below, or at the end of corporate name. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19,
April 25, 2019.) The SEC may impose administrative sanctions on
an OPC transacting business without indicating clearly that it is an
Sec. 121. Single Stockholder as Director, President. — The
single stockholder shall be the sole director and president
of the One Person Corporation.
Sec. 122. Treasurer, Corporate Secretary, and Other
Officers. Within fifteen (15) days from the Issuance of its
certificate of Incorporation, the One Person Corporation

—

760

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 123

shall appoint a treasurer, corporate secretary, and
other officers as it may deem necessary, and notify the
Commission thereof within five (5) days from appointment
The single stockholder may not be appointed as the corporate
secretary.

A single stockholder who is likewise the self-appointed
treasurer of the corporation shall give a bond to the
Commission in such a sum as may be required: Provided,
That, the said stockholder/treasurer shall undertake
In writing to faithfully administer the One Person
Corporation’s funds to be received as treasurer, and to
disburse and invest the same according to the articles of
incorporation as approved by the Commission. The bond
shall be renewed every two years or as often as may be
required.
Sec. 123. Special Functions of the Corporate Secretary.

— In addition to the functions designated by the One Person

Corporation, the corporate secretary shall:

(a) Be responsible for maintaining the minutes book
and/or records of the corporation;
(b) Notify the nominee or alternate nominee of thedeath
or incapacity of the single stockholder, which notice shallbe
given no later than five (5) days from such occurrence;

(c) Notify the Commission of the death of the single
stockholder within five (5) days from such occurrence and
stating in such notice the names, residence addresses, and
contact details of all known legal heirs; and
(d) Call the nominee or alternate nominee and the
known legal heirs to a meeting and advise the legal heirs
with regard to, among others, the election of a new director,
amendment of the articles of incorporation, and other
ancillary and/or consequential matters.

Officers of the OPC.
(1) The single stockholder is the president and sole director
of the OPC. He may not appoint himself as corporate secretary in
view of the distinct functions (Sec. 123.) of the secretary but may to
appoint himself as treasurer of the corporation.

Secs. 124

TITLE Xin. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

761

(2) Within fifteen (15) days from the issuance of its certificate of
incorporation, the OPC shall appoint a treasurer, corporate secretary,
and other officers, and notify the SEC thereof within five (5) days
from appointment, using the Appointment Form as prescribed by
the SEC.
The single stockholder shall not be appointed as corporate
secretary but may assume the role of a treasurer. (SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.)
(3) The single stockholder who assumes the position of the
treasurer shall post a surety bond to be computed based on the
authorized capital stock of the OPC, as shown in the table below
(SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.):

ACS
1.00101,000,000.00
1,000,001.00 to 2,000,000.00
3,000,001.00 to 4,000,000.00

Surety Bond Coverage*
1,000,000.00
2,000,000.00
3,000,000.00
4,000,000.00

4,000,001.00 to 5,000,000.00

5,000,000.00

2,000,001.00 to 3,000,000.00

(4) Section 123 enumerates the special functions of the corporate
secretary.
‘Subject to renewal every two (2) years or as may be required, upon
review of the annual submission of the audited financial statements/
financial statements certified under oath by the company's president
and treasurer.
“The bond is a continuing requirement for so long as the single
stockholder is the self-appointed Treasurer of the OPC.
‘“The bond may be cancelled upon proof of appointment of another
personas the Treasurer and Filing of Amended Form for Appointment
of Officers. (Sec. 10, SEC Memo. Circ., supra.)

—

Sec. 124. Nominee and Alternate Nominee. The single
stockholder shall designate a nominee and an alternate
nominee who shall, in the event of the single stockholder’s
death or Incapacity, take the place of the single stockholder as
director and shall manage the corporation’s affairs.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Sea. 124-126

762

The articles of incorporation shall state the names,
residence addresses and contact details of the nominee and
alternate nominee, as well as the extent and limitations of
their authority In managing the affairs of the One Person
Corporation.
The written consent of the nominee and alternate
nominee shall be attached to the application for incorporation.
Such consent may be withdrawn in writing any time before the
death or incapacity of the single stockholder.

—

Sec. 125. Term of Nominee and Alternate Nominee.
When the incapacity of the single stockholder is temporary,
the nominee shall sit as director and manage the affairs
of the One Person Corporation until the stockholder, by
self-determination, regains the capacity to assume such

duties.
In case of death or permanent incapacity of the
single stockholder, the nominee shall sit as director and
manage the affairs of the One Person Corporation until the
legal heirs of the single stockholder have been lawfully
determined, and the heirs have designated one of them or
have agreed that the estate shall be the single stockholder of
the One Person Corporation.
The alternate nominee shall sit as director and manage the
One Person Corporation in case of the nominee's inability,
incapacity, death, or refusal to discharge the functions as
director and manager of the corporation, and only for the
same term and underthe same conditions applicable to the
nominee.

Sec. 126. Change of Nominee or Alternate Nominee.

— The single stockholder may, at any time, change its

nominee and alternate nominee by submitting to the
Commission the names of the new nominees and their
corresponding written consent. For this purpose, the
articles of incorporation need not be amended.

Designation of nominee and alternate
nominee required.

—

The single stockholder is required to designate
a nominee and an alternate nominee who shall replace the single
stockholder and manage the corporation affairs, in the event of the
latter's death and/or incapacity. The written consent of both the
(1) Purpose

TITLE xm. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

Sea. 127-128

763

nominee and alternate nominee shall be attached to the application
for incorporation. Such consent may be withdrawn in writing. (SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.)
(2) Change of nominee or alternate nominee —To effect the change
in the nominee, the articles of incorporation need not be amended.
(SEC Memo. Circ. No. 07-19, April 25, 2019.)
A sample form of the notice of the change of nominee and
alternate nominee (infra.) is attached to SEC Memo. Circ. No. 27-20.
(3) Term
The term depends on whether the incapacity of the
stockholder is temporary or permanent.
(a) If the single stockholder becomes incapacitated the
nominee can take over the management of the OFC as director
and president. At the end of the incapacity, the single stockhold¬
er can resume the management of the OPC.
(b) In case of death or permanent incapacity of the single
stockholder, the nominee will take over the management of
the OPC until the legal heirs of the single stockholder have
been lawfully determined and the heirs have agreed among
themselves who will replace the deceased, (see Sec. 132, par. 2.)

—

Sec. 127. Minutes Book. — A One Person Corporation
shall maintain a minutes book which shall contain all
actions, decisions, and resolutions taken by the One
Person Corporation.
Sec. 128. Records in Lieu of Meetings. — When action
Is needed on any matter, it shall be sufficient to prepare
a written resolution, signed and dated by the single
stockholder, and recorded in the minutes book of the One
Person Corporation. The date of recording in the minutes
book shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting for all
purposes under this Code.

Minutes books and records.
(1) The minutes book shall contain all actions, decisions, and

resolutions taken by the OPC.

(2) It shall be sufficient to prepare a written resolution, signed
and dated by the single stockholder and recorded in the minutes
book, with respect to action taken by the OPC on any matter.
.1

764

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 129

(3) The date of recording in the minutes book of any action
taken by an OPC shall be deemed to be the date of the meeting. The
records shall be in lieu of meetings.
The provisions on corporate books and records required to
be kept by other corporations (including financial statements) are
provided in Sections 73 and 74 of the Revised Corporation Code,
(see Sec. 161.)

—

Sec. 129. Reportorial Requirements.
The One Person
Corporation shall submit the following within such period
as the Commission may prescribe:
(a) Annual financial statements audited by an
independent certified public accountant: Provided, That
if the total assets or total liabilities of the corporation are
less than Six hundred thousand pesos (P600.000.00), the
financial statements shall be certified under oath by the
corporation’s treasurer and president;
(b) A report containing explanations or comments by
the president on every qualification, reservation, or adverse
remark or disclaimer made by the auditor in the latter’s
report;
(c) A disclosure of all self-dealings and related party
transactionsentered into between the One Person Corporation
and the single stockholder; and

(d) Other reports as the Commission may require.

For purposes of this provision, the fiscal year of a One
Person Corporation shall be that set forth in its articles of
incorporation or, in the absence thereof, the calendaryear.
The Commission may place the corporation under
delinquent status should the corporation fail to submit the
reportorial requirements three (3) times, consecutively or
intermittently, within a period of five (5) years.

Reportorial requirements.
The OPC must submit within the period required by the SEC
the documents mentioned in Section 129.
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 7-2019 (2019) requires the OPC to submit
annual audited dated financial statements within 120 days from the
end of the fiscal year as stated in the articles of incorporation. (Sec.

TITLE XIII. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

Sec 130

765

13.) The SEC may place the corporation under delinquent status
should it fail to submit the reportorial requirements three (3) times
consecutively or intermittently, within a period of five (5) years.

For purposes of Section 129, the fiscal year of an OPC shall be
that set forth in its articles of incorporation or in the absence thereof,
the calendar year.
Sec. 130. Liability of Single Shareholder. — A sole
shareholder claiming limited liability has the burden of
affirmatively showing that the corporation was adequately
financed.

Where the single stockholder cannot prove that the
property of the One Person Corporation is independent of
the stockholder’s personal property, the stockholder shall be
jointly and severally liable for the debts and other liabilities
of the One Person Corporation.
The principles of piercing the corporate veil applies
with equal force to One Person Corporations as with other
corporations.

Liability of single stockholder.
(1) Limited liability. A sole shareholder enjoys limited liability
just like a stockholder in a stock corporation. He is not personally
liable for the obligations of the OPC. To be exempt, however, he has
the burden to affirmatively show that:

—

(a) the OPC was adequately financed; and
(b) the property of the OPC is independent of his personal

property.

(2) Personal liability. — The single stockholder has a personality
separate and distinct from the OPC. As in the case of other
corporations, the principles of piercing the veil of corporate fiction
are expressly made applicable by Section 130 with equal force to
OPC when pursued under the medium of sole proprietorship. His
failure to overcome the proven fact that the OPC was not adequately
financed at the time of its incorporation or the property of the OPC
is not independent of his personal (i.e., non-invested) property shall
make him jointly and severally or solidarity liable for all the debts
and other liabilities of the OPC.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

766

Sec. 131

Section 130 contemplates a situation when the OPC becomes
insolvent and can no longer pay its debts and other liabilities from
its own assets.
Sec. 131. Conversion from an Ordinary Corporation to a One
Person Corporation. — When a single stockholder acquires
all the stocks of an ordinary stock corporation, the latter
may apply for conversion into a One Person Corporation,
subject to the submission of such documents as the
Commission may require. If the application for conversion is
approved, the Commission shall issue a certificate of filing of
amended articles of incorporation reflecting the conversion.
The One Person Corporation converted from an ordinary
stock corporation shall succeed the latter and be legally
responsible for all the latter’s outstanding liabilities as of
the date of conversion.

Conversion to OPC of an ordinary corporation.
A single stockholder (natural person of legal age, a trust, or an
estate) who acquires all the stocks of an ordinary stock corporation
may apply with the SEC for its conversion into an OPC.1
(1) The ordinary stock corporation shall submit the documentary
requirements (enumerated in Sec. 1 of SEC Memo. Circ. No. 272020) which shall be processed as an amendment to the articles of
incorporation.
(2) Upon issuance of the Certificate of Filing of Amended
Articles of Incorporation by the SEC reflecting the conversion to
OPC, the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the ordinary stock
corporation shall be deemed superseded. The date of issuance of the
Certificate of Filing of Amended Articles of Incorporation shall be
deemed as the date of approval of the conversion. (SEC Memo. Circ.
No. 27-2020.)
(3) The OPC, as the successor corporation, shall be legally
responsible for all the outstanding liabilities of the ordinary stock
corporation as of the date of approval of the conversion. (SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 27-2020.)
’See Appendix I: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 27-20, August 25, 2020 (Guidelines for the
Conversion of Corporations Either to a One Person Corporation or to Ordinary Stock
Corporation).

Secs. 132

TITLE Xin. SPECIAL CORPORATIONS

767

Sec. 132. Conversion from a One Person Corporation to
an Ordinary Stock Corporation. — A One Person Corporation
may be converted into an ordinary stock corporation
after due notice to the Commission of such fact and
of the circumstances leading to the conversion, and
after compliance with all other requirements for stock
corporations under this Code and applicable rules. Such
notice shall be filed with the Commission within sixty (60)
days from the occurrence of the circumstances leading
to the conversion into an ordinary stock corporation. If all
requirements have been complied with, the Commission
shall issue a certificate of filing of amended articles of
incorporation reflecting the conversion.
In case of death of the single stockholder, the nominee
or alternate nominee shall transfer the shares to the duly
designated legal heir or estate within seven (7) days from
receipt of either an affidavit of heirship or self-adjudication
executed by a sole heir, or any other legal document
declaring the legal heirs of the single stockholder and
notify the Commission of the transfer. Within sixty (60)
days from the transfer of the shares, the legal heirs shall
notify the Commission of their decision to either wind up
and dissolve the One Person Corporation or convert It into
an ordinary stock corporation.

The ordinary stock corporation converted from a One
Person Corporation shall succeed the latter and be legally
responsible for all the latter’s outstanding liabilities as of
the date of conversion.

Conversion to ordinary stock corporation of OPC.
An OPC may be converted into an ordinary stock corporation
when the shares in an OPC ceases to be held solely by a single
stockholder.
(1) These are the conditions to effect the conversion.
(a) Due notice must be given by the OPC to the SEC of such
conversion and the circumstances leading to the same;
(b) There must be compliance with all other requirements
for stock corporations under the Revised Corporation Code and
applicable rules of the SEC; and

768

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 132

i.'

।

(c) The notice must be filled with the SEC within 60 days
from the transfer of shares such transfer shall be deemed to
be the date that the corresponding Certificate Authorizing
Registration /tax clearance is issued by the Bureau of Internal

Title XIV

Revenue;

(2) If all the requirements have been complied with, and after
an evaluation of the documentary requirements, the SEC shall issue
a certificate of filing of amended articles of incorporation reflecting
the conversion.
(3) The ordinary stock corporation shall succeed the OPC and
be legally responsible for all the latter's outstanding liabilities as of
the date of conversion.
(4) Thesecond paragraph of Section 132 speaks of the obligation
of the nominee or alternative nominee and the legal heirs in case of
death of the single stockholder as regards the notice to be given to
the SEC. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 27-2020.)

DISSOLUTION
Sec. 133. Methods of Dissolution. — A corporation
formed or organized under the provisions of this Code
may be dissolved voluntarily or Involuntarily.

Meaning of dissolution.
(1) The term dissolution, as applied to a corporation, signifies
die extinguishment of its franchise to be a corporation and the
termination of its corporate existence.
(2) It is that condition of law and fact which ends the capacity
of the body corporate to act as such and necessitates a liquidation
and extinguishment of all legal relations existing in respect of the
corporate enterprise.
(3) It denotes the complete destruction of the corporation and
within contemplation of the law, is equivalent to its death, being
sometimes likened to the death of a natural person.1 (16 Fletcher, p.

655.)

Power to dissolve corporation.
It is an accepted theory that what the law itself has granted,
the law may take away. And so, a corporation may come to an end
'A distinction not to be ignored exists, however, between the life of a human being
and that of a personi ficta, the creature of the State. When a human being dies,
his death is
equally a fact whether it is brought about legally or illegally. But thedeath of a corporation
must be "conditioned by juristic quality of the cause." There is no dissolution,
strictly
speaking, unless the corporation has lost all power to continue or resume its business
as
a going concern. (Ibid.)
As has been pointed out, the law which gives a corporation existence may
terminate
for some purposes and yet permit it to continue for purpose of
setting its affairs.
(Ballantine, p. 729.) The result of dissolution "is not death of the corporation,
but its
retirement from active business." (Ibid., p. 731.)
769

770

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 133
Sec 133

and its life extinguished only by the act or with the approval of the
sovereign power by which it was established. (Ibid., p. 659.) Being
a creation of the State, a corporation can be dissolved only with the
consent of the State?
De Jure and de facto dissolution.

The dissolution of a corporation may either be de jure or de facto.
(1) A de jure dissolution is a dissolution in law adjudged and
determined by judicial sentence, or brought about by an act of or
with the consent of the sovereign power, or which results from the
expiration of the charter period of corporate life.
(2) A de facto dissolution is one which takes place in substance
and in fact when the corporation by reason of insolvency, cessation
of business, or otherwise, suspends all its operations and as it may
be, goes into liquidation still retaining its primary franchise to be
a corporation. The mere fact, however, that the corporation has
quit doing business does not necessarily constitute even a de facto
dissolution, if it is still solvent and has not gone into liquidation. (16
Fletcher, p. 656.)

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

771

Methods or causes of corporate dissolution.
A corporation can have perpetual existence. The law, however,
permits the dissolution of corporations. Under Section 133, a private
corporation organized under the law may be dissolved either
voluntarily or involuntarily.
These two (2) methods of dissolving corporations may be
outlined as follows:
(1) Voluntarily, which may be effected:
(a) by the vote of the board of directors /trustees and the
stockholders /members where no creditors are affected (Sec.
134.);

(b) by judgment of the SEC after hearing of petition for
voluntarily dissolution where creditors are affected (Sec. 135.);
(c) by amending the articles of incorporation to shorten the
corporate term (Sec. 136.); or

(d) in the case of a corporation sole, by submitting to the
SEC, a verified declaration of dissolution for approval. (Sec.
113.)

Two legal steps In corporate dissolution.

(2) Involuntary, which may be effected:

Dissolution of a corporation involves two (2) legal steps:
(1) The termination of the corporate existence at least as far as
the right to go on doing ordinary business is concerned; and
(2) The winding up of its affairs, the payment of its debts, and
the distribution of its assets among the stockholders (Ibid., p. 655.)
or members and other persons interested. After winding up, the
existence of the corporation is terminated for all purposes.
After the formal dissolution of the corporation, any its
stockholders may form another corporation that will engage in the
same line of business even if if s done during the liquidation period.

(a) by expiration of the term provided for in the original
articles of incorporation (Sec. 11.);

’Accordingly, the courts of one State do not have the power to dissolve a corporation
created by the laws of another State. In fact, the dissolution of corporations is primarily a
matter for the legislature and is ordinarily not a matter of judicial cognizance. However,
our law (Infra.) authorizes the dissolution of a corporation through judicial proceedings
or permits dissolution by the stockholders or members without judicial proceedings. (
Am. Jur. 2d 953-954.)

(b) by legislative enactment (Infra.)-,

(c) by failure to formally organize and commence the
transaction of its business within two (2) years from the date of
incorporation (Sec. 21.); or
(d) by order of the SEC. (Sec 137.)

Methods exclusive.
According to some decisions, the methods of effecting dissolution
as prescribed by statute are exclusive,3 and a corporation cannot be
’Piercing the veil of corporate fiction (see Sec 2.) is not one of the causes by which a
corporation may be dissolved.

The total destruction of a condominium project does not automatically dissolve the
condominium corporation. Under R.A. No. 4726 (Condominium Law), two (2) general
options are available for unit owners to pursue: First, restore or

reconstruct the project

772

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 134

dissolved except in the manner prescribed by law. It is said that a
failure to follow the prescribed statutory method renders ineffectual
any attempt to dissolve a corporation. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 955.)

The requirements for dissolution mandated by the Revised
Corporation Code should be strictly complied with, (see Vesagas vs.
Court of Appeals, 371 SCRA 508 [2001].)
Sec. 134. Voluntary Dissolution Where No Creditors
Are Affected. — If dissolution of a corporation does not
prejudice the rights of any creditor having a claim against
it, the dissolution may be effected by majority vote of the
board of directors or trustees, and by a resolution adopted
by the affirmative vote of the stockholders owning at least
majority of the outstanding capital stock or majority of the
members of a meeting to beheld upon thecall of the directors
or trustees.

At least twenty (20) davs prior to the meeting, notice
shall be given to each shareholder or member of record
personally, bv registered mail, or bv anv means authorized
under its bylaws, whether or not entitled to vote at the
meeting, in the manner provided In Section 50 of this Code
and shall state that the purpose of the meeting is to vote on
the dissolution of the corporation. Notice of the time, place,
and object of the meeting shall be published once Prior to the
date of the meeting in a newspaper published in the place
where the principal office of said corporation is located, Q£
if no newspaper is published in such place, in a newspaper
ofgeneral circulation in the Philippines.

A verified request for dissolution shall be filed with the
Commission stating: (a) the reason for the dissolution; (b)
the form, manner, and time when the notices were given;
(c) names of the stockholders and directors or members and
trustees who approved the dissolution; (d) the date, place,
and time of the meeting in which the vote was made; and (e)
details of publication. (N)

The corporation shall submit the following to the

Commission; (1) a copy of the resolution authorizing

and continue with the condominium; and second, terminate the condominium project ano
voluntarily dissolve the corporation under any of the conditions provided under sai
law. (see Secs. 13, 14 thereof.)

Sec 134

773

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

the dissolution, certified by a majority of the board of
directors or trustees and countersigned by the secretary
of the corporation; (2)prQOfofPublication;and(3) favorable
recommendation from the appropriate regulatory agency,

when necessary.
Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the verified
request for dissolution, and in the absence of any
withdrawal within said period, the Commission shall
approve the request and issue the certificate of dissolution.
The dissolution shall take effect only upon the issuance by
the Commission of a certificate of dissolution. (N)

No application for dissolution of banks, banking and
quasi-banking Institutions, preneed, insurance and trust
companies, NSSLAs, pawnshops, and other financial
intermediaries shall be approved by the Commission
unless accompanied by a favorable recommendation of the
appropriate government agency. (N)

Voluntary dissolution of corporations.

The legal existence of a corporation is terminated only when a
corporation is dissolved by legal authority or expires by limitation
of existence or by forfeiture. (Ballantine, p. 709.) Thus, the statutory
provision on voluntary dissolution must be followed to legally
effect the dissolution of a corporation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 6, 1964.)
(1) Compliance with legal requirements.
A mere resolution
by the board of directors or trustees and by the stockholders or
members of a corporation to dissolve the same does not have the
effect of dissolution but some other steps, administrative or judicial,
are necessary. (Daguhoy Enterprises, Inc. vs. Ponce, 96 Phil. 15
[1954].) In case of voluntary dissolution, it can have no legal effect
until all the requirements prescribed by law are complied with. A
corporation being a legal creation, it can be dissolved only in the
manner prescribed by the law which gave it life.
(2) When corporation deemed dissolved.
The corporation shall
be deemed dissolved only upon the issuance of the certificate of
dissolution, if the dissolution is effected under Section 134; when

—

—

774

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 134

a judgment is rendered dissolving the corporation, if under Section
135; upon approval of the amended articles of incorporation or the
expiration of the shortened term, as the case may be, if under Section
136; and upon approval of the verified declaration of dissolution,
if
under Section 113.

—

(3) Where no dissolution papers filed. If no dissolution papers are
filed with the SEC by a corporation claiming dissolution voluntarily,
such corporation is still deemed legally existing, notwithstanding
the fact that it has ceased to operate. The only possible exception
is where the corporation is dissolved by judicial decree (Infra.) and
the court order dissolving it has not been filed with the SEC. In such
case, the corporation would be legally dead even if the SEC has no
notice of such fact. (SEC Opinion, March 1, 1971.)
(4) Where corporation sole. A corporation sole may be dissolved
and its affairs settled voluntarily by submitting to the SEC a verified
declaration of dissolution. Upon approval of such declaration by the
SEC, the corporation shall cease to carry on its operations except to
wind up its affairs. (Sec. 131.)

—

Voluntary dissolution where no creditors
are affected.
(1) How affected.
A private corporation may be dissolved
voluntarily if the dissolution does not affect the rights of any creditor
against such corporation. The dissolution is effected by the vote of
the board of directors or trustees and by a resolution duly adopted
by the affirmative vote of the stockholders owning at least majority
(formerly 2/3) of the outstanding capital stock or majority of the
(formerly at least 2/3) members.

—

The procedure for dissolution (including the documents the
corporation shall submit to the SEC) is specifically provided for
in Section 134. Even holders of non-voting shares or non-voting
members, as the case may be, are entitled to vote on the matter.
(Sec. 6, par. 3[hj.) The publication requirement regarding the time,
place, and object of the meeting is prescribed for the protection of

unknown creditors.

।

Sec 134

775

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

—

(2) Issuance of certificate of dissolution. The SEC is required to
issue a certificate of dissolution. Such requirement was not present
in the former Corporation Law (Act No. 1459.), and the practice
of the SEC was merely to record the fact of voluntary dissolution
of a corporation. It was not required to issue an order expressly
approving the dissolution. Consequently, the issuance of the
certificate of filing of the resolution of voluntary dissolution was
sufficient to dissolve the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 6, 1964.)

—

(3) Dissolution of a corporation sole.
Under Section 113, a
corporation sole may be dissolved voluntarily by submitting to the
SEC a verified declaration of dissolution which must be approved
by the SEC before the dissolution can take effect.

Sale of assets in anticipation of voluntary
dissolution.

Under Section 39 of the Revised Corporation Code, the board
of directors or trustees of a corporation may be authorized by the
holders of at least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or by at least
2/3 of the members of the corporation "to sell, lease, exchange,
mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of its property and assets,
upon such terms and conditions and for such consideration which
may be money, stocks, bonds, or other instruments for the payment
of money or other property or consideration, as its board of directors
or trustees may deem expedient." (par. 1.)

—

(1) Liquidation of corporate debts permitted. In anticipation of a
voluntary dissolution proceeding, a corporation may, pursuant to
Section 39, convert its assets into cash and settle with its creditors.
The proceeds of such sale may be used to pay debts, although no
refund of capital to stockholders except as authorized by Section 39
may be made until the dissolution is accomplished. This is so, because
corporations are under no obligations to continue in business. The
right to do business is purely voluntary, and if at anytime it is
deemed advisable to suspend the transaction of business, pay debts,
and convert assets into cash or its equivalent, the execution of that

776

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 135

purpose is a matter which concerns the corporation and its creditors
alone. (Fisher, op. cit., p. 379.)
While a
(2) Distribution of corporate assets prohibited.
corporation may validly liquidate its debt before its dissolution
under Section 39 of the Revised Corporation Code, it cannot, under
the express prohibition of Section 139 (last par.) thereof, "distribute
any of its assets or property except upon lawful dissolution and
after payment of all its debts and liabilities." Since it is only upon
the issuance of the certificate of dissolution that the dissolution
of a corporation becomes legally effective, it cannot, before such
issuance, lawfully distribute its assets to its stockholders though it
may lawfully liquidate its debts in anticipation of such voluntary
dissolution. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 6, 1964.)

—

Right of minority stockholders to oppose

dissolution.
Ordinarily, the motive of the stockholders voting for dissolution
is immaterial. Only in rare and exceptional cases will their action be
stayed or interfered with by the courts or the SEC.
If a stockholder had the votes required for voluntary dissolution
of a corporation and dissolution was necessary to protect his
investment and would not give unfair advantage over other
stockholders, the fact that the corporation would suffer if it were
dissolved is immaterial.4 (19 Am. Jur. 2d 962-963.)
Sec. 135. Voluntary Dissolution Where Creditors Are
Affected, Procedure and Contents of Petition. — Where the
dissolution of a corporation may prejudice the rights of
any creditor, a verified petition for dissolution shall be
‘However, the right of stockholders to voluntarily dissolve the corporation by vote
of a prescribed percentage thereof is not absolute if it clearly appears that the action of the
stockholders in voting for dissolution is in bad faith, or that the resolution for dissolution
has been superinduced by fraud or undue influence, or if it is clearly established that the
resolution was not taken for the benefit of the corporation or in furtherance of its interest,
but for the mere purpose of unjustly oppressing the minority of the stockholders or any of
them and causing a destruction or sacrifice of their pecuniary interest or holdings, givuig
a clear indication of a breach of trust, such action may be restrained. In forcing dissolution
and disposition of the corporate assets, the majority stockholders cannot overreach the
minority stakeholders or freeze them out of their share of the proceeds. (Ibid.)

Sec. 135

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

filed with the Commission. The petition shall be signed
by a majority of the corporation’s board of directors or
trustees verified by Its president or secretary or one of
its directors or trustees, and shall set forth all claims and
demands against it, and that its dissolution was resolved
upon the affirmative vote of the stockholders representing
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock
or at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members at a meeting
of its stockholders or members called for that purpose.

The petition shall likewise state: (a) the reason for the
dissolution: (b) the form, manner, and time when the
notices were given: and (c) the date, place, and time of
the meeting in which the vote was made. The corporation
shall submit to the Commission the following: (11 a copy
of the resolution authorizing the dissolution, certified
by a majority of the board of directors or trustees and
countersigned bv the secretary of the corporation: and (2)
a list of all its creditors.
If the petition is sufficient in form and substance, the
Commission shall, by an order reciting the purpose of the
petition, fix a deadline for filing objections to the petition
which date shall not be less than thirty (30) days nor more
than sixty (60) days after the entry of the order. Before such
date, a copy of the order shall be published at least once
a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the municipality or city
where the principal office of the corporation is situated,
or if there be no such newspaper, then In a newspaper of
general circulation in the Philippines, and a similar copy
shall be posted for three (3) consecutive weeks in three (3)
public places in such municipality or city.
Upon five (5) days’ notice, given after the date on which
the right to file objections as fixed in the order has expired,
the Commission shall proceed to hear the petition and try
any issue raised in the objections filed; and if no such
objection is sufficient, and the materials allegations of the
petition are true, It shall render judgment dissolving the
corporation and directing such disposition of its assets
as justice requires, and may appoint a receiver to collect
such assets and pay the debts of the corporation.
The dissolution shall take effect only upon the Issuance
by the Commission of a certificate of dissolution. (N)

777

778

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 136

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

Sec. 136

Voluntary dissolution where creditors
are affected.

779

Dissolution by shortening of term.

If the dissolution of a corporation affects the rights of any
creditor having a claim against the corporation, a hearing before
the SEC is required. In the judgment dissolving the corporation, the
SEC may appoint receiver (Infra.) to take charge of the liquidation
of the corporation.
Here, the voluntary dissolution of the corporation must be
resolved by the affirmative note of stockholders representing at
least 2/3 of the outstanding capital stock or by at least 2/3 of the
members at a meeting called for that purpose.
Section 135 contemplates a situation where the consent of the
creditors to dissolve the corporation cannot be obtained. In such
case, the petition for dissolution must be filed with the SEC which
shall render judgment after due notice and hearing in accordance
with Section 135.
The procedure for dissolution is Section 135. The petition shall
state the matters mentioned in Section 135. (par. 1.) The dissolution
shall likewise take effect only upon the issuance by the SEC of a
certificate of dissolution.

—

Sec. 136. Dissolution by Shortening Corporate Term.
A voluntary dissolution may be effected by amending the
articles of incorporation to shorten the corporate term
pursuant to the provisions of this Code. A copy of the
amended articles of Incorporation shall be submitted to
the Commission in accordance with this Code.
Upon the expiration of the shortened term, as stated
in the approved amended articles of Incorporation, the
corporation shall be deemed dissolved without any further
proceedings, subject to the provision of this Code on
liquidation.
In the case of expiration of corporation term,
dissolution shall automatically take effect on the day
following the last day of the corporate term stated in the
articles of incorporation, without the need for the Issuance
by the Commission of a certificate of dissolution. (N)

—

(1) How effected. This method is the more widely used method
to dissolve a corporation.

A voluntary dissolution is effected if the articles of incorporation
are amended to shorten the corporate term. It is only upon approval of
the amended articles of incorporation by the SEC that the corporation
shall be deemed dissolved. This means that if the shortened term,
as proposed in the amendment of the articles of incorporation,
expires before the approval by the SEC, the corporation will not be
automatically dissolved upon such expiration but only upon SEC
approval of the amendment. On the other hand, if the SEC gives its
approval before such shortened term expires, the dissolution can
take effect only upon the expiration of such shortened term. (SECOGC Opinion No. 20-06, March 13, 2006.)

—

(2) Publication of notice of dissolution. The SEC has opined that
an affidavit of publication of notice of dissolution of the corporation
must be executed by the publisher of the print medium. It cannot be
dispensed with by alleging that the same is not required in Section
136 and that no creditors will be prejudiced by its dissolution. The
publication of the notice of dissolution serves as a protection of
the rights of existing creditors of the dissolving corporation who,
under the law, enjoy preference in the distribution of assets before
the stockholders are finally entitled to a return of their investment
(SEC Opinion, Aug. 30, 1988.)

Dissolution by expiration of term.
(1) How effected.
A corporation is automatically dissolved
upon the expiration of the period as fixed in the original articles of
incorporation, unless the period is extended by an amendment of
the articles of incorporation, (see Secs. 11, 35[b].) It is unnecessary to
seek the aid of the SEC or a court to terminate the corporation or to
formally dissolve and liquidate it. The task of distributing the assets
of the corporation rests upon the board of directors or trustees.
(2) Extension of corporate existence/reincorporation.
Upon
dissolution of a corporation by expiration of corporate term
provided for in the original or amended articles of incorporation, it
ceases to exist de facto or de jure except only for purposes connected
with winding up or liquidation. (Sec. 139.) Its corporate existence

—

—

780

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 136

or juridical personality may thus no longer be extended. (Alhambra
Cigar vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 24 SCRA 269 [1968].)
But the stockholders may reincorporate the expired corporation by
complying with the requirements for incorporation under Sections
10 to 14 of the Revised Corporation Code.

Dissolution by legislative enactment
It is
(1) Reserved power of Congress to dissolve corporations.
thereof.)
(Sec.
76
that
"any
Law
provided by the former Corporation
or all corporations created by virtue of this Act may be dissolved by
legislative enactment." This provision has been deleted in the old
Corporation Code, but the power is still reserved, albeit implied, by
Section 145 (now Sec. 184.) subject to the limitations therein and the
constitutional prohibition against laws impairing the obligation of
contracts. (Constitution of the Philippines, Art. m, Sec. 10.)
With reference to franchise of public utilities, the exercise of
the power by the legislative is reserved by the Constitution in the
clause which provided: "Neither shall any such franchise or right
be granted except under the condition that it shall be subject to
amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress when the common
good so requires." (Art. XU, Sec. 11 thereof.)
(2) Limitations on the power. The limitations on the power to
dissolve corporations by legislative enactment are:
(a) Under the Constitution, the amendment, alteration, or
repeal of the corporate franchise of a public utility shall be made
only "when the common good so requires";
(b) Under Section 184 of the Revised Corporation Code, it is

—

—

provided that:
"No right or remedy in favor of or accrued against any
corporation, its stockholders, members, directors, trustees,
or officers nor any liability incurred by any such corporation,
its stockholders, members, directors, trustees, or officers,
shall be removed or impaired either by the subsequent
amendment or repeal of the Code or any part or portion
thereof."
a
(c) While Congress may provide for the dissolution of
corporation, it cannot impair the obligation of existing contracts

Sec 136

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

781

between the corporation and third persons, or take away the
vested rights of its creditors. And a repeal of the charter of a
corporation, except for some act or neglect constituting a
cause for forfeiture of its charter is void as unconstitutionally
impairing the obligation of the contract between the State and
the corporation, unless the corporation consents. (16 Fletcher, p.

662.)

In the case, however, of the corporate franchise of a public utility,
there is no impairment if the amendment, etc. is effected because
"the common good so requires."

—

(3) Inherent power of Congress to amend or repeal laws.
The
inherent power of Congress to make laws carries with it the
power to amend or repeal them. Involuntary corporate dissolution
may be effected through the amendment or repeal of the Revised
Corporation Code. It has even been said that "dissolution of a
corporation does not constitute an impairment of the obligation of
contracts made with creditors and others, since resort may be had to
the property of the corporation in the mode provided by statute, or,
if there is no adequate statutory remedy, by the process of equity.'
(19 Am. Jur. 2d 954.)

It would be a doctrine new in the law that the existence of a
private contract of the corporation force upon it a perpetuity of
existence contrary to public policy and the nature and object of its
charter. (16 Fletcher 662.)

Dissolution by failure to formally organize
and commence transaction of business.
(1) Cessation of corporate powers.
If a corporation does not
formally organize and commence its business within five (5) years
from the date of its incorporation, its certificate of incorporation
shall be deemed revoked as of the day following the end of the five
(5)-year period. (Sec. 21, par. 1.) The cessation of corporate powers
operates as a dissolution.
An attempted completion of organization after such time is
wholly ineffective and will not give it even the status of a de facto
corporation. A complete organization from the very beginning is
necessary in order to give it to a corporate existence, (see Secs. 10
to 14.) Under Section 21, the corporation is "deemed revoked."

—

782

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 136
Sec. 136

—

(2) Collateral attack of a dissolved corporation. The legal existence
of a corporation whose powers have ceased under Section 21 can be
collaterally attacked in any private suit to which the corporation
may be a party, (see Sec. 19.)

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

783

While the possession of assets is necessary to the creation
of a stock corporation, the loss of all its property does not affect
its existence. (7 R.C.L. Corps., par. 4.) For the same reason, the
appointment of a receiver for a corporation does not ipso facto
produce its dissolution nor bar the existence of corporate rights, (see
Teal Motor vs. Court of First Instance, 51 Phil. 549 [1928]; Leyte A &
M Oil Co. vs. Block Johnson & Greebaum, 52 Phil. 429 [1928].)

—

If a corporation has
(3) Subsequent continuous incorporation.
commenced its business but subsequently becomes inoperative for
a period of at least five (5) consecutive years, the SEC may, after due
notice and hearing, place the corporation under delinquent status.
Failure to comply with the requirements and resume operations
within the period given by the SEC shall cause the revocation of the
corporation's certificate of incorporation.

Effect of alienation of all assets
on corporate existence.

—

(1) Practicalor de facto dissolution. Under certain circumstances,
a legal dissolution of a corporation may result from the transfer or
sale of all its property and assets, as where it virtually amounts to
a surrender of the corporate charter with the consent of the State.
Moreover, a transfer of all property of a corporation, whatever its
legal effect on the life of a corporation may be, is generally, for all
practical purposes, a dissolution, particularly when the corporation
is insolvent or nearly so, and conveys its entire property with a view
of going out of business.
(2) State of suspended animation.
But a corporation may exist
without property, and may at any time, purchase the same or other
property and resume business. And so, though a practical or de facto
dissolution may take place when a corporation disposes of or is
deprived state of all its property, there is, in such case, no dissolution
as a matter of law. (16 Fletcher, p. 707.) It may continue in a state of
suspended animation.
(3) Ground for voluntary dissolution.
The sale or other
disposition of all, or substantially all of the corporate assets (Sec.
39.) to convert them into cash and liquidate corporate debts may,
however, be ground for the voluntary dissolution of a corporation,
(see Secs. 134-135.)

Effect of change of name on corporate
existence.
A mere change in the name of a corporation does not result in
its dissolution.
The changing of the name of a corporation, either by the
legislature (i.e., by special act) or by the corporators under legislative
authority (i.e., under a general law), is no more the creation of a
corporation than the changing of the name of a natural person is
the begetting of a natural person. The act, in both cases, is what
a change of name, and not a change of
the language imports
being. Nor does it affect the rights of the corporation or lessen or
add to its obligations previously acquired or incurred by it. After a
corporation has effected a change in its name, it should sue and be
sued in its own name. (Phil. First Insurance Co., Inc. vs. Hartigan,
34 SCRA 252 [1970]; Zuelleg Freight and Cargo Systems vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 701 SCRA 561 [2013].) It is the same
corporation with different name but the same identity, property,
rights, and liabilities. (Republic Planters Bank vs. Court of Appeals,
216 SCRA 738 [1992].)

—

—

—

Effect of insolvency or bankruptcy on corporate
existence.
Insolvency is the inability or failure to pay debts as they become
of
due. When used in the bankruptcy sense, it means that condition
the
an individual or organization where the total liabilities exceed

Effects of death, etc. of stockholders or members

on corporate existence.
(1) In the case of stock corporations.
Dissolution by the death
of all the members of the corporation cannot apply to business
corporations. (Am. Jur. 2d 954-955.)

—

total assets available for their settlement.
I

i

784

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 136

Under normal conditions, the stockholder of a corporation
differs from the corporation itself. The corporation has the right
of succession. Hence, the transfer of shares neither dissolves the
corporation nor renders the same inoperative even if the transfer
results to only four or fewer stockholders, (see Sec. 10.) A corporation
may be owned substantially by a single individual and the rest
of the stockholders may only be qualifying shareholders for the
purpose of complying with the statutory requirement of at least five
incorporators /stockholders directors. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 18, 1993.)

—

(2) In the case of nonstock corporations. The death or withdrawal
of members may leave the association in such a state as to be
incapable of acting or continuing itself. Where that happens and too
few members remain to continue the succession and fill vacancies
under the constitution of the association, a dissolution may result.
As a rule, however, such corporation is not dissolved by the death or
withdrawal of its members, even though it is left without members.
(16 Fletcher, p. 691.)

Effect of want of officers on corporate
existence.

The want of officers by reason of failure to elect or by reason
of death or resignation does not of itself work a dissolution of the
corporation or operate as a surrender of the corporate franchise.
Although the proper officers may be necessary to enable the
body to act, yet they are not essential to its validity. Even the want
of officers and the want of power to elect them would not be fatal to
its existence. The corporate body has a potentiality which might, by
proper authority, be called into action without affecting its identity.
Accordingly, the election of non-resident directors will not ipso facto
dissolve a corporation of a State under statutes that provide that
every director of its own corporations must be a resident of the State.
However, the failure of a corporation to hold an election of
officers may, in a proper case, be a cause for forfeiture of its charter.
(19 Am. Jur.2d.957.)

Sec. 137

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

785

Effect of concentration of stock on corporate
existence.

Although the shares of a corporation after its creation are held
by several shareholders less than that which the law would have
required as a condition precedent to the organization of the same
corporation, it is held that the corporation continues to exist. While
there is a dictum to the effect that on the acquisition of ownership of
all stock of a corporation by a single individual, the corporation is
thereby virtually dissolved, it is well recognized that the fact that all
of the stock of a business corporation is owned by or concentrated in
the hands of one person does not ipso facto dissolve the corporation;
and if the articles of incorporation or bylaws require certain
acts by
more than the shareholder, the sole owner may transfer a portion of
his shares to other persons and thereby conform to the letter of
the
requirement. (Ibid., 959.)

Sec. 137. Withdrawal of Request and Petition for
Dissolution. A withdrawal of the request for dissolution

—

shall be made in writing, duly verified by any incorporator,
director, trustee, shareholder, or member and signed
by
the same number of incorporators, directors,
trustees,
shareholders, or members necessary to request for
dissolution as set forth in the foregoing sections. The
withdrawal shall be submitted no later than fifteen (15)
days from receipt by the Commission of the
request for
dissolution. Upon receipt of a withdrawal of request for
dissolution, the Commission shall withhold action on the
request for dissolution and shall, after investigation:
(a)
make a pronouncement that the request for
dissolution is
deemed withdrawn; (b) direct a joint meeting of the
board
of directors or trustees and the stockholders
or members
for the purpose of ascertaining whether to proceed
with
dissolution; or (c) issue such other orders as it may deem
appropriate. (N)
A withdrawal of the petition for dissolution
shall be in
the form of a motion and similar in substance to a
withdrawal
of request for dissolution but shall be verified
and filed prior
to publication of the order setting the
deadline for filing
objections to the petition. (N)

786

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 138

—

A corporation may
Sec. 138. Involuntary Dissolution.
proprio or upon
motu
Commission
the
by
be dissolved
interested party.
any
by
complaint
verified
a
of
filing
the
The following may be grounds for dissolution of the
corporation:
(a) Non-use of corporate charter as provided under
Section 21 of this Code;
(b) Continuous inoperation of a corporation as
provided under Section 21 of this Code;
(c) Upon receipt of a lawful court order dissolving the
corporation;
(d) Upon finding by final judgment that the corporation
procured its incorporation through fraud;

(e) Upon finding by final judgment that the corporation:
(1) Was created for the purpose of committing,
concealing or aiding the commission of securities
violations, smuggling, tax evasion, money laundering,
or graft and corruptpractices;
(2) Committed or aided In the commission of
securities violations, smuggling, tax evasion, money
laundering, or graft and corrupt practices, and its
stockholders knew of the same; and

(3) Repeatedly and knowingly tolerated the
commission of graft and corrupt practices or other

fraudulent or illegal acts by its directors, trustees,
officers, oremployees. (N)

If the corporation is ordered dissolved by final
judgment pursuant to the grounds set forth in subparagraph
(e) hereof, its assets, after payment of its liabilities, shall,
upon petition of the Commission with the appropriate
court, be forfeited in favor of the national government.
Such forfeiture shall be without prejudice to the rights
of innocent stockholders and employees for services
rendered, and to the application of other penalty or sanction
under this Code or other laws. (N)

Sea. 137-138

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

787

The Commission shall give reasonable notice to, and
coordinate with, the appropriate regulatory agency prior
to the involuntary dissolution of companies under their
special regulatory jurisdiction. (N)

Dissolution by order of the SEC.
The SEC may order the involuntary dissolution of a corporation
on any of the grounds enumerated in Section 138 (a to e.) motu
proprio upon filing of a verified (i.e„ under oath) complaint by
an interested party and after proper notice and hearing. If the
corporation is ordered dissolved pursuant to the grounds set forth
in subparagraph (e), its assets, after payment of its liabilities, shall
be forfeited in favor of the national government.
Section 138 does not state the person or the agent who can file
the verified complaint, except only that he must be an interested
party. The Rules of Procedure of die SEC requires that all actions
filed with the SEC must be prosecuted and defended in the name of
the real party-in-interest. (Rule HI, Sec. 2 thereof.)
(1) Other violations by a corporation. Under Section 170, which
provides a general penalty for violations of the Revised Corporation
Code not specifically penalized, if the violation is committed by a
corporation, the same may, after notice and hearing, be dissolved in
appropriate proceedings before the SEC.
(2) Deadlocks in a close corporation.
In case of deadlock in a
close corporation respecting the management of its affairs, the SEC,
upon written petition of any stockholder, shall have authority to
make such orders as it may deem appropriate including an order
dissolving the corporation. (Sec. 103, par. 1.)
(3) Mismanagement of a close corporation.
Any stockholder
of a close corporation may, by written petition to the SEC, compel
the dissolution of such corporation whenever any of the acts of the
directors, officers or those in control of the corporation is illegal, or
fraudulent, or dishonest, or oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to the
corporation or any stockholder, or whenever corporate assets are
being misapplied or wasted. (Sec. 104.)
j

—

—

—

788

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 137-138

—

(4) Approval by SEC of voluntary dissolution. A corporation sole
may be dissolved and its affairs settled voluntarily by submitting to
the SEC a verified declaration of dissolution. Upon approval of such
declaration by the SEC, the corporation shall cease to carry on its
operations except to wind up its affairs. (Sec. 113.)

Effect of revocation of registration.

—

A corporation, whose registration has
(1) Actions permitted.
from dissolution to continue to be
revoked,
three
has
years
been
wind
up its affairs. Specifically, these
to
but
only
a body corporate
actions should be for (a) prosecuting and defending suits by or
against it and enabling the dissolved corporation to settle and close
its affairs, (b) disposing and conveying its property, (c) distributing
the corporate assets. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 09-18, June 4, 2018.)

—

(2) Filing of suits. The trustee of a corporation may continue
to prosecute a case commenced by the corporation within three
years from its dissolution until rendition of the final judgment,
even if such judgment is rendered beyond the three-year period
allowed by Section 139 of the Revised Corporation Code. However,
an already defunct corporation cannot sue after the lapse of the said
three-year period. Thus, unless the assets of the corporation were
transferred to a trustee, a corporation lacks the legal capacity to sue
as a corporation when it filed a case more than three years after its
certificate of registration has been revoked, (Alabang Development
Corporation vs. Alabang Hills Village Association and Rafael Tinio,
G.R. No. 187456, June 2, 2014.)
Generally, the effect of the
(3) Lifting of revocation.
it relates back to the date of
that
is
reinstatement of the corporation
[or revocation] had
revocation]
the
dissolution
as
if
dissolution [or
of ratifying and
effect
the
has
never occurred. The reinstatement

—

confirming all acts and proceedings of the corporation's officers,
directors, and stockholders which would have been legal and valid
but for the dissolution. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 08-13, Aug. 22,
2013.)

Dissolution by quo warranto proceedings.
(1) Jurisdiction. This method of dissolution is impliedly found
in Section 19 of the Revised Corporation Code which authorizes the

—

Secs. 137-138

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

789

Solicitor General to bring a quo warranto' proceedings against a (de
facto) corporation claiming in good faith to be a corporation to oust
it from the exercise of corporate powers, and, ultimately, to have it
dissolved.2
(2) Where violations not serious.
Where the violations are
not willful or fraudulent or do not affect the public adversely or
seriously, the court (or SEC) may in its discretion merely enjoin the
further commission of the wrongful act or acts. In other words, not
any violation if proved will warrant a dissolution of a corporation.
A different rule "would be dangerous in the extreme, since
it would actually place the life of all corporate investment in the
country within the absolute power of a single government official.
No corporate enterprise of any moment be conducted perpetually
without some trivial misdemeanor against corporate law being
committed by someone or other of its numerous employees."
Thus, "the extreme penalty of the forfeiture of its franchise will
not be visited upon a corporation for holding a piece of real estate
for a period slightly in excess of the time allowed by law, where
the conduct of the corporation does not appear to have been
characterized by obduracy or pertinacity in contempt of law."
(Republic of the Philippines vs. Security Credit and Acceptance
Corporation, 19 SCRA 58 [1967].)

—

Rights of minority stockholders to sue
for dissolution.

The minority stockholders of a corporation cannot sue and
demand its dissolution.

—

(1) Where stockholders without redress or remedy within corporation
itself.
There are cases, however, that hold that even minority
stockholders may ask for dissolution, this, under the theory that
such minority members, if unable to obtain redress and protection

*A Latin phrase meaning “by what authority.” It is a challenge to a person's legal
authority to act.
’The Interim Rules of Procedure Governing Intra-Corporate Controversies under

R.A. No. 8799 omitted controversies "between such corporation,
or association
and the State insofar as it concerns their individual franchisepartnership
or right to exist as such
entity." Sec. 52 of R.A. No. 8799 (SRC), however, is very clear that "the
Commission's
jurisdiction over all cases enumerated" under said section
"is hereby
courts of general jurisdiction or the appropriate Regional Trial Court." transferred to the

790

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 137-138
Secs. 137-138

of their right within the corporation, must not and should not
be left without redress and remedy. Even the existence of de jure
corporation may be terminated in a private suit for its dissolution
by the stockholders without the intervention of the State.

—

(2) Where violations do not warrant quo warranto proceedings.
Again, although, as a rule, minority stockholders of a corporation
may not ask for its dissolution in a private suit, and such action
should be brought by the government through the Solicitor General
in a quo warranto case, at their instance and request, there might be
exceptional cases wherein the intervention of the State, for one reason
or another, cannot be obtained, as when the State is not interested
because the complaint is strictly a matter between the stockholders
and does not involve, in the opinion of the Solicitor General, any of
the acts or omissions warranting quo warranto proceedings, in which
minority stockholders are entitled to have such dissolution.

When such action or private suit is brought by them, the court
has jurisdiction and may not grant the prayer, depending upon the
facts and the circumstances attending it. (Financing Corp, of the
Phils, vs. Teodoro, 93 Phils. 678 [1953]; Hall vs. Picdo, 86 Phil. 603
[1950].)
.

•

.1

Effects of dissolution.

A dissolved corporation continues to exist but only for a limited

purpose and for a limited time.
(1) Transfer of legal title to corporate property.

—

The dissolution

of the corporation results in the vesting of legal title to the corporate
property in the stockholders, who become co-owners thereof. The
stockholders are, therefore, entitled to have the corporate assets sold
or converted into cash which will, in turn, be distributed to those
entitled thereto. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 3, 1984.)

—

A party's
(2) Protection of stockholder's property rights.
is a
dissolved,
or
stockholding in a corporation, whether existing

who
property right which he may vindicate against another party
not
does
has deprived him thereof. The corporation's dissolution
a
of
life
extinguish such property right. The termination of the

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

791

juridical entity does not by itself cause the extinction or diminution
of the rights and liabilities of such entity nor those of its owners and
creditors. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 23-16, Oct. 5, 2016.)
Section 184 (Infra.) ensures the protection of this right. (Aguirre
H vs. FQB + Inc., 688 SCRA 242 [2013].)
The right of stockholders of a dissolved corporation to inspect
the corporate books remains until all its assets are distributed to
those entitled thereto.

—

(3) Continuation of corporate business.
The corporation
ceases as a body corporate to continue the business for which it
was established. (Sec. 139, par. 1.) But while the dissolved entity
is prohibited from continuing its operation as a "corporation," it
may operate to continue to undertake the purpose for which it was
organized but its status is only that of an ordinary "association" (see
Sec. 10.) which has no juridical personality. (SEC-OGC Opinion No.
24-09,’ July 28, 2009; SEC Opinion, Sept. 25, 1995.)
(4) Creation of a new corporation. While the board of directors
of a dissolved corporation is not normally permitted to undertake
any activity outside of the usual liquidation of its business,
there is nothing to prevent its stockholders from conveying their
respective shareholding toward the creation of a new corporation
to continue the business of the old. Winding up is the sole activity

—

of a dissolved corporation that does not intend to incorporate anew.
If it does, however, it is not unlawful for the old board of directors
to negotiate and transfer the assets of the dissolved corporation, as
allowed by Section 39, to the new corporation intended to be created
if the stockholders have given their consent. (Chung Ka Bio vs.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 163 SCRA 534 [1988].)
(5) Continuation as a body corporate.
The dissolution does
not by itself imply the diminution or extinction of the rights and
liabilities of such entity. (Gonzales vs. Sugar Regulatory Board, 170
SCRA 377 [1989].), nor those of its owners and creditors. (Clemente
vs. Court of Appeals, 242 SCRA 717 [1995].) Thus, the revocation
of a corporation's certificate of registration does not
automatically
warrant the extinction of the corporation itself such that its rights

—

’ Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 751 [2002).

m.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 139

and liabilities are likewise altogether extinguished. (Roque vs.
People, 826 SCRA 618 [2017].) Thus, the dissolution of creditor¬
corporation does not extinguish any right or remedy in its favor nor
the corresponding liability of the debtor. The contrary rule would be
to sanction the unjust enrichment of the debtor at the expense of the
corporation.
The corporation continues as a body corporate for three (3) years
for purposes of winding up or liquidation. (Sec. 139, par. 1.) It may
hold an election of officers but only for the said purposes.
(6) Cessation of corporate existence for all purposes.
Upon
the expiration of the winding up period of three (3) years, the
corporation ceases to exist for all purposes and as a rule, it can no
longer sue and be sued as such. (Gelano vs. Court of Appeals and
Insular Sawmill, Inc., 103 SCRA 90 [1981].) Jurisprudence, however,
has carved out an exception to the rule: an appointed receiver, an
assignee or a trustee (such as a lawyer representing the corporation
in a certain case) may institute suits or continue pending actions
in behalf of the corporation even after the winding-up period. The
board of directors of the corporation may be considered trustees by
legal implication for the purpose of winding up its affairs. (Reyes
vs. Bancom Development Corporation, 850 SCRA 544 [2018].)

—

Sec 139

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

793

close its affairs, dispose of and convey its property and
distribute its assets, but not for the purpose of continuing
the business for which it was established.
At any time during said three (3) years, the corporation
is authorized and empowered to convey all of its property
to trustees for the benefit of stockholders, members,
creditors, and other persons in interest. After any such
conveyance by the corporation of its property in trust for
the benefit of its stockholders, members, creditors, and
others in interest, all interest which the corporation had
in the property terminates, the legal interest vests in the
trustees, and the beneficial interest in the stockholders,
members, creditors or other persons-ln-interest
Except as otherwise provided for in Sections 93 and
94 of this Code, upon the winding up of corporate affairs,
any asset distributable to any creditor or stockholder or

member who is unknown or cannot be found shall be
escheated in favor of the national government.

Except by decrease of capital stock and as otherwise
allowed by this Code, no corporation shall distribute any
of its assets or property except upon lawful dissolution
and after payment of all Its debts and liabilities.

Absent a statutory provision to the contrary, pending actions

by or against a corporation are abated upon the expiration of the
period allowed by law for the liquidation of its affairs. (National
Abaca & Other Fibers Corp. vs. Pore, 2 SCRA 989 [1961].)
(

Sec. 139. Corporate Liquidation. — Except for banks,
which shall be covered bv the applicable provisions if
Republic Act No. 7653. otherwise known as “The New

Central Bank Act." as amended and Republic Act No. 3551
otherwise known as the Philippine Deposit Insurance
Corporation Charter, as amended, every corporation whose
charter expires pursuant to Its articles of Incorporation is

annulled by forfeiture, or whose corporate existence Is
terminated in any other manner, shall nevertheless remain
as a body corporate for three (3) years after the effective
date of dissolution, for the purpose of prosecuting and
defending suits by or against it and enabling it to settle and

Meaning of liquidation.

Once a corporation is dissolved, whether voluntarily or
involuntarily, liquidation will ensue.
(1) Liquidation, as applied to a corporation, means the winding
up of the affairs of the corporation by reducing its assets in money,
settling with creditors and debtors, and apportioning the amount of
profit and loss, (see 16 Fletcher, p. 658; see SEC-OGC Opinion No.
60-19, Dec. 20, 2019.)

(2) It consists of adjusting all debts and claims, that is, of
collecting all that is due the dissolved corporation, the settlement
and adjustment of claims against it, and the payment of its debts,
(see China Banking Corp. vs. Michelin & Cie, 58 Phil. 261
[1933];
Majority of Stockholders of Ruby Industrial Corp. vs. Lim, 650
SCRA 461 [2011].)

794

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 139

(3) After payment of corporate debts, liquidation entails the
distribution of the remaining assets, if any, among the stockholders
in accordance with their contracts, or if there be no special contract,
based on their respective interests. The manner of liquidation or
winding up may be provided for in the corporate bylaws and this
would prevail unless it is inconsistent with law. (SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 60-19, Dec. 20, 2019.)

Nature of liquidation.
A distribution of all assets is a "winding up" of the affairs of
the corporation and is synonymous with liquidation.1 (19 Am. Jur.
2d 953.) A corporation whose corporate existence has been legally
terminated continues as a body corporate for three (3) years after
the time when it would have been dissolved but only for purposes
of winding up its affairs. Any new business in which the dissolved
corporation would engage in "will be a void transaction because of
the non-existence of the corporate party." (Rich vs. Paloma HI, 888
SCRA27 [2018].)
Since the stockholders of a corporation are not co-owners or
tenants in common of the corporate property, the liquidation of its
assets by the stockholders is not and cannot be considered a partition
of a community property but rather, a transfer or conveyance of the
title of its assets to the individual stockholders. (Stockholders of
F. Guanzon & Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, 6 SCRA 373 [1962];
Majority Stockholders of Ruby Industrial Corp. vs. Lim, 650 SCRA
461 [2011].)

Methods of corporate liquidation.

There are three (3) methods by which a dissolved corporation
may wind up its affairs:
(1) Liquidation by the corporation itself (Sec. 139, par. 1.);
*

>

•

•

'Liquidation is diametrically opposed to rehabilitation. Both cannot be undertaken
at the same time. In rehabilitation, corporations have to maintain their assets to continue
to se
business operations. In liquidation, corporations preserve their assets in order
d‘vi
is
surplus
the
creditors,
and
among
of the
are distributed

sale
them. The proceeds
Inc,
or losses are allocated. (Viva Shipping Lines, Inc. vs. Keppel Philippines Marine,
SCRA 173 12016].)

Sec. 139

e

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

795

(2) Liquidation by a duly appointed receiver (Sec. 135, par. 3.);
and

(3) Liquidation by a trustee to whom the corporation had
conveyed the corporate assets, (see Sec. 139, par. 2.)

The liquidation process is an internal concern of the corporation
and falls within the powers of the directors and stockholders to
effect.2 (SEC Opinions, April 30, 1986, July 23, 1993, and Nov. 21,
1997.)
Liquidation by the corporation itself.

The normal method or procedure is for the corporation through
the directors or trustees and executive officers to have charge of the
winding up operation.

—

(1) Period of three (3) years. Section 139 prohibits a dissolved
corporation from continuing its business for which it was
established but allows it to continue its existence for the limited
purpose of settling and closing its affairs. Necessarily, there must be
a board that will continue to act for and on behalf of the dissolved
corporation for that purpose. In fact, Section 139 authorizes the
dissolved corporation's board of directors to conduct its liquidation
within three (3) years from its dissolution. Jurisprudence has even
recognized the board's authority to act as trustee for persons in
interest beyond the said three-year period. (Aguirre II vs. FQB+7
Inc., 688 SCRA 242 [2013].)

As the law grants the corporation three (3) years after the time
when it would have been so dissolved within which to wind up

its affairs, the claims by and against it not presented and settled
within that period become unenforceable as there exists no longer a
corporate entity against which they can be enforced, (see Buenaflor
’While the SEC may order the dissolution of a corporation, jurisdiction over the
liquidation of the corporation pertains to the appropriate Regional Trial Court Thus,
the SEC authority to liquidate the assets of a dissolved corporation unless it can work
out a final settlement of corporate affairs in the absence of a duly designated
receiver
or trustee, (see Clemente vs. Court of Appeals, 242 SCRA 717 [1995], infra.)
Liquidation
requires the settlement of claims for and against the corporation and the trial court
is
in best position to converse all creditors of the corporation, ascertain
their claims, and
determine their preferences. (Consuelo Metal Corp. vs. Planters Development Bank, 555
SCRA 456 [2008].)

796

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 139

vs. Camarines Sur Industry Corp., 108 Phil. 472 [I960].) In other
words, action pending by or against the corporation when the threeyear period expires are abated, for after the period, the corporation
becomes defunct and ceases to be an entity capable of suing or being
sued. (National Abaca & Other Fibers Corp. vs. Pore, 2 SCRA 989
[1961].)
(2) Extension of period. The law does not allow any extension
of the period.
A corporation with a pending action and which cannot be
terminated within the three-year period after its dissolution is
authorized under Section 138 of the Revised Corporation Code
to convey all its property to trustees to enable it to prosecute and
defend suits by or against the corporation beyond the three-year
period. A trustee may commence a sit which can proceed to final
judgment even beyond the three-year period. (Gelano vs. Court of
Appeals, 103 SCRA 90 (1981).
A creditor with a pending action against a corporation may
prevent the abatement by asking the proper court to appoint a
receiver or trustee within the winding up period. Under Section 184,
no right or remedy against a corporation can be impaired by the
subsequent dissolution of the corporation?
It is to be noted
(3) Action against liquidators/stockholders.
1.)
bars an action
which
that there is nothing in Section 139 (par.

—

—

’Within the three-year period, the corporation may appoint a trustee or receiver who
shall carry out the purposes stated in Sec. 122 (par. 1.) beyond the three-year winding-up
period. Thus, a trustee of a dissolved corporation may commence a suit which can proceed
to final judgment even beyond the three-year period of liquidation. (Metropolitan Bank
& Trust Company, Inc. vs. Board of Trustees, 630 SCRA 350 [2010]; Aguirre n vs. FQB+7,
Inc, 688 SCRA 242 [2013].)
of
It has been held that the counsel who prosecuted and defended the interest a
to the
respect
with
the
corporation
of
a
trustee
be
considered
may
dissolved corporation
matter in litigation (Gelano vs. Court of Appeals, 103 SCRA 90 [1981].) and the board
as
of directors may be permitted to complete the corporate liquidation by continuing
[1995].)
717
SCRA
242
of
Appeals,
(0emente
Court
vs.
"trustees' by legal implication.
Indeed, if "the trustee may commence a suit which can proceed to final judgment
already
even beyond the three-year period, [n]o reason can be conceived why a suit who, by
trustee
mere
a
not
by
commenced by the corporation itself during its existence
not
fiction, merely continues the legal personality of the dissolved corporation should
execution
and
judgment
final
to
to
proceed
allowed
and
be afforded similar treatment
of
thereof. (Reburiano vs. Court of Appeals, 301 SCRA 342 [1991], citing Gelano vs. Court
Appeals, supra; Knetch vs. United Cigarette Corp., 384 SCRA 45 [2002].)

Sec. 139

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

TV

to recover the debts of the corporation against the liquidator
thereof after the lapse of the winding up period of three (3) years.
(Republic of the Philippines vs. Marsman Dev. Co., 44 SCRA 418
[1972].) The dissolution of a corporation does not extinguish the
debts due or owing to it. A creditor of a dissolved corporation may
follow its assets, as in the nature of a trust fund, into the hands of
its former stockholders. Dissolution or even the expiration of the
three-year liquidation period does not bar a corporation from
enforcing its rights as a corporation? (see Sec. 184.)
(4) Approval of SEC not required.
There is also nothing in
Section 139 which requires SEC's approval of distribution or
liquidation of the assets of a dissolved corporation. Distribution or
liquidation of assets is a matter of internal concern of the corporation
and falls within the power of the directors and stockholders or duly
appointed liquidation trustee. Liquidation of assets, however, is
subject to the payment of debts of the corporation. Should there
be substantial issues, the matter may be brought to the court. (SEC
Opinion, July 23, 1993; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 15-16, June 1, 2016.)
(5) Authority of hold-over officers. The hold-over officers of an
expired corporation are empowered to wind up the affairs of the
corporation within the three-year liquidation period. While Section
139 gives a dissolved corporation three (3) years to continue as a
body corporation for purposes of liquidation, the disposition of the
remaining undistributed assets must necessarily continue after such
period. A contrary interpretation would have unjust and absurd
results. (SEC Opinion, May 14, 1996; see Clemente vs. Court of
Appeals, supra.)

—

—

Liquidation by a receiver.

The liquidation by receivership is authorized by Section 135,
pursuant to which the SEC "may appoint a receiver to collect such
assets and pay the debts of the corporation." (par. 3.)
(1) Authority of receiver.
Being merely a ministerial officer,

—

*This rule applies to the tax obligations of a corporation to the government. While
the government cannot collect taxes from a defunct corporation, it loses thereby none of
its rights to assess taxes due from the corporation, and to collect them from persons who,
by reason of transactions with the corporation, hold property against which the tax can be
enforced. (Tan Tiong Bio vs. Comm, of Internal Revenue, 4 SCRA 86 [1962].)

798

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 139

a receiver of a corporation has only such authority as conferred
by statute. (19 C.J.S. 1226.) Ordinarily, he may sue to enforce the
stockholder's liability on unpaid subscription in representation of
the corporation. (Ibid., 1236.) A call is considered a pre-requisite to
any action that a receiver may take to enforce unpaid subscriptions.
(Ibid., 1239.)
The appointment of a receiver operates to suspend the authority
a
of corporation and of its directors /trustees and officers over its
property and effects, such authority being reposed in the receiver,
and in this respect the receivership is equivalent to an injunction
to restrain the corporation's officers from intermeddling with the
property of the corporation. (Villanueva vs. Court of Appeals, 244
SCRA 395 [1995]; Yam vs. Court of Appeals, 303 SCRA 1 [1999];
Abacus Real Estate Dev. Center, Inc. vs. Manila Banking Corporation,
455 SCRA 97 [2005].)
(2) Status of receiver. A receiver is not only a representative of
the court. He also represents both the stockholders and the creditors
of the corporation and as their trustee, he acts not for himself but
for both and represents each. In some respect, he is the agent or
representative of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, April 7, 1987, citing
16 Fletcher, p. 404.) He has, therefore, the power to vote the shares
owned by the latter in other corporations.
The assets of the dissolved are not transferred to the receiver or
liquidator (Infra.); these are just held in trust to be distributed to the
creditors after the liquidation of the corporation in accordance with
rules on concurrence and preference of credits.
Pres. Decree No. 902-A is clear
(3) Stay of pending actions.
that "allocations for claims5 against corporations, partnerships
or associations under management or receivership pending
before any court, tribunal, board or body shall be suspended
accordingly."6 (Sec. 6[c] thereof.)

—

—

*The word "claim" must be construed to mean debts or demand of a pecuniary
nature. An action for the nullification of a special power of attorney and other
documents based on an obligation of forgery is not a "claim" under Sec. 6(c) which
or
provides for the suspension of all actions against corporations, partnerships,
Corp,
Finance
St
associations under management or receivership. (Finasia Investments
vs. Court of Appeals, 237 SCRA 446 [1994).)

•See Rizal Commercial Banking Corp. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 213 SCRA
830 (1992); Alemar's Sibal &Sons, Inc. vs. Elbinas, 186 SCRA 94 (1990); Philippine
Commercial International Bank vs. Court of Appeals, 172 SCRA 436 (1989); Clarion

Sec. 139

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

799

—

(4) Equality among creditors.
When a corporation threatened
by bankruptcy is taken over by a receiver, all the creditors stand
on equal footing. Its assets are held in trust for their equal benefit
to preclude one from obtaining an advantage or preference over
another by the expediency of an attachment, execution, or otherwise.
This is precisely the reason for the suspension of all pending
claims against the corporation under receivership. Instead of
creditors vexing the court with suits against the distressed firm,
they are directed to file their claims with the receiver who is a
duly appointed officer of the SEC (Alemar's Sibal & Sons, Inc. vs.
Elbinians, 186 SCRA 94 [1990].), subject to the rules on preference of
credits, to enable the receiver to effectively exercise his powers free
from any judicial or extrajudicial interference that might unduly
hinder the rescue of the distressed corporation. Jurisprudence
has established that a stay of execution may be warranted by the
fact that the corporation has been placed under rehabilitation
receivership. (Alemar's Sibal & Sons, Inc. vs. National Labor
Relations Commission, 322 SCRA 306 [2000].)
(5) Duration of receivership. The receivership, unless otherwise
specifically limited in its duration, shall exist indefinitely until the
affairs of the dissolved corporation shall have been completely settled
and liquidated. During its continuance, claims can be presented and
allowed if they are not barred by the statute of limitations.
In other words, the period of three (3) years prescribed by
Section 139 is not applicable, (see Sumera vs. Valencia, 67 Phil. 721

—

Printing House, Inc. vs. National Labor Relations Commission, 461 SCRA 272 (2005);
Tyson's Super Concrete, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 461 SCRA 69 (2005).
The law does not make any exception in favor of labor claims. "The justification
for the automatic stay of all pending actions for claims is to enable the management
committee or the rehabilitation receiver to effectively exercise its/his powers free from
any judicial or extrajudicial interference that might unduly hinder or prevent the 'rescue'
of the debtor company. To allow such other actions to continue would add to the burden
of the management committee or rehabilitation receiver, whose time, effort and resources
would be wasted in defending claims against the corporation instead of being directed
towards its restructuring and rehabilitation." (Rubberworld [Phils], Inc. vs. National
Labor Relations Commission, 336 SCRA 433 [2000].)
The appointment of a management committee or rehabilitation receiver may only
take place after filing with the SEC of an appropriate petition for suspension of
payments.
Pursuant to the proviso in Sec. 6(c) taken together with Sec. 6(d) and Sec. 59(d), a court
action is ipso jure suspended only upon the appointment of a management committee
or
a rehabilitation receiver. (Barotac Sugar Mills, Inc. vs. Court of
Appeals, 275 SCRA 497
110071 1

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

800

Sec. 139

[1939].) The receiver or a trustee (Infra.) may act beyond the period.
(Pepsi-Cola Products Philippines, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 443
SCRA 580 [2004].)
Appointment of receiver discretionary.
The appointment of
(1) Where corporation has been dissolved.
a receiver is addressed to the sound discretion of the SEC (see P.D.
No. 902-A, Sec. 6[c].) and such discretion should be exercised with
great caution and only when the necessity therefor is clear, in view
of the drastic nature and burdensome character of a receivership,
involving as it does the appointment of a stranger who would take
over the corporate business. (Chase vs. Court of First Instance of
Manila, 18 SCRA 602 [1966]; China Banking Corp. vs. M. Michelin
& Cie, 58 Phil. 261 [1933]; see Limsico vs. Bautista, 122 SCRA 337

—

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

Thus, where, instead of appointing a receiver, the court adopted

precautionary measures for the protection of the petitioner's rights
and interests, the court cannot be said to have abused its discretion.
(Chase vs. Court of First Instance of Manila, supra.)
Even without dissolution,
(2) Where there is no dissolution.
a
the court has the authority to appoint receiver for a corporation
to protect and preserve its properties for the use and benefit of its
creditors and others who may have similar interests in the property
as where there is already a final and executory judgment against the
corporation, which is in a precarious financial condition. (Central
Sawmills, Inc. vs. Alto Surety and Ins. Co., 27 SCRA 247 [1969]; see
Ching vs. Land Bank of the Phils., 201 SCRA 190 [1991].)
Where corporate directors are guilty of breach of trust, minority
stockholders may ask for receivership. (Chase vs. Court of First
Instance, supra.) The court should appoint a receiver when necessary
to protect the rights of minority stockholders especially when said
stockholders are unable to obtain redress and protection of their
rights within the corporation itself.7 (Financing Corp, of the Phils,
vs. Teodoro, 93 Phil. 678 [1953].)

—

the
Receivership is not an action. It is but an auxiliary remedy, a mere incident ofcase
one
in
receivership
of
the
grant
that
said
be
cannot
its
purpose.
It
achieve
help
to
suit
will amount to res judicata on the merits of another case. (Chavez vs. Court of Appeals,

801

—

(3) Where another remedy available.
The appointment of a
receiver for a going corporation is a last resort remedy and should
not be employed when another remedy is available. Misconduct
or corporate directors or other officers, bad judgment, or even
unauthorized use and misapplication of the company's funds will
not justify the appointment of a receiver for the corporation if an
appropriate relief can otherwise be had.
Thus, the refusal to allow the stockholders (or members of a
nonstock corporation) to examine the books of the company is
a ground for appointing a receiver (or creating a management
committee) since there are other adequate remedies, such as a writ
of mandamus. (Ao-As vs. Court of Appeals, 491 SCRA 339 [2006]; see
Sec. 74.)

Liquidation by a trustee.

[1983].)

610 SCRA 399 (20101.)

Sec 139

—

(1) Meaning of trustee. The word "trustee," as used in the law,
must be understood in its general concept. It has been held that a
counsel who prosecuted and defended the interest of a corporation
and who in fact appeared in behalf of the corporation before and after
its dissolution by amendment of its articles of incorporation (see Sec.
136.) may be considered a trustee of the corporation under Section 77
of the former Corporation Law (now Sec. 139.), at least with respect
to the matter in litigation only. The purpose in transferring the assets
of the corporation to a trustee upon its dissolution is more for the
protection of its creditors and stockholders. The appointment of the
counsel can be considered a substantial compliance with Section 77
(par. 2.). (Gelano vs. Court of Appeals, 103 SCRA 90 [1981].)
(2) Conveyance of corporate property.
The liquidation of the
corporation may be placed in the hands of a trustee or assignee to
whom all the corporate assets are conveyed by resolution of the
stockholders or members (see Sec. 39.*) at any time during the threeyear period after the time when it would have been dissolved.
(3) Effect of conveyance. By the terms of Section 139 (par. 2.),
the conveyance makes the trustee the legal owner of the property,
subject to the beneficial interest of the creditors, stockholders,
members, and other persons in interest. The trustee may sue and be

—

—

’It applies to the sale, etc. of all or substantially all the assets of an

corporation.

802

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 139
Sec. 139

sued as such in all matters connected with the liquidation. (Sumera
vs. Valencia, 67 Phil. 721 [1939].)
The same rules governing duration and
(4) Rules applicable.
the time for filing of claim where the Liquidation is done by a receiver
apply to liquidation effected by a trustee.
Where no time limit has
(5) Period of existence of trusteeship.
been fixed regarding the existence of the trusteeship, the trustee
has authority to close the affairs of the corporation even after the
expiration of the statutory three-year period and claims not barred
by the statute of limitations can be presented and allowed until the
liquidation is terminated, (see National Abaca & Other Fibers Corp,
vs. Pore, 2SCRA 989 [1961]; Board of Liquidators vs. Heirs of Maximo
Kalaw, 20 SCRA 987 [1967]; Pepsi-Coia Products Philippines, Inc.
vs. Court of Appeals, 443 SCRA 580 [2004].) There is no time limit
within which the trustees must complete the liquidation. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 34-19, Sept. 9, 2019.)
Since the law specifically allows a trustee to manage the affairs
of the corporation in liquidation, any supervening fact, such as the
dissolution of the corporation, the repeal of a law (see Sec. 145.), or
any other fact similar nature, would not serve as an effective bar to
the enforcement of such right. (Reburiano vs. Court of Appeals, 301
SCRA 342 [1999]; Knecht vs. United Cigarette Corp., 384 SCRA 45
[2002].)
(6) Where no receiver or trustee has been designated after dissolution.
If the three-year extended life has expired without a receiver or
trustee having been expressly designated by the corporation within

—

—

—

that period:
(a) The board of directors or trustees itself may be permitted
to so continue as "trustees" by legal implication to complete the
liquidation, (see Sec. 184.)
(b) Still, absent a board of directors or trustees, those having
a pecuniary interest in the corporate assets, including not only the
stockholders but likewise the creditors of the corporation, acting
for and in its behalf, may make proper representations with the

SEC which has primary and sufficiently broad jurisdiction in
matters of this nature, for working out a final settlement of the
corporate concerns. (Clemente vs. Court of Appeals, 242 SCRA
717 [1995]; see Premier Development Banks vs. Flores, 574 SCRA

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

803

66 [2008]; Gelano vs. Court of Appeals, 103 SCRA 90 (1981);
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 7-15, July 21, 2015; SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 29-14, Oct. 22, 2014.)
(c) The only surviving stockholder or director of a corporation
whose term of existence has expired may act as trustee-inliquidation after the three-year period to liquidate has expired
without appointment of a trustee-in-liquidation. In case of
death of one or more directors during or after the three-year
liquidation period, the surviving directors continue as trusteesin-liquidation, without prejudice to the right of a person-ininterest (e.g., creditor or stockholder) to petition the courts for
the appointment of a different trustee on account of failure
to wind up the affairs of the corporation within a reasonable
period. (SEC Opinion No. 6-10, Jan. 29, 2010.)
(d) The counsel who prosecuted and defended the interest of the
corporation and who appeared in behalf of the corporation, may
be considered a trustee of the corporation at least with respect
to the matter in litigation only. (Reburiano vs. Court of Appeals,
supra.)
(6) Death of trustee.
In our jurisdiction, the statutes and
jurisprudence are silent regarding the consequences of the death of
a director, acting as trustee-in-liquidation, during the liquidation or
winding up period. In some American jurisdictions, directors who
become trustees of the corporation on dissolution hold on as joint
tenants with right of survivorship incident to their tenancy. When
one or more directors die, the surviving trustees take the whole
title subject to the trust, and the latter may exercise the powers and
duties of the deceased director-trustee. However, it is also provided
that in case of the death, resignation, inability, or refusal to act of the
directors as trustees, or the survivors, the court may appoint trustees
to fill the vacancy, upon the application of any person interested.
(SEC-OGC Opinion No. 06-10, Jan. 29, 2010.)

—

Effect of dissolution on corporate power
to enter into contracts.

Except for banks covered by provisions of the new Centred Bank
Act and the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation Charter,
every corporation whose charter expires pursuant to its articles of

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

804

Sec 139

incorporation is annulled by forfeiture or where corporate existence
is terminated in any other manner shall nevertheless continue as a
body corporate for the purpose of winding up its affairs, but not for
the purpose of entering into new contracts or continuing its business
as a going concern. The dissolution of a corporation terminates
its power to enter into contracts or to continue the business as a
going concern, even though it continues its existence for a definite
or indefinite time to wind up the business. (SEC Opinion,* June 7,
2002.)

Under Section 139, the winding up period is only for the limited
purposes enumerated to enable the dissolved corporation to settle
its affairs gradually. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 24, 1971.) Dissolution in its
early stage is, in reality, a change in the permitted scope of activity
rather than a change in the status. The result is not the death of the
corporation but its retirement from active business. (Ballantine, Sec
317.)

Thus, a university whose charter expires during the academic
year may continue holding classes up to the end of such year
where the enrollment for such classes was made before the date of
dissolution but only as part of the winding up process of the affairs of
the corporation. The university, however, cannot accept enrollment
for a succeeding semester which starts after the expiration of the
corporate term. Since collegiate courses are conducted by semesters,
each semester would constitute a fully executed contract. Should
the university then accept enrollment for the second semester
classes, it would be entering into a new contract which is impossible
of execution as its scheduled performance could be made only after
the dissolution of its corporate existence. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 24,
1971.)

Distribution of corporate assets.
Except by decrease of its capital
(1) General rule/ exceptions.
the
stock as provided in Section 37 and as otherwise allowed by no
104.),
l[d],
103,
42,
par.
Corporation Code (see Secs. 8, 9, 40,
upon
corporation shall distribute any of its assets or property except

—

’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 659

[1993)

Sec 139

:i. >

805

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

lawful dissolution and after payment of all its debts and liabilities.
(Sec. 139, last par.)
Thus, the
(a) Distribution in exchange for shares of stock.
property contributed to the corporation in exchange for shares
of stocks and forming part of the assets of the corporation cannot
be withdrawn by the subscriber but only with the approval
of the board of directors and stockholders, respectively,
provided further that the law, rules, and regulations pertinent
to said withdrawal are duly observed and complied with,
although stockholders owning stocks in exchange therefor
are not precluded from assigning and/or transferring their
shareholdings to any person qualified absent a valid and just
restriction. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 5, 1976.)
(b) Distribution in pursuance of liquidation. In a case, it was
held that where the purpose of liquidation and the distribution
of the assets of the corporation is to transfer the title thereto
from the corporation to the stockholders in proportion to
their shareholdings, that transfer cannot be effected without
the corresponding deed of conveyance from the corporation
to the stockholders, and the certificate of liquidation executed
by the stockholders, though it involves a distribution of the
corporation's assets, should be considered as one in the nature
and in substance a transfer or conveyance. (Stockholders of F.
Guanzon & Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, supra.)

—

—

—

(2) By act of stockholders.
In liquidation, the act of the
stockholders distributing assets of the corporation among
themselves is valid if all corporate creditors are paid and no one is
prejudiced.
(3) Trust fund doctrine.
This doctrine (see Sec. 40.) is the
underlying principle behind the stringent procedural requirements
to be complied with for the distribution of capital assets of the
corporation in the instances when such distribution is allowed by
the Revised Corporation Code. It considers the subscribed capital
as a trust fund or equity in trust for the payment of the debts of the
corporation, to which the creditors look for satisfaction.
Until the liquidation of the corporation, no part of the
subscribed capital may be returned or released to the stockholder
(except in the redemption of redeemable shares) without violating

—

806

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 139

this principle. Thus, dividends must never impair the subscribed
capital; subscription commitments cannot be condoned or
remitted; nor can any corporation buy its own shares using
the subscribed capital as the consideration therefor. (National
Telecommunications Commission vs. Court of Appeals, 311 SCRA
508 [1999].)
(4) Liquidation process, an internal concern.
There is nothing
in Section 139 which requires that the distribution of the remaining
assets of a dissolved corporation to either the creditors or
stockholders be approved by the SEC. The liquidation process is an
internal concern of the corporation and falls within the powers of
the directors and stockholders to effect. (SEC Opinions, April 30,
1986 and Nov. 21, 1997; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 22-14, Aug. 8, 2014.)

—

Priority of application of assets.

The question of the right of claimant against the assets of a
corporation that is being dissolved and liquidated to priority in
the payment of his claims becomes of importance only when the
assets of the corporation are not sufficient to pay all claims. If the
corporate assets are sufficient to pay all claims, it cannot matter
practically which claim is paid first or is entitled to preferential
payment. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 1027-1029.)
(1) When the corporation is insolvent, the creditors of the
corporation are entitled to have all its assets distributed first
among them according to their respective rights and priorities.10
This is in accordance with the trust fund doctrine. (19 Am. Jur. 2d
1029.)

'“Secured creditors shall enjoy preference over unsecured creditors subject only
to the provisions of the Gvil Code (see Arts. 2246-2250 thereof.) on concurrence and
preference of credits. Creditors of secured obligations may pursue their security interests
or lien, or they may choose to abandon the preference and prove their credits as ordinary
claims. The right to foreclose the mortgage under Art. 2248 over a specific property
whether or not the debtor-mortgagor is under insolvency or liquidation proceedings is
merely suspended upon the appointment of a management committee or rehabilitation
receiver. (Sec. 6[c].) P.D. No. 902-A or upon the issuance of stay order by the trial court.
(Sec. 4, Rule 4, Interim Rules of Procedure on Corporate Rehabilitation.) He may exercise
the right to foreclose the mortgage upon the termination of the rehabilitation proceedings
or upon the lifting of the stay order. (Consuelo Metal Corp. vs. Planter's Development
Bank, 555 SCRA 465 [2008].)

Sec 139

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

807

(2) Stockholders, members, directors, or officers of the
corporation who are also its creditors as a result of a legitimate or
proper loan or claim must be paid next. (Ibid., 1029-1030.)
(3) The remaining assets are then to be distributed among the
stockholders or members in proportion to their shareholdings or
interest absent any provision to the contrary, (see Stockholders of F.
Guanzon & Sons, Inc. vs. Register of Deeds, 6 SCRA 373 {1962]; see
SEC-OGC Opinion No. 60-19," Dec. 20, 2019.] Holders of preferred
stock as to assets have a preference over the common stockholders
in the distribution of the surplus proceeds of the assets of the
dissolved corporation.
(a) The amount of capital refund that a stockholder will
get in case of liquidation of a corporation will depend upon the
financial condition thereof at the time. He may get more than his
original capital investment or less or even none at all, depending
upon the success or failure of the enterprise. (SEC Opinion, Feb.
22, 1960.)
(b) If, after the distribution to stockholders of corporate
assets, unpaid debts of the corporation shall appear, the
stockholders are liable to pay the debts to the extent of the value
of the assets received by them.

(c) Upon winding up of the corporate affairs, any asset
distributable to any creditor or stockholder or member who
is unknown or cannot be found shall be escheated to the
national government. (Sec. 139, par. 3.) Under section 122 of the
old Corporation Code, the assets are escheated to the city or
municipality where such assets are located.
(4) Under the law, the distributive shares of the assets of the
corporation upon its dissolution are not available for general
distribution among the whole class of stockholders. The reason
for this rule is that upon the dissolution of a corporation, the
assets become a trust hind (Supra.) with the title of the stockholders
becoming an equitable right to a distributive share therein, and
that the stockholders, in respect of the liquidating dividend, are not
mere creditors, but the money is set apart for them and belongs to

"Gting De Leon The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 750 [2006].

808

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 139

them severally in equity and is, therefore, not available for general
distribution. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 1035-1036.)
Refund to stockholders of their
investment

"Stock corporations derive their capital stock from the sale of
shares or stock to the stockholders. The stockholders, in purchasing
shares from the corporation, merely invest their capital in paying
for those shares. Being investors, they expect the corporation to
earn profits and to distribute the profits among them in the form
of dividends. For this reason, stock corporations are also known as
commercial corporations, that is, corporations organized for the
purpose of earning profits to be divided among the stockholders."

—

(1) Where shares with par value.
When stock corporations
are dissolved, the assets are first applied to the payment of
their obligations and the balance is then used to refund to the
stockholders the amount they invested in the purchase of shares
of the corporation. Where the shares of a stock corporation have par
value, and unless the articles of incorporation or the bylaws and the
certificates of the stock specify what amount is to be returned to the
stockholders as their investment in the corporation, the stockholders
shall be entitled to receive as a refund of their investment only an
amount equal to the par value of each of the shares which they hold,
even if in acquiring those shares they may have paid more than their
par value."

—

(2) Where shares without par value. "When the shares of stock
of a corporation have no-par value, in the absence of any provision
in the articles of incorporation to the contrary, the stockholders shall
be entitled to receive from said corporation upon its dissolution
as a refund of their investment, the amount which they have paid
to the corporation for the purpose of the said shares. If said
shares, although belonging to the same class, have been issued
at different times and have different prices as consideration, then
the stockholders shall be entitled to receive as a refund of their

investment the amount which they respectively paid for those
shares."

Sec 139

809

TITLE XIV. DISSOLUTION

—

"When
(3) Where shares acquired from prior stockholder.
the
from
directly
did
their
shares
not
acquire
stockholders
corporation but acquired them by transfer another stockholder, the
amount which the former shall be entitled from the corporation as
a refund of their investment is not the price for which the shares
were acquired from the prior stockholder, but the refund which

the original stockholder to whom the shares were issued by the
corporation would have been entitled to receive from the corporation
had he not transferred his shares." (C.G. Alvendia, op. cit., pp. 3334.)

— —
oOo

Sec. 140

Title XV

FOREIGN CORPORATIONS
Sec. 140. Definition and Rights of Foreign Corporations.
— For purposes of this Code, a foreign corporation is one
formed, organized or existing under laws other than those
of the Philippines and whose laws allow Filipino citizens
and corporations to do business in its own country or
State. It shall have the right to transact business in the
Philippines after obtaining a license for that purpose in
accordance with this Code and a certificate of authority
from the appropriate government agency.

Definition of foreign corporation.
(1) With respect to a particular State, a foreign corporation is a
corporation created by or under the laws of another State or country.
This is the traditional definition of the term. In the incorporating
State, it is a domestic corporation.

Thus, X Corporation organized under the laws of the Philippines
is a domestic corporation with respect to the Philippines and a
foreign corporation with reference to any other State; if organized
under the laws of Y country, it is domestic with reference to Y and a
foreign corporation under the Revised Corporation Code.
(2) For licensing purposes, the Revised Corporation Code
defines a foreign corporation as one formed, organized or existing
under any laws other than those of the Philippines and whose laws
allow Filipino citizens and corporations to do business in its own
country or State.' (see Sec. 140, par. 2.) It does not say that it is

'Section 140 does not apply to foreign partnerships. (SEC Opinion, May 25,
1982.) Neither does it cover joint ventures formed outside the Philippines by two
foreign corporations to establish a representative office in the Philippines. The SEC has
jurisdiction to issue licenses only to foreign corporations. (SEC Opinion, April 22, 1985.)
810

811

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

required that the laws under which foreign corporations are formed
give Philippine nationals reciprocal rights. (State Investment House,
Inc. vs. Citibank, N.A., 203 SCRA9 [1991].)
Under the Revised Corporation Code, the existence of foreign
law allowing Filipino citizens and corporations to do business in the
country of the foreign corporation is prescribed only as a condition
for securing a license to transact business in the Philippines. It is not
an essential element of being a foreign corporation.
Corporation may operate within jurisdiction
of another State.
A foreign corporation has no legal existence or status beyond
the bounds of the State or sovereignty by which it is created or
incorporated and organized. It exists only in contemplation of law
and by force of the law and where that law ceases to operate, the
corporation can have no existence.

—

(1) With consent of foreign state where business conducted. This
principle, however, does not prevent a corporation from acting in
another State or country with the latter's express or implied consent.2
This is the "consent doctrine" provided in Sections 142 and 143.

But every power which a corporation exercises as such in another
State depends for its validity upon the laws of the sovereignty
in which it is exercised. A corporation can exercise none of the
functions and privileges conferred by its charter in another State or
country except by the comity and consent of such State or country.
(20C.J.S. 12.)

—

(2) Subject to conditions and restrictions it may impose.
The
State in extending to foreign corporations the privilege of doing
business may impress such privilege with whatever conditions and
restrictions it deems fit to impose.
Thus, it is within the power and discretion of a State to require
foreign corporations, as a condition precedent to the right to do

’The new type of problems caused by big multinational corporations doing business

the Philippines and other countries suggests the need for special laws to regulate
them. Created in one State, they transact business, maintain offices and operate plants
or factories in numerous states. Most such corporations with worldwide activities have
stockholders, directors, officers, and employees from different countries where they do

business.

812

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 140

business within the State, to take out a license, permit, or certificate
from a designated officer or agency, giving such foreign corporations
authority or permission to do so, and on compliance therewith,
the transaction has been held to constitute a contract between the
corporation and the State. (SEC Opinion, March 5, 1959.)
Objectives of regulation of foreign

corporations.

The objectives of the statutory provisions prescribing conditions
under which foreign corporations are permitted to do business in a
State other than that of their creation are:
(1) to place them on an equality with domestic corporations;
(2) to subject them to inspection so their condition may be
known; and
(3) to protect residents of the State doing business with them by
subjecting them to the courts of the State.
Provisions of revenue requiring the payment of fees and taxes
are only incidental. (17 Fletcher, p. 424.)
License and certificate of authority required
of foreign corporations.

Under Section 140, foreign corporations shall not be permitted
to transact or do business in the Philippines until they have secured
a license for that purpose from the SEC and a certificate of authority
from the appropriate government agency?
The fact, however, that a foreign corporation may not transact
business in the Philippines unless it has obtained a license for that
purpose, nor maintain a suit in Philippine courts to recover any
debt, claim or demand without such license, does not make such
corporation any less a juridical person. An exception to the license
requirement has been recognized where a foreign corporation sues
on an isolated transaction. (General Garments Corp. vs. Director of
Patents, 41 SCRA 50 (1971].)
The SEC does not have rules and regulations governing the activities of foreign
corporations in the Philippines before they are granted a license, the reason being that
until they have obtained a license, they cannot transact business in the country. (SEC
Opinion, March 29, 1962.)

Sec. 140

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

Nationality of corporations with
foreign equity.

813

—

There are several tests for
(1) Determination of nationality.
determining the corporate nationality of a corporation:
(a) Under the "incorporation test," the nationality of a
corporation is that of the state of incorporation regardless of the
nationality of its stockholders.
(b) The Grandfather Rule is the method by which the
percentage of Filipino equity in a corporation is computed by
attributing the nationality of the second or even subsequent
tier of ownership to determine the nationality of the corporate
shareholder. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 42-19, Sept. 19, 2019.)
Under the "Grandfather Rule," the combined totals in the
investing corporation and the investee corporation must be
traced (i.e., "grandfathered") to determine the total percentage
of Filipino ownership.
This rule is only used when doubt exists as to the locus
of the beneficial ownership and control, as when these do not
in fact reside in the Filipino shareholders but in the foreign
shareholders. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 42-19, Sept. 19, 2019.). In
other words, the Grandfather Rule is only applicable when the
60-40 Filipino-foreign equity ownership is in "doubt."
The Supreme Court, in its Resolution in Narra Nickel Mining
and Development Corporation v. Redmont Consolidated Mines
Corp. (G.R. No. 195580, April 21, 2014) explained that even if the
60-40 Filipino to foreign equity ratio is apparently met by the
investing or investee corporation, a resort to the Grandfather
Rule is necessary if doubt exists as to the locus of the "beneficial
ownership" and "control." The "doubt" refers to, "various
indicia that the 'beneficial ownership' and 'control' of the
corporation do not in fact reside in Filipino shareholders but in
foreign stakeholders." (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 24-19, June 24,
2019.)
(c) The Control Test or the "liberal rule" states that shares

belonging to corporations at least sixty percent (60%) of the
capital of which is owned by Filipino citizens shall be considered
as of Philippine nationality. Under this test, there is no need
to further trace the ownership of the 60% (or more) Filipino

814

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODEOF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 140

Sec. 140

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

815

stockholdings of an investing corporation since a corporation
which is at least 60% Filipino-owned is already considered as
Filipino. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 42-19, Sept. 19, 2019; SECOGC Opinion No. 24-19, June 24, 2019.)
The control test may be traced to a Department of Justice,
opinion (No. 18, Jan. 19, 1989.), which the SEC adopted (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 7, 1993.; see, however, SEC Opinion No. 31-10,
Dec. 9, 2010 (Infra.) and which is now embodied in the Foreign
Investments Act of 1991 (Infra.) and its implementing rules and
regulations?
Under existing laws, the
(2) 60-40 percentage requirement.
capital stock,
outstanding
total
basis of the computation is the
shares,
(see Sec.
the
of
value
of
the
amount
par
the
of
irrespective

Philippine national and at least 60% of the fund will accrue to the
benefit of Philippine nationals" is deemed a "Philippine National."*4
Where a corporation and its non-Filipino stockholders own
stocks in an enterprise registered with the SEC, at least 60% of the
capital stock outstanding and entitled to vote of both corporations
must be owned and held by Filipino citizens and at least 60% of
the members of the board of directors of both corporations must
be citizens of the Philippines in order that the corporation shall be
considered a Philippine national. (Sec. 3[a] thereof, as amended by
R.A. No. 8179.) Thus, the law applies the control test both with respect
to the ownership of shares entitled to vote and the membership in
the board of directors.7

173.)
Under
(3) Rule under the Foreign Investments Act of 1991.
R.A. No. 7042:’ (a) "a citizen of the Philippines, or (b) a domestic
partnership or association wholly-owned by citizens of the
Philippines, or (c) a corporation organized under the laws of the
Philippines of which at least 60% of the capital stock outstanding
and entitled to vote is owned and held by Filipino citizens, or (d)
a corporation organized abroad and registered as doing business
in the Philippines under the Revised Corporation Code of which
100% of the capital stock outstanding and entitled to vote is whollyowned by Filipinos, or (e) a trustee of funds for pension or other
employee retirement or separation benefits, where the trustee is a

‘Sec. 7(a) of the rules promulgated by the SEC on February 28, 1967 provides for
the determination of Philippine nationality in case of a corporation engaged in the
exploration, development and utilization of natural resources. It is sufficient under the
rule that the subscribing corporation is owned to the extent of at least 60% of its capital
stock by Filipino atizens, to be considered a Philippine national. This is consistent with
the provision of the Constitution which states, among others, that the exploration, etc. of
our natural resources (which shall be under the control and supervision of the State) shall
be limited to Filipino citizens or to corporations or associations at least 60% of the capital
stock of which belongs to Filipino citizens. (Art. XII, Sec. 2[par. 1] thereof.)
The rule, however, is intended to apply only to corporations and associations subject
to our laws and not to foreign corporations not licensed to do business in the Philippines.
As regards such foreign entities, their shares of stock in a Philippine corporation engaged
in the exploration, etc of our natural resources will be regarded as belonging to Filipinos
only to the extent of the interest that Filipino citizens own in the foreign company. Thus,
if the foreign entity is owned to the extent of 60% of its capital by Filipino citizens and
40% by aliens, the ownership of its shares in the Philippine corporation will be allocated
as follows: 60% Filipino and 40% alien, (see SEC Opinion, June 9, 1973.)
7Under Art. 7(13) of E.O. No. 226, otherwise known as the Omnibus Investments
Code of 1987, as amended by R.A. No. 7888, the Board of Investments may recommend the
suspension of the nationality requirement with respect to specified foreign investments,

—

—

4 As follows: “Shares belonging to
corporations or partnerships at least 60% of the
capital of which are owned by Filipino citizens shall be considered as of Philippine
nationality, but if the percentage of Filipino ownership in the corporation or partnerships
less than 60%, only the number of shares corresponding to such percentage shall be
counted as of Philippine nationality. Thus, if 100,000 shares are registered in the name
of a corporation or partnership at least 60% of the capital stock or capital, respectively.
Of which belong to Filipino citizens, all of said shares shall be recorded as owned by
Filipinos. But if less than 60% or, say only 50% of the capital stock or capital belong to
Filipino citizens, only 50,000 shares shall be counted as owned by Filipinos and the other
50,000 shares shall be recorded as belonging to aliens." (see SEC Opinions No. 07-20, Nov.
28, 2007 and No. 07-21, Nov. 27, 2007.)
’Under Sec. 3 thereof, it is the test for compliance with the nationality requirement
It is based on the total outstanding or subscribed/issued applied stock irrespective of
the amount of the par value of the shares. With respect to nonstock corporations, the
nationality is computed on the basis of the nationality of its members and not on the
membership contribution. (SEC Opinion No. 49-04, Dec. 22, 2004.) The control test cannot
be applied where the law requires a greater percentage of ownership. (SEC Opinions No.
41-04, Sept. 28, 2004 and No. 3004, April 28, 2004.)

thus:

"(13) To the extent that such activities are allowed by the Constitution and
relevant laws, to recommend to the President of the Philippines, the suspension
of the nationality requirement provided in this Code in cases ASEAN projects,

or investments by ASEAN nationals, regional ASEAN or multilateral financial
institutions including their subsidiaries in preferred projects and/or projects
allowed through either financial or technical assistance agreements entered into
by the President, and in the case of regional complementation for the manufacture
of a particular product which seeks to take advantage of economies of scale. For
the purpose of this Act, a multilateral financial institution shall refer to a financial
agency or entity, and its affiliates which satisfy the following qualifications:
(1) The institution is either owned or controlled by member countries but does
not possess any national identity;
(2) The institution sources its funds from capital stock subscriptions and
contributions by member countries; and
(3) The primary responsibility of the institution is to provide funds for
developmental purposes and international economic stability."

816

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 140

(4) 40% foreign equity limit in public utility refers only to voting

—

The Constitution does not distinguish between
common stock.
common and preferred shares; hence, the term "capital," as used
in Section 11,' may be interpreted as including preferred shares
in the computation of the foreign ownership limit for domestic
corporation, i.e., all types of shares whether voting or non-voting.
The Corporation Code (Sec. 173 thereof.) defines "outstanding
capital stock as referring to "the total shares of stock issued x x x." In
Camboa vs. Teves (652 SCRA 690 [2011].), the Supreme Court, sitting
en banc, ruled that the 40% limit refers only to common stock
entitled to vote directors and not to the total stock comprising
both common and non-voting preferred shares of a public utility
corporation.* (see dissenting opinions.)
*The provision (see note 1 to Sec. 140.) does not qualify whether the 60% ownership
of capital shall be common or preferred, voting or non-voting.
*It explains: "Considering that common shares have voting rights which translate
to control, as opposed to preferred shares which usually have no voting rights, the term
“capital" in Sec. 11, Art. XII of the Constitution refers only to common shares. However if
the preferred shares also have the right to vote in the election of directors, then the term
'capital' shall include such preferred shares because the right to participate in the control
or management of the corporation is exercised through the right to vote in the election of
directors. In short, the term "capital" in Sec 11, Art. XII of the Constitution refers only to
shares of stock that can vote in the election of directors.
This interpretation is consistent with the intent of the framers of the Constitution
to place in the hands of Filipino citizens the control and management of public utilities.
As revealed in the deliberations of the Constitutional Commission, 'capital' refers to the
voting stock of controlling interest of a corporation, Io wit: . . .
Thus, 60% of the 'capital' assumes, or should result in, 'controlling interest' in the
corporation. Reinforcing this interpretation of the term 'capital,' as referring to controlling
interest or shares entitled to vote, is the definition (Sec. 3, A thereof.) of a "Philippine
national" in the Foreign Investments Act of 1991, Io wit: .
To construe broadly the term 'capital' as the total outstanding capital stock,
including both common and non-voting preferred shares, grossly contravenes the intent
and letter of the Constitution that the 'State shall develop a self-reliant and independent
national economy effectively controlled by Filipinos.' A broad definition unjustifiably
disregards who owns the all-important voting stock, which necessarily equates to control
of the public utility."
The same decision declares that the 60% Filipino ownership required by the
Constitution to engage in certain economic activities applies not only to voting control of
the corporation, but also to the beneficial ownership of the corporation. "Mere legal title
is insufficient to meet the 60% Filipino owned" 'capital' required in the Constitution. Full
(and legal) beneficial ownership of 60% of the outstanding meet capital stock, coupled
with 60% of the voting rights, must rest in the hands of Filipino nationals xxx "Precisely,
that is what SEC MC No. 8 (infra.) provides. (Roy VI vs. Herbosa, 823 SCRA 133 [20171,
motion for consideration of 2016 decision (810 SCRA 1 [2016L infra.) denied; see
dissenting opinions. Said circular incorporates the voting control test or the controlling
interest requirement

..

Sec. 140

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

817

Pursuant to this, the SEC issued SEC Memorandum Circular No.
08-13,10 which was upheld by the Supreme Court in Roy vs. Herbosa.
SEC MC No. 8 uses the two-tiered test in determining compliance

with the required percentage of Filipino ownership. Under the twotiered test, the 60% required Filipino ownership shall be applied to

BOTH: (a) the total number of outstanding shares of stock entitled
to vote in the election of directors; AND (b) the toted number of
outstanding shares of stock, whether or not entitled to vote in the
election of directors. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 24-19, June 24, 2019.)
"If a corporation engaged in a partially nationalized industry issues a mixture of

common and preferred shares, ... the 60-40 ownership requirement in favor of Filipino

citizens must apply separately to each class of shares, whether common, preferred
non-voting or any other class of shares. . . . Applying uniformly the 60-40 ownership
requirement in favor of Filipino citizens to each class of shares regardless of differences on
voting rights, privileges, and restrictions, guarantees effective Filipino control of public
utilities as mandated by the Constitution." (Gamboa vs. Teves, 652 SCRA 690 [2011];
Heirs of W. P. Gamboa, 682 SCRA 397 [2012); motion for reconsideration denied.) The
Gamboa decision became final and executory on October 18, 2012. (Roy ID vs. Herbosa,
810 SCRA 1 [2016].)
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 15-2019 requiresall registered domestic corporations to disclose
their beneficial owners in their general information sheet. The Circular aims to assist
in the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) and the Terrorism
Financing Prevention and Suppression Act. Under the Circular, beneficial owners are
identified through a three-tiered approach based mainly on the natural person's (a)
ultimate ownership; (b) ultimate control; and (c) position in the reporting corporation.
The ultimate ownership test covers 25% direct or indirect ownership of the corporation's
voting shares or capital determined through the Grandfather's Rule, or indirect control or
ownership of an estate, trust, or partnership owning at least 25% of the corporation. The
Circular gives an illustration.
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 10-16 (July 28, 2016) prescribes the guidelines on the issuance
of certification on the nationality of nonstock corporations.
SEC Memo. Circ. No. 8-13 (May 20, 2013) provides Guidelines on Compliance
with the Filipino-Foreign Ownership Requirements Prescribed in the Constitution and/
or Existing Laws by Corporations Engaged in Nationalized and Partly Nationalized
Activities. In compliance with the ruling of the Supreme Court in Gamboa that the term
"capital" in Sec. 11, Art. XII of the 1987 Constitution refers only to shares of stock entitled
to vote in the election of directors and in line with Sec. 1(b) of the IRR of the Foreign
Investment Act which requires the existence of full benefidal ownership of the stocks
and appropriate voting rights in determining whether stocks are owned and held by
Philippine nationals, provides: "Sec. 2. All covered corporations shall, at all times, observe
the constitutional or statutory ownership requirement. For purpose of determining shall
be applied to BOTH (a) the total number of outstanding shares of stock entitled to vote in
the election of directors; and (b) the total number of outstanding shares of stock, whether
or not entitled to vote in the election of directors."
Corporations covered by special laws (For example, R.A. No. 9474, also known as
the Lending Company Regulation Act of 2007, R.A. No. 8556, also known as Financing
Act 1998 and P.D. No. 129, also known as the Investment Houses Law) which provide
specific citizenship requirements shall comply with the provisions of said laws."
10See Appendix J: SEC Memo. Circ. No. 08-13, May 20, 2013 (Guidelines on Compli¬
ance with the Filipino Foreign Ownership Requirements Prescribed in the Constitution
and/ or Existing Law by Corporations Engaged in Nationalized and Partly Nationalized

Activities).

—

818

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 140

Since APIC is considered "a premium paid over and above the
price of shares," wherein the amount paid for the shares (as recorded
on the balance sheet) is increased but there is no further issuance of
shares, the creation of APIC will not affect Filipino ownership. The
ratio of Filipino to foreign ownership would be same before and after
the creation of APIC. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 14-19, March 28, 2019.)
(5) Purpose of 60% requirement. The purpose is to ensure that
corporations and associations allowed to operate a public utility
shall be controlled by Filipino citizens. Any attempt to defeat the
same shall be subject to sanctions imposed under applicable laws
and rules and regulations. (SEC Opinion No. 20-07, Nov. 28, 2007.)
(6) Determining board seats allowable for foreign investors.
Under the Constitution, the allowable foreign investment in a
public utility is only up to 40% of the outstanding capital stock and
foreign participation in the governing body shall be limited to their
proportionate share in the capital. (Art. XII, Sec. 11 thereof.) If, for
example, the corporation's board of directors is composed of nine
(9) members, foreign investors are entitled only to 40% of the nine
(9) seats. By mathematical computation, 40% of nine (9) is 3.6 and
60% is 5.4.
Under the accepted rule of rounding off numbers, the decimal
figures to the right of a specified number of places are dropped
after increasing the final remaining figure by one (1) if the first digit
dropped is five (5) or greater. (Third New Int. Diet., p. 1979 [1976].)
Thus, applying the rule, 3.6 is considered four (4) and 5.4 as only
five. Accordingly, for purposes of computation, 40% of nine is four
(4) and 60% is 5. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 14, 1991.)
A corporation organized under the laws of another State is a
foreign corporation notwithstanding that 60% or even 100% of its
capital stock is owned by Filipino citizens, (see Sec. 140.)
(7) Determination of required Filipino interest in a corporation for

—

—

—

purposes of land ownership. Save in cases of hereditary succession,
private lands may be transferred to corporations provided they are
"qualified to acquire or hold lands of the public domain."11 (Art. XII,
UA condominium corporation that owns the land on which the condominium project
is situated is considered engaged in a partially nationalized activity, and, therefore, is
covered by the "Anti-Dummy Law." Pursuant to Sec. 5 of the Condominium Act (R.A.
No. 4726 ), no transfer of a unit and of an undivided interest in the common areas shall be
valid if the concomitant transfer of the appurtenant membership or stockholdings in the
corporation will cause the alien interest in such corporation to exceed the 40% of its entire
capital stock. (SEC Opinion No. 17-09, July 22, 2009.)

Sec 140

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

819

Sec. 7 thereof.) Sections 22 and 23 of C. A. No. 141, otherwise known as
the Public Land Act, "provide as to who are qualified to own private
lands. With respect to corporations, it is required that at least 60%
of the capital stock belongs to citizens of the Philippines," without
qualifying whether the required ownership of "capital stock" are
voting or non-voting. Hence, the criterion of "beneficial ownership"
should be met, not merely the "control of the corporation." (SEC
Opinion, Dec. 27, 1995.)
Under the Foreign Investment Act and its amended
implementing rules and regulations, the term "Philippine national"
includes a "corporation organized under the laws of the Philippines
of which at least sixty percent (60%) of the capital stock outstanding
and entitled to vote is owned and held by citizens of the Philippines."
Such a corporation is qualified to own land in the Philippines, or to
acquire the entire capital of a Philippine corporation which owns
lands in the Philippines. (SEC Opinion No. 09-09, April 28, 2009.)
R.A. No. 4726 does not prohibit the acquisition of a condominium unit by a foreign
corporation subject to the requirement that no unit in the condominium project may be
transferred to aliens or to corporations more than 40% of the capital stock of which is
owned by foreigners, except in the case of hereditary succession. In case of the exception,
transfer to foreigners of units in the project may be done only to the extent that such
would not cause foreign interest to exceed 40% of the capital stock of the condominium
corporation. There is no requirement for a foreign corporation not doing business in
the Philippines to register or secure approval from the SEC for the mere buying of a
condominium unit. Such acquisition does not constitute "doing business under the
Foreign Investments Act, which presupposes an element of continuity of conduct. (SEC
Opinion No. 11-06, Jan. 26, 2011.)
A foreign corporation may acquire condominium units in the Philippines without
necessarily securing a license from the SEC to transact business. However, when the
condominium units are used in commercial transactions, such activity is considered
doing business in the Philippines which would require a license from the SEC. (SECOGC Opinion No. 40-11, Sept. 30, 2011.)
A business activity in the operation and management of buildings which does not
indude ownership or acquisition of land in the Philippines and whose paid-in equity
capital is more than the equivalent of US$200,000.00 is not a nationalized or partly
nationalized activity.
Also, interests in a condominium, which may be in the form of ownership, lease or
any other real rights, are subject to the following rules:
(1) If the condominium project is set up on leased land, the corresponding
condominium corporation may be established by a corporation which is wholly-owned
by a foreign firm.
(2) Where the condominium corporation is a Filipino corporation which owns the
land on which the condominium project is situated, no interest in the condominium may
be transferred to aliens or to corporations more than 40% of the capital stock of which is
owned by aliens; or, when the common areas are held by a condominium corporation,
the transfer to aliens if units in the project may be made only up to the point where the
concomitant transfer of stockholdings in the condominium corporation would not cause
the alien interest in such corporation to exceed 40% of its entire capital stock. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 12-12, Feb. 6, 2012.)

I
820

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 142

If the foreign shareholdings of a foreign landholding corporation
exceed 40%, it is not the foreign stockholders' ownership of the
shares which is adversely affected but the capacity of the corporation
to own land that is, the corporation becomes disqualified to own
land. No law disqualifies a person from purchasing shares in a
landholding corporation even if it will exceed the allowed foreign
equity. What the law disqualifies is the corporation from owning
land. (J.G. Summit Holdings, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 450 SCRA
169 [2005].)

—

The corporation shall be considered of Philippine nationality and
there is no need to further trace the ownership of its stockholding.*2

12The Supreme Court has clarified when the two (2) tests shall be used in
determining the nationality of a corporation. “Basically, there are two acknowledged
tests in determining the nationality of a corporation: the control test and the Grandfather
Rule. Paragraph 7 of DOJ Opinion No. 020, Series of 2005, adopting the 1967 SEC Rules
which implemented the requirement of the Constitution and other laws pertaining to
the controlling interests in enterprises engaged in the exploitation of natural resources
owned by Filipino citizens, provides:
Shares belonging to corporations or partnerships at least 60% of the capital of which
is owned by Filipino citizens shall be considered as of Philippine nationality, but if the
percentage of Filipino ownership in the corporation or partnership is less than 60%, only
the number of shares corresponding to such percentage shall be counted as of Philippine
nationality. Thus, if 100,000 shares are registered in the name of a corporation or
partnership at least 60% of the capital stock or capital, respectively, of which belong to
Filipino citizens, all the shares shall be recorded as owned by Filipinos. But if less than 60%,
or say, 50% of the capital stock or capital of the corporation or partnership, respectively,
belongs to Filipino citizens, only 50,000 shares shall be counted as owned by Filipinos
and the other 50,000 shall be recorded as belonging to aliens. The first part of paragraph
7, DOJ Opinion No. 020, stating "shares belonging to corporations or partnerships at
least 60% of the capital of which is owned by Filipino citizens shall be considered as of
Philippine nationality," pertains to the control test or the liberal rule. On the other hand,
the second part of the DOJ Opinion which provides, "if the percentage of the Filipino
ownership in the corporation or partnership is less than 60%, only the number of shares
corresponding to such percentage shall be counted as Philippine nationality," pertains
to the stricter, more stringent grandfather rule. . . . Corporate layering" is admittedly
allowed by the FLA but if it is used to circumvent the Constitution and pertinent laws,
then it becomes illegal. Further, the pronouncement of petitioners that the grandfather
rule has already been abandoned must be discredited for lack of basis." (Narra Nickel
Mining and Development Corp. vs. Redmont Consolidated Mines Corp., 722 SCRA 382

12014).)
In Nana, the Supreme Court held that the "control test" is the prevailing mode of
determining whether or not a corporation is Filipino. It is only when based on attendant
facts and circumstances of the case, there is doubt in the 60-40 Filipino equity ownership in
the corporation that it may apply the "grandfather rule." (see Querubin vs. Commission
on Elections, 776 SCRA 715 (2015).)

Secs. 141-142

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

821

Sec. 141. Application to Existing Foreign Corporations.

— Every foreign corporation which on the date of the
effectlvity of this

Code is authorized to do business in the
Philippines under a license issued to it, shall continue to
have such authority under the terms and conditions of its
license, subject to the provisions of this Code and other
special laws.

Where license issued before effectlvity
of the Revised Corporation Code.
A foreign corporation authorized to transact business in the
Philippines under a license issued under the Revised Corporation
Code shall be bound by the terms and conditions of such license
and the Revised Corporation Code. If the license was issued before
the effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code, it "shall continue to
have such authority under the terms and conditions of its license,"
but "subject to the provisions of this Code and other special
laws." Thus, a foreign corporation is not required by the Revised
Corporation Code to obtain a new license to continue transacting
business in the Philippines.
The Revised Corporation Code has expanded the definition of
a foreign corporation to include the requirement that the laws of
the foreign corporation "allow Filipino citizens and corporations to
do business in its own State or country." (see Sec. 140.) Unless this
requirement is satisfied, a foreign corporation cannot be licensed to

transact business in the Philippines.

Sec. 142. Application for a License. — A foreign corpo¬
ration applying for a license to transact business in the
Philippines shall submit to the Commission a copy of
Its articles of incorporation and bylaws, certified in
accordance with law, and their translation to an official
language of the Philippines, if necessary. The application
shall be under oath and, unless already stated in its articles
of incorporation, shall specifically set forth the following:
(a) The date and term of incorporation;

(b) The address, including the street number, of the
principal office of the corporation in the country or State

of incorporation;

822

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 142

(c) The name and address of its resident agent
authorized to accept summons and process in all legal
proceedings and all notices affecting the corporation,
pending the establishment of a local office;
(d) The place in the Philippines where the corporation
Intends to operate;
(e) The specific purpose or purposes which the
corporation intends to pursue in the transaction of its
business in the Philippines: Provided, That said purpose or
purposes are those specifically stated in the certificate of
authority issued by the appropriate government agency;
(f) The names and addresses of the present directors
and officers of the corporation;
(g) A statement of its authorized capital stock and the
aggregate number of shares which the corporation has
authority to issue, itemized by class, par value of shares,
shares without par value, and series, if any;
(h) A statement of its outstanding capital stock and
the aggregate number of shares which the corporation
has issued, itemized by class, par value of shares, shares
without par value, and series, if any;
(i) A statement of the amount actually paid in; and

(j) Such additional information as may be necessary
in order to enable the Commission to
appropriate
or
determine whether such corporation is entitled to a license
to transact business in the Philippines, and to determine
and assess the fees payable.
Attached to the application for license shall be a
certificate under oath duly executed by the authorized
official or officials of the jurisdiction of its incorporation,
attesting to the fact that the laws of the country or state
of the applicant allow Filipino citizens and corporations to
do business therein, and that the applicant is an existing
corporation in good standing. If the certificate is in a foreign
language, a translation thereof in English under the oath of
the translator shall be attached to the application.

The application for a license to transact business in the
Philippines shall likewise be accompanied by a statement
under oath of the president or any other person authorized

Sea 143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

by the corporation, showing to the satisfaction of the
Commission and when appropriate, other governmental
agencies that the applicant is solvent and in sound financial
condition, and setting forth the assets and liabilities of
the corporation as of the date not exceeding one (1) year
Immediately prior to the filing of the application.
Foreign banking, financial and insurance corporations
shall, in addition to the above requirements, comply with
the provisions of existing laws applicable to them. In the
case of all other foreign corporations, no application for
license to transact business in the Philippines shall be
accepted by the Commission without previous authority
from the appropriate government agency, whenever
required by law.
Sec. 143. Issuance of a License.
If the Commission
is satisfied that the applicant has complied with all the
requirements of this Code and other special laws, rules
and regulations, the Commission shall issue a license to
transact business In the Philippines to the applicant for
the purpose or purposes specified in such license. Upon
Issuance of the license, such foreign corporation may
commence to transact business in the Philippines and
continue to do so for as long as it retains its authority to act
as a corporation under the laws of the country or State of its
incorporation, unless such license is sooner surrendered,
revoked, suspended or annulled in accordance with this
Code or other special laws.
Within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the license
to transact business in the Philippines, the licensee,
except foreign banking or insurance corporations, shall
deposit with the Commission for the benefit of present and
future creditors of the licensee in the Philippines securities
satisfactory to the Commission, consisting of bonds or
other evidence of indebtedness of the Government of the
Philippines, its political subdivisions and instrumentalities,
or of government-owned or -controlled corporations
and entitles, shares of stock or debt securities that are
registered under Republic Act No, 8799, otherwise
known
as “The Securities Regulation Code." shares of stock in
domestic corporations listed in the stock exchange, or
shares of stock in domestic insurance companies and

—

823

824

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 143

banks any financial instrument determined suitable bv
the Commission, or any combination thereof with an
actual market value of at least Five hundred thousand
fP500.000.00) pesos or such other amount that mav be
set bv the Commission: Provided, however, That within
six (6) months after each fiscal year of the licensee, the
Commission shall require the licensee to deposit additional
securities or financial Instruments equivalent in actual
market value to two percent (2%) of the amount by which
the licensee’s gross income for that fiscal year exceeds
Ten million pesos (PIO,000,000.00).' The Commission shall
also require the deposit of additional securities or financial
Instruments if the actual market value of the deposited
securities orfinancial instruments has decreased by at least
ten percent (10%) of their actual market value at the time
they were deposited. The Commission may at its discretion
release part of the additional deposit if the gross income of
the licensee has decreased, or if the actual market value of
the total deposit has increased, by more than ten percent
(10%) of their actual market value at the time they were
deposited. The Commission may, from time to time, allow
the licensee to make substitute deposits for those already
on deposit as long as the licensee is solvent. Such licensee
shall be entitled to collect the interest or dividends on such
deposits. In the event the licensee ceases to do business
in the Philippines, its deposits shall be returned, upon the
licensee’s application and upon proof to the satisfaction
of the Commission that the licensee has no liability to
Philippine residents, Including the Government of the
Republic of the Philippines. For purposes of computing
the securities deposit, the composition of gross income

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

825

Application for the issuance of license.
A foreign corporation1 applying for a license to transact business
the
Philippines must comply with these requirements and the
in
conditions precedent to the issuance of the license by the SEC:
(1) Submission of required documents. It shall submit to the SEC
a certified copy of its articles of corporation, with a translation to an
official language of the Philippines, if necessary, and the application
for a license which shall be under oath and shall specify set forth the
matters enumerated by law, unless already stated in its articles of
incorporation (Sec. 142, par. 1.);
(2) Accompanying documents to application.
The application
shall specifically set forth the matters enumerated in Section 142 (a
to j.). It shall be accompanied by these documents:
(a) A duly executed certificate under oath by the authorized
official or officials of the jurisdiction of its incorporation, attesting
to the fact that the laws of the country or State of the applicant
allow Filipino citizens and corporations to do business therein
and the applicant is an existing corporation of good standing.
If the certificate is in a foreign language, a translation of the
certificate in English under oath of the translator if it is in a
foreign language (Ibid., par. 2.);

—

—

(b) A sworn statement of the president of any authorized
officer of the corporation, showing to the satisfaction of the

SEC and when appropriate, other government agency that the
applicant is solvent and in sound financial condition setting
forth its assets and liabilities for the previous year (Ibid., par. 3.);

and allowable deductions therefrom shallbe in accordance
with the rules of the Commissioncircumstances of their operations which extend across borders such that certain revenues
and expenses from within and without the Philippines are recognized in the
Philippine

‘Gross income is synonymous with gross revenue (i.e., gross inflow without any
deduction except those direct costs and expense items as may be allowed by the SEC)
for purposes of computing the security deposit required to be deposited by branches
of a foreign corporation under Sec. 126. The difference in the definition of gross income
and gross revenue is only for purposes of financial reporting but not for computing
the security deposit. With respect, however, to online business, due to the special

books, the computation of the security deposit should account only for the
proportionate
share of direct operating costs and expenses actually incurred in the Philippines.
(SEC
Opinion No. 14-11, March 9, 2011; see SEC Memo. Circ. No. 2, March 8, 2012.)
'It includes corporations incorporated abroad owned or controlled by Filipinos.
(SEC Opinion, March 26, 1963.) The law
refers to a branch of a foreign corporation,
as distinguished from a subsidiary of such foreign corporation. The former
is merely
an extension of the juridical personality of the foreign corporation while
the latter is a
corporation organized under Philippine laws with legal personality separate and
distinct
from its parent company.

826

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

authority from the appropriate
whenever
required by law (ibid., last
authority,
government
par.; Sec. 140.); and
(d) A written power of attorney designating a resident
agent on whom summons and other legal processes against
the corporation may be served and a written agreement or
stipulation consenting that such service may be made upon
the SEC if at any time it shall cease to transact business in the
Philippines, or shall be without any resident agent.12 (Secs. 144,
(c) A certificate of

145.)

—

(3) Compliance with provisions of special laws. Foreign banking,
financial and insurance corporations shall, in addition to the above
’Under the Rules and Regulations implementing R. A. No. 7042, a foreign corporation

is required to submit these documents to secure a license to do business:
(1) Name verification slip;
(2) Certified copy of board resolution authorizing the establishment of an office
in the Philippines; designating the resident agent to whom summons and other legal
processes may be served in behalf of the foreign corporation; and stipulating that in the
absence of such agent or upon cessation of its business in the Philippines, the SEC shall
receive any summons or legal processes as if the same is made upon the corporation at its
home office;
(3) Financial statements for the immediately preceding year at the time of filing

if the application, certified by an independent certified public accountant of the home
country;
(4) Certified copies of the articles of incorporation /partnership with an English
translation thereof if in a foreign language;
(5) Proof of inward remittance such as bank certificate of inward remittance of
credit advises; and
(6) Other documents which the SEC may require, such as those for the issuance by
the SEC of a license to transact business in the Philippines.
For representative offices, the amount remitted initially should be at least US$30,000.
If the paid-in equity/capital is in kind, additional requirements shall be submitted
to the SEC pursuant to its existing rules and regulations. All documents executed abroad
should be authenticated by the Philippine Embassy or Consular Office. In the case of
an existing corporation intending to increase foreign equity participation, all documents
required of the proposed transaction under applicable laws, rules and regulations shall
be submitted.
Upon fulfillment of all SEC requirements and favorable evaluation by the SEC,
the certificate of registration for domestic corporations and partnerships, or license
to do business in the case of a foreign corporation, shall be issued by the SEC. In case
of disapproval, the SEC shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for the
disapproval of the registration. Within 15 working days from official acceptance of the
application, the SEC shall act on the same. Otherwise, the application shall be considered
as automatically approved if it is not acted upon within said period for a cause not
attributable to the applicant (Secs. 2, 3 thereof.)

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

827

requirements, comply with the provisions of existing laws applicable
to them (Sec. 142, last par.); and
(4) Issuance of license to transact business.
If the applicant
shows to the satisfaction of the SEC that it has complied with the
requirements of the Revised Corporation Code and those imposed
by other special laws, rules and regulations, the SEC shall issue the
license authorizing it to transact business in the Philippines for the
purpose or purposes specified therein? (Sec. 143, par. 1.)
(5) Term of license.
As long as the foreign corporation still
exists legally in its place of incorporation, its license to do business in
the Philippines remains valid, unless sooner surrendered, revoked,
suspended, or annulled in accordance with the Revised Corporation
Code or other special laws. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 33-19, Sept. 9,

—

—

2019.)

Conditions subsequent to issuance
of license.

Upon the issuance of the license, the foreign corporation may
commence to transact its business in the Philippines and continue
to do so for so long as it retains the authority to act as a corporation
under the laws of the State of its incorporation, unless such license is
sooner surrendered, revoked, suspended, or annulled in accordance
with the Revised Corporation Code or other special laws. (Sec. 143.)
’Registration of a foreign corporation with the SEC requires that the same is doing
business in the Philippines; hence, a firm name belonging to a foreign corporation cannot
be registered here just for the sole purpose of precluding the possibility of any
group
capitalizing on said firm name in the Philippines. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 7, 1974) The SEC
may exempt foreign corporations from its licensing requirements upon appropriate
application for exemption to promote equity, justice, and national interest. Thus, it may
determine on a case-to-case basis whether a particular act or limited undertaking of a
foreign corporation constitutes an act of doing or transacting business in the Philippines.
(SEC Opinion, May 25, 1982.)
A foreign corporation with a branch license issued by SEC may "re-domesticate"
its corporate domicile from one country to another. This re-domestication is
the process of
changing a corporation's seat of registration from one state to another without having
to undergo either a liquidation or a new incorporation. In case of
re-domestication, the
foreign corporation must file with the SEC, and in the proper case, with the appropriate
government-agency, documents pertaining to the transfer of domicile under the laws of
both states. Likewise, the foreign corporation must include any and all other amendments
to the same set of information required under Sec. 125.
(particularly
thereof.)
In case of amendments to the articles of incorporation or bylaws of thepar. 2
same foreign
incorporation. Sec. 130 governs. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 04-12, Feb. 10, 2012.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

828

(1) The foreign corporation shall transact business only for the
purpose or purposes for which it is authorized under its license
(Ibid.);

(2) Within 60 days after the issuance of the license, the licensee,
except a foreign banking or insurance corporation (which are
governed by the pertinent laws), shall deposit with the SEC for the
benefit of present and future creditors in the Philippines satisfactory
securities with an actual market value of at least P500,000 or
such other amount as may be set by the SEC. (Ibid.) The deposit
requirement is also a means of compelling foreign firms to invest in
or buy Philippine securities;
(3) Within six (6) months after each fiscal year of the licensee,
it shall deposit additional securities or financial instruments
equivalent in actual market value to two percent (2%) of the amount
by which the licensee's gross income for that fiscal year exceeds
PIO million. Such deposit shall be increased if the actual market
value of the securities has decreased by at least 10% of such value at
the time they were deposited (Ibid.); and
(4) It must comply with the provisions of existing laws, rules
and regulations; otherwise, its license may be revoked, suspended
or annulled by the SEC. (see Sec. 151.)

Secs. 142-143

829

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

i. If the licensee's gross income within the Philippines
for that fiscal year exceeds P10,000,000.00, additional
securities with an actual market value equivalent to two
percent (2%) of the increase in the gross income; and

ii. If the actual market value of the securities deposit or
financial instruments has decreased by at least ten percent
(10%) from the time it was deposited, additional securities
with an actual market value that would cover the decrease.
Thereafter, the SEC shall issue a Certificate of deposit of
additional securities.

—

(2) Corporations not required to post securities.
These
corporations are not required to post securities deposit:

a. Foreign banking corporation including offshore
banking units;
b. Foreign insurance corporation;

c. Foreign nonstock corporations including foreign
religious corporations;
d. Foreign corporations which have established
representative offices in the Philippines;

e. Regional or Area Headquarters of multinational
companies; and

Securities deposit.

The SEC issued these guidelines on the securities deposits of
branch offices of foreign corporations.*
(1) Coverage and Schedule of Posting. The licensee must pose
the bond in accordance with these rules:
a. Within 60 days after the issuance of its SEC license, the
licensee must post securities with an actual market value of at

—

least P500,000.00;
b. Additional securities shall be deposited within six
months after the end of the fiscal year indicated in the financial
statements in these situations:

See Appendix K; SEC Memo. Circ. No. 17-19, July 31, 2019 (Revised Guidelines on
Securities Deposit of Branch Offices of Foreign Corporations).

f. Operating Regional Headquarters of multinational
companies.

—

(3) Acceptable securities. These securities or any combination
of these kinds of securities are acceptable as deposit to the SEC
under Section 143 of the Revised Corporation Code:
(a) Government Debt Instruments.

—

Bonds or any
evidence of indebtedness of the Government of the
Philippines, its political subdivisions and instrumentalities,
or of government-owned or controlled corporations and
entities;5 and
As Section 143 of the Revised Corporation Code does not differentiate between
peso or foreign-currency denominated government debt instruments or securities, we
eonfirm your opinion that the security may be in the form of USD-denominated bonds,
provided the same are issued by the Philippine Government. (SEC-OGC Opinion No
11-19, March 25, 2019.)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

830

(b) Equity Instruments.

1. Shares of stock in "registered enterprises" under the
Omnibus Investments Code of 1987 (Executive Order No.
226);

2. Shares of stock in domestic corporations registered
in the stock exchange;
3. Shares of stock in domestic insurance corporations
under the supervision and regulation of the Office of the
Insurance Commissioner; and
4. Shares of stock in banks licensed by the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas.
Cash, money market placement, time deposits and bank
guaranty or standby letter of credit and similar instruments
other than those falling in the foregoing enumeration shall
not be acceptable as securities deposit.
(4) Release of Securities.
Upon proper application by the
foreign corporation, the SEC may release part of the securities
deposited by the licensee under these circumstances:
1. If there is more than 10% decrease in gross income of the
licensee-foreign corporation;
2. If the actual market value of the total securities deposit
has increased by more than 10% of the actual market
value of the securities at the time they were deposited;

—

The SEC shall issue a Certificate of Partial Release of Securities.
However, the current balance of the security deposit should be
maintained in these circumstances:

3. If gross income is equal to allowable deductions,-*
4. If the gross income after allowable deductions would
result to a negative amount.

—

(5) Return of Securities.
Whenever a foreign corporation
decides to withdraw from business in the Philippines, the SEC may
*SEC Memo. Circ. No. 17-19 allows certain items to be deducted from gross income,

(see Sec 4)

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

Secs. 142-143

831

return the securities deposited by such foreign corporation, subject
to these conditions:
1. A written application must be made therefore and
signed under oath by its resident agent or by a duly authorized
representative upon payment of a fee; and
2. It has ceased to do business in the Philippines by sub¬
mitting a resolution of the board of directors of die foreign cor¬
poration to effect that they desire to withdraw the license to
do business in the Philippines and that said company has no
liabilities to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines,
to the public or private corporations, Philippine residents and /
or citizens.

The SEC shall thereafter issue a Certificate of Return of Deposit.
(SEC Memo. Circ. No. 17-19, July 31, 2019.)
Types of entities.

A foreign corporation can file an application with the SEC to
establish these entities in the Philippines.7

—

(1) Branch.
A branch is an extension of the foreign
corporation's head office. Subject to the terms of the branch licenses
issued by the SEC and applicable nationality requirements on
certain types of activities, a branch can generally engage in all types
of business activities in the Philippines.
(2) Representative office.

—

A representative or liaison office deals
directly with the clients of the parent company but does not derive
income from the host country is fully subsidized by its head office.
It undertakes activities such as but not limited to information
dissemination and promotion of the company's products and
quality control of products. (R.A. No. 7052 implementing rules and

regulations, Rule 1, Section l[c].)

The allowed activities of a representative office are those aligned
with information dissemination, promotion and quality control of
the company's products. In other words, a representative office may
only engage in activities which support the business activities of the
7

The requirements for the establishment of these entities can be found here: https: / /

w'vw.sec.gov.ph/forms-and-fees/primary-registration/ (last accessed on July 10, 2021)

832

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

parent company. In addition, it is imperative that a representative
office does not derive income from activities performed in the
Philippines. All the expenses to establish and maintain the
representative office will therefore come from the parent company's
remittances. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 20-16, August 25, 2016.)
The SEC has opined that a representative office cannot invest
in shares of stock of a domestic corporation and earn dividend
therefrom. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 6-15, July 21, 2015.)
A representative office may bring and defend suits before
Philippine courts and other government agencies in order to protect
its rights and interests (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-13, April 5, 2013.)
(3) Regional or Area Headquarters (RHQs). An RHQ is an office
whose purpose is toact as an administrative branch of a multinational
company engaged in international trade which principally serves
as a supervision, communications and coordination center for its
subsidiaries, branches or affiliates in the Asia-Pacific Region and
other foreign markets and which does not earn or derive income in
the Philippines. (Sec. 2[2], R.A. No. 8756.)
(4) Regional Operating Headquarters (ROHQs). An ROHQ is a
foreign business entity allowed to derive income in the Philippines
by performing qualifying services to its affiliates, subsidiaries or
branches in the Philippines, in the Asia-Pacific Region and in other
foreign markets. (Sec. 2[3], R.A. No. 8756.)
(5) Partnership.
A foreign partnership can also apply for a
license to do business in the Philippines.

—

—

—

Purpose of law in requiring license.

The object of the statute in requiring that foreign corporations
doing business in the Philippines be licensed to do so and that they
appoint an agent for service of process is to subject the foreign
corporation doing business in the Philippines to the jurisdiction of
its courts.*
*Our laws and jurisprudence indicate a purpose to assimilate foreign corporations,
duly licensed to do business in the Philippines to the status of domestic corporation.
Courts have held that a domestic corporation is regarded as having a residence within
the State where it engaged in the particulars of the corporate enterprise, and not only
as its chief place or home office. In other words, a corporation may have a residence
(ie., die place where it operates and transacts business) separate from its domicile
(i.e., the State of its formation or organization). It is not really the grant of a license to

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

833

(1) It is not to prevent the foreign corporation from performing
single or isolated acts, but to bar it from acquiring a domicile for
the purpose of business without taking steps necessary to render
it amenable to suit in the local courts. (Marshall-Wells Co. vs. Elser
& Co., 46 Phil. 71 [1924].) In other words, what the law seeks to
prevent is a foreign corporation doing business in the Philippines
without a license from gaining access to Philippine courts. (Hang
Lung Bank, Ltd. vs. Saulog, 201 SCRA 137 [1991].)
(2) It was never the purpose of the legislature to exclude foreign
corporation which happens to obtain an isolated order for business
from the Philippines, and thus, in effect, to permit persons to avoid
their contracts made with such foreign corporation. (Marshall vs.
Elser & Co., supra.)
(3) The requirement enables our government to exercise
jurisdiction over foreign corporations doing business in the
Philippines for the regulation of their activities in the country. By
securing a license, a foreign corporation gives assurance that it will
abide by the decisions of our courts, even if adverse to it.’ (Eriks
Pte., Ltd. vs. Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 567 [1997].)
It must be emphasized that a foreign corporation doing business
in the Philippines with or without a license is subject to process and
jurisdiction of the local courts (Marubeni Nedeland B.V. vs. Tensuan,
190 SCRA 105 [1990].), and if it is not doing business, a license is not
required.

foreign corporation to do business in the Philippines that makes it a resident; the
•license
merely gives legitimacy

to its doing business here. What effectively makes such
a foreign corporation a resident corporation in

the Philippines is its actually

being the
Philippines doing business here, "locality of existence" being the "necessary element
in x
in

x x (the) signification" of the term "resident
foreign corporation."
The Supreme Court itself has held that a foreign corporation lidtly doing business
in the Philippines, which is a defendant in a dvil suit,
may not be considered a "non¬
resident" within the scope of the legal provision authorizing attachment against a
defendant "not residing in the Philippines." (State Investment House, Inc vs. Citibank.
N.A., 203 SCRA 9 [19911.)
*The law, however, "must be given a reasonable, not an
harsh interpretation
which does not hamper the development of trade relationsunduly
and which fosters friendly
commercial intercourse among countries" (Home Insurance Co. vs. Eastern Shipping
Lines, 123 SCRA 424 [1983].) consistently with the need to enforce our
laws that regulate
the conduct of foreigners who desire to do business in our
country. (Eriks Pte., Ltd. vs.
Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 567 [1997[.)

834

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Secs. 142-143

Meaning of transacting business based
on jurisprudence.

—

No general rule or governing
(1) Circumstances of each case.
what constitutes "doing" or
to
as
down
laid
be
can
principle
"engaging" or "transacting" business. Indeed, the accepted rule in
jurisprudence is that each case must be judged in the light of its
peculiar environmental circumstances, considering the purposes
and the language of the statute or statutes applicable. This is
essentially a question of fact.
The true test, seems to be
(2) Twin characterization test.
whether the foreign corporation is continuing the body or substance
of the business or enterprise for which it was organized or whether
it has substantially retired from it and turned it over to another."
(Mentholatum Co., Inc. vs. Mangalman, 72 Phil. 524 [1941].)
Thus, under the twin characterization test laid out by the
Supreme Court in the landmark case of Mentholatum, a foreign
corporation is considered "doing business" in the Philippines when:
(a) The foreign corporation is continuing the body or sub¬
stance of the business or enterprise for which it was organized
or whether it has substantially retired from it and turned it over
to another; and
(b) The foreign corporation is engaged in activities which
implies a continuity of commercial dealings and arrangements,
and contemplates, to that extent, the performance of acts or
works or the exercise of some of the functions normally incident
to, and in progressive prosecution of, the purpose and object of
its organization.
The twin characterization test (i.e., transactions must be for the
pursuit of the main business, and with intent to continue the same
for some time) have since become the hallmark of what constitutes
doing business in the Philippines. That it derives income from
its activities should also be considered. What determines "doing
business" is not really the number or the quantity of the transactions,
but more importantly, the intention of an entity to continue the body
of its business in the country. The number and quantity are merely
evidence of such intention. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-17, April 4,
2017.)

—

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

835

"All the combined acts of the foreign corporation in the state
must be considered, and every circumstance is material which
indicates a purpose on the part of the corporation to engage in some
part of its regular business." (Pacific Micronesian Line, Inc. vs. Del
Rosario, 96 Phil. 23 [1954]; 17 Fletcher, pp. 465-466.) The expression
should not be given such a strict and literal construction as to make
it apply to any corporate dealing whatever. (MR Holdings, Ltd. vs.
Bajar, 380 SCRA 617 [2002].)
(3) Continuous business act or transactions. It should appear that
the corporation and its officers intended to establish a continuous
business, such as the appointment of a local agent, and not one of the
temporary character. (Marshall-Wells Co. vs. Elser & Co., 46 Phil. 70
[1924]; see Far East Infl. Import & Export Corp. vs. Nankai Kogyo
Co., Ltd., 6 SCRA 725 [1962].) Transactions which are occasional,
incidental, and casual
not of a character to indicate a purpose to
engage in business do not constitute the doing or engaging in
business contemplated by law. (Lorenzo Shipping Corp. vs. Chubb
and Sons, Inc., 431 SCRA 266 [2004].)
The term "doing business" implies continuity of conduct by the
foreign corporation in that respect, such as the investment of capital
and the maintenance of an office for the transaction of business
with those incidental circumstances which attest to the corporate
intention to avail itself of the privilege of doing business. (Penn.
Collieries Co. v. Mokeover, 183 N.Y. 98.)
(a) Thus, where FC, a foreign corporation which habitually
imports garments from the Philippines, sends its order to DC, a
commercial broker duly incorporated under the laws of the
Philippines, which, for a fee, looks for a local manufacturer, say
M, and if M agrees to produce the goods in accordance with
the specification of FC, DC then cables FC for confirmation of
the order, after which the finished products are sent directly
by M to FC, FC must be regarded as doing business within the
Philippines and, therefore, should obtain a license from the
SEC pursuant to Section 68 (now Secs. 142, 143.) of the Revised
Corporation Code and R.A. No. 5455 [in/ra.], SEC Opinion, Nov.
6, 1975.)

—

——

(b) Similarly, a foreign corporation with an "exclusive

distributing agent in the Philippines" and which had been selling
its product here, was held to be doing business in the Philippines.
(Mentholatum Co., Inc. vs. Mangalman, supra.)

836

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

(c) Likewise, where a foreign insurance corporation
engages in regular marine insurance business here by issuing
12 marine insurance policies abroad to cover different foreign
shipments to the Philippines, said policies being made payable
here, and the insurance company appoints and keeps an agent
here to receive and settle claims, said foreign corporation was
regarded as doing business here. (General Corp, of the Phils, vs.
Union Society of Canton, Ltd., 87 Phil. 313 [1950].)
(d) It has also been held that a foreign corporation which
sold its products 16 times over a five (5)-month period to the same
Filipino buyer without first obtaining a license was prohibited
from maintaining an action to collect payment therefor in
Philippine courts. (Eriks Pte., Ltd. vs. Court of Appeals, 267
SCRA 567 [1997].)
(e) In another case, a foreign corporation collecting premiums
on its outstanding policies, incurring the risks and/or enjoying the
benefits consequent thereto was held to be transacting business
within the meaning of the law. (Manufacturers Life Ins. Co. vs.
Meer, 89 Phil. 351 [1951].)

But the mere issuance abroad by a foreign corporation of
marine insurance policies to cover international-bound cargoes
shipped by a Philippine carrier and the payment of the claims of
consignees do not constitute doing business in the Philippines
by an unlicensed foreign corporation. (Universal Shipping
Lines, Inc. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 188 SCRA 170
[1990]; see Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. vs. Pacific Star Line, 80
SCRA 635 [1977].)
(f) Similarly, a foreign corporation engaged in the business
of manufacturing and selling computers worldwide, which had
installed at least 26 products in several corporations in the Philippines
since 1976, registered its name with the Philippine Patents
Office, allowed its registered logo and trademark to be used and
made it known that there exists a designated distributor in the
Philippines as published in its advertisements, its controller in
Asia having visited the office of its distributor for at least four (4)
times where it conducted training programs in the Philippines,
cannot unilaterally declare that it is not doing business in the
Philippines. (Wang Laboratories, Inc. vs. Mendoza, 156 SCRA 44
[1987].)

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

837

(g) Foreign airline companies which sell tickets in the
Philippines through their local agents, whether called liaison offices,
agencies or branches, are considered under the National Internal
Revenue Code as resident foreign corporations engaged in trade
or business in the Philippines. Such activities show continuity of
commercial dealings or arrangements and performance of acts
or works or the exercise of some functions normally incident
to and in progressive prosecution of commercial gain or for
the purpose and object of the business organization. (Comm,
of Internal Revenue vs. American Airlines, Inc., 180 SCRA 274
[1989].)
The sale of tickets is the very lifeblood of the airline business,
the generation of sales being the paramount object. (Comm, of
Internal Revenue vs. Japan Airlines, Inc., 202 SCRA 450 [1991];
Comm, of Internal Revenue vs. British Overseas Airways Corp.,
140 SCRA 395 [1987].)
(h) Where a foreign corporation has been corporation has
been continuously, for several years, acting as a supervision,
communications, and coordination center for its home office's affiliates
and in the process has named its local agent and has employed
Philippine nationals as sales representatives, it is clear from this
uninterrupted performance by the foreign corporation of acts
pursuant to its primary purposes and functions as a regional/
area headquarters for its home office that it is doing business in
the Philippines. (Georg Grotjahn GMBH & Co. vs. Isnani, 235
SCRA 216 [1994].)
But a foreign company that merely imports goods from a
Philippine exporter, without opening an office or appointing an
agent in the Philippines, is not doing business in the Philippines.
(Cargill, Inc. vs. Intra Strata Assurance Corp., 615 SCRA 304

[2010].)
(4) Isolated business acts or transactions.
Where a foreign
corporation has not engaged in its general business in the State,
but had done only those acts preliminary to doing the business for
which it was incorporated, such acts will not be regarded as doing
business in the State. (17 Fletcher, p. 476.)
The authorities are to the effect that where the corporation signs
a single agreement, or engaged in some other isolated or casual
business act or transaction within a particular State, with no intention

—

838

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

Sets. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

839

to repeat the same or make such State a basis for the conduct of any
part of its corporate business, such corporation cannot be said to be
doing business or transacting business within the State, within the
meaning of the usual statutory provisions regulating the transaction
of business by foreign corporations. (17 Fletcher, p. 478; see MR
Holdings Ltd. vs. Bajar, supra.)

foreign banks where such signing is merely a preliminary act of
the parties for the loan itself and the delivery of funds will be
consummated abroad cannot also be considered as indicating a
purpose to engage in business as would necessitate the licensing
of foreign lenders in accordance with Philippine laws. (SEC
Opinion, Oct. 7, 1981.)

(a) Thus, where the only acts performed in the Philippines
by a foreign corporation were the negotiation and signing of two (2)
agreements, to wit: one, for the sale to a domestic corporation of
a veneer plant, and the other, for the exclusive right to purchase
all core veneer that the domestic corporation would produce
for five (5) years, as to which neither party has commenced
performance of their respective obligations there have been
no payments, no shipments, nor deliveries made under the
contracts
and the foreign corporation has no branch office
in the Philippines, but for purposes of said contracts was
represented by its president who was a transient visitor, it
cannot be said that the mere entering into the contracts can by
itself be considered as transacting business in the Philippines
for which a license is necessary. (SEC Opinion, Feb. 15, 1963.)

However, the real estate mortgage agreement, the
mortgagee being a foreign corporation, is subject to R.A. No.
133 (as amended by R.A. Nos. 4381 and 4882.) imposing certain
restrictions upon the mortgagee or his successor-in-interest, if
disqualified to acquire or hold lands of the public domain in
the Philippines, by forbidding him to take possession of the
mortgaged property during the existence of the mortgage;
neither is possession allowed after default of the mortgagor
except for the sole purpose of foreclosure, receivership,
enforcement of other proceedings and in no case for a period
of more than five (5) years from the actual possession and such
alien mortgagee cannot participate in the bidding nor take part
in any sale of such real property in case of foreclosure. (SEC
Opinion, March 29, 1995, citing Pena, Registration of Land Titles
and Deeds, 1982 Rev. Ed.)

—

—

(b) Also, engaging the services of a cook, not as part of operating
of the business of the foreign corporation but merely to employ
as member of the crew in one of its ships (Pacific Micronesian
Lines, Inc. vs. Del Rosario, supra.), obtaining an isolated order
for business in the Philippines (Marshall-Wells Co. vs. Elser &
Co., supra.), and carrying cargo to and from the Philippine ports on
only two (2) occasions (Eastboard Navigation, Ltd. vs. Ysmael &
Co., 102 Phil. 1 [1957].), were held not to constitute "transacting"
business within the rule.
(c) The acts of a foreign shipping corporation without a
branch office in the Philippines in making only two (2) calls on the
Philippines to load cargoes for foreign destinations on two occasions
in 1963 and 1964 and collecting freight fees on these transactions
were held as a casual business activity not amounting to
engaging in trade or business in the Philippines for income tax
purposes. (N.V. Reedery vs. Comm, of Internal Revenue, 162
SCRA 487(1988].)
(d) The mere act of signing a loan agreement in Manila covering
a $100 million loan of the Central Bank to be extended by

(e) Where a foreign corporation contracted to buy tons of
crude coconut oil from a local corporation but the latter failed to
make the delivery, resulting in losses to the foreign corporation
which had to cover its oil needs in the open market at a price
substantially in excess of the contract, and to recover its losses, it
entered into two (2) other transactions with the same local entity,
said foreign corporation did not do business within the meaning
of the law, because there was in reality only one (1) agreement, for
the three (3) seemingly different conditions were entered into only to
enable the seller to fulfill the basic agreement and in no way indicated
the foreign corporation's intent to engage in a continuity of
transactions in the Philippines. (Antam Consolidated, Inc. vs.
Court of Appeals, 143 SCRA 288 [1986].)

(f) A view subscribed by many authorities is that mere
ownership by a foreign corporation of a property in a certain
state, unaccompanied by its active use to further the business
for which it was formed, is insufficient to constitute doing
business. Thus, a foreign corporation which becomes the

assignee of mining properties, facilities and equipment cannot

840

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

automatically be doing business, nor presumed to have the
intention engaging in mining business. (MR Holdings, Ltd. vs.
Bajar, 380 SCRA 617 [2002].)
(h) A foreign corporation which will participate in a joint
venture project for an activity done only once and not continually
(although the project will be 910 days) is considered as engaged
in an isolated transaction for which it need not register with the
SEC. (SEC Opinion No. 34-04, June 8, 2004.)
(5) Single act or transaction in pursuance of corporation's ordinary
It is not really the fact that there is only a single act
business.
done that is material. The other circumstances of the case must be
considered. A single act or isolated business transaction may bring
the corporation within the purview of the statute where it is an act
of the ordinary or customary business of the corporation. In such a
case, the single act or transaction is not merely incidental, casual,
sporadic, occasional, or isolated but is of such character as distinctly
to indicate the foreign corporation's purpose to do other business in
the State, and to make the State a base of operations for the conduct
of the corporation's ordinary business, (see General Corp, of the
Phils, vs. Union Society of Canton, Ltd., supra; Wang Laboratories,
Inc. vs. Mendoza, supra.)
It is the performance by the foreign corporation of the act or acts
for which it was created, the frequency or the amount or volume of the
business being immaterial, that determines whether it must secure a
Ecense or not. (see Granger Associates vs. Microwave Systems, Inc.,
189 SCRA 631 [1990].) Whether a corporation is engaged in business
does not necessarily depend upon the number and quantity of
transactions although they are evidence of such intention, but more
upon the nature and character of the transaction, (see Eriks Pte., Ltd.
vs. Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 567 [1997].)
(a) Accordingly, the act of defendant foreign corporation
in purchasing 7,770 dozens of soccer uniforms from a domestic
corporation and opening an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the
latter, was held to be within the ordinary course of business of the
company considering that it was engaged in the manufacture of
uniforms, being such a character as to indicate a purpose to do
business. (Litton Mills, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 256 SCRA 696
[1996].)

—

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

841

(b) In a case involving an action against a Japanese
corporation which contracted with the plaintiff to import scrap
iron from the Philippines, it appearing that the corporation
rented an office and sent no less than one (1) of its officers to the
Philippines "to look into the operation of mines, thereby revealing
the defendant's desire to continue engaging in business here,
after receiving the shipment of scrap iron under consideration,
making the Philippines a base of operations," the court ruled
that from the facts the corporation was doing business in the
Philippines. (Far East Inti. Import & Export Corp. vs. Nankai
Kogyo Co., Ltd., supra.)
(c) And if the corporation does that for which it was created,
the volume of the business done is immaterial and a single act
of that character may constitute doing business. (17 Fletcher, p.
474.) Thus, where X, a foreign corporation, which is primarily an
engineering consulting firm, has contracted with die National

Waterworks and Sewerage Authority (NAWASA) to render
services for three (3) years as technical consultant in engineering,
during the construction of interim projects of the NAWASA for
the improvement of Manila's water supply, and during the
effectivity of the contract, X will send to the Philippines not
more than eight (8) technical men to advise the NAWASA in the
supervision of construction work, X, as engineering consultant,
will be transacting that business in the Philippines for which it
was organized, although under a single contract, for which a
license is necessary under Sections 142 and 143. It is immaterial
that X has no intention of entering into other contracts in the
Philippines. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 19, 1965; see SEC Opinion, Feb.
20, 1976.)
(d) Similarly, a foreign corporation was considered as doing
business in the Philippines for having contracted with a Philippine
corporation for the manufacture and distribution of the former's

welding products and equipment, as said foreign corporation was
carrying out the purposes for which it was created, i.e., the
manufacture and marketing of the products, with the terms
and conditions of the contract indicating that it established
within the country a continuous business, and not merely one
of temporary character, which fact was even more strengthened
by its admission that it was negotiating with another group for
the transfer of the distributorship and franchising rights from

842

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 142-143

the Philippine corporation. (Top-Weld Manufacturing, Inc. vs.
ECED, S.A., 138 SCRA 118 [1985]; see Communication Materials
and Design, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 260 SCRA 673 [1996];
Merill Lynch Futures, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 211 SCRA 824
[1992].)
(e) The act of appointing representatives or distributors,
operating under the full control of the foreign corporation,
domiciled in the Philippines, or who, in any calendar year, stay
in the country for a period or periods totaling 180 days or more,
is an act of doing business. (Sec. 3[d], R.A. No. 7042 [The Foreign
Investments Act], as amended; SEC Opinion No. 07-09, April 17,
2009.)
(f) Also, a foreign corporation, by participating in bidding
for the operation of a waste management center exhibits its
intent to transact business in the Philippines. Similarly, a
foreign corporation is deemed doing business if it participated
on the bidding for the automated fare collection system of the
LRT-1 North Extension project, (see European Resources &
Technologies, Inc. vs. Ingenieuburo, etc., 435 SCRA 246 [2004];
SEC Opinion No. 18-09, July 14, 2009; SEC-OGC Opinion No.
21-14, August 5, 2014.)
(5) Contracts consummated outside the State or by independent
agents. As a rule, a foreign corporation will not be regarded as
doing business in the State simply because it contracts with residents
of the State where such contacts are consummated outside the State
or by an alleged agent, whether a corporation or a natural person,
where such activities are not under the direction and control of the
foreign corporation but are engaged in by the alleged agent as an

—

independent business.
(a) Thus, sales made to customers in the State by an
independent dealer who has purchased and obtained title from
the corporation to the products sold are not doing business by
the corporation. (Columbia Pictures, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals,
261 SCRA 144 [1996].)
(b) A reinsurance company is not doing business in a
certain State merely because the property or lives insured by
the original insurer company are located in that State. The
reason for this is that a contract of reinsurance is generally a
separate and distinct arrangement from the original contract of

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

843

insurance, whose contracted risk is insured in the reinsurance

agreement. Hence, the original insured has generally no interest
in the contract of reinsurance. (Avon Insurance PLC vs. Court of
Appeals, 278 SCRA 312 [1997].)
(c) But a foreign corporation not engaged in business in the
Philippines can still be sued in Philippine courts for acts done
against a person or persons in the Philippines prejudicial to the
rights they may have acquired in their transactions with such
foreign corporation, (see Facilities Management Corp. vs. De la
Osa, 89 SCRA 131 [1979], infra.)
Meaning of phrase under investment laws.
The Revised Corporation Code does not define the phrase "doing
or transacting business." The Omnibus Investments Code (E.O. No.
226 [July 16, 1987], Sec. 44 thereof.) and the Foreign Investments Act
of 1991 (R.A. No. 7042, Sec. 2[d] thereof.), however, give a definition
which may be adopted for purposes of the Revised Corporation
Code. Under these laws, "doing business"10 by a foreign corporation

shall include:
(1) Soliciting orders, purchases (sales) and service contracts
(see Marubeni Nedeland B.V. vs. Tensuan, 190 SCRA 105 [1990].);
(2) Opening offices, whether called "liaison" offices or branches;
(3) Appointing representatives or distributors11 who are
domiciled in the Philippines or who in any calendar year stay
10See also Sec. 1(g) of Implementing Rules and Regulations which enumerate
particular acts deemed included in the phrase "doing business" under the Omnibus

Investments Code.
"A foreign corporation with an agent or distributor in the Philippines of its

products is considered doing business in the Philippines but is not so considered if such

middleman is an independent dealer acting in his own name and for his own account.
(Hahn vs. Court of Appeals, 266 SCRA 527 [1997].) The appointment
of a distributor
in the Philippines is not sufficient to constitute doing business unless the distributor is
under the full control of the foreign corporation. (Steelcase, Inc vs. Design International

Selections, Inc., 670 SCRA 64 [2012].)
A foreign corporation doing business through an indentor is not deemed doing
business in the Philippines. An indent is defined as a purchase of goods especially when

sent from a foreign country. There are three parties to an indent transaction, namely, the
buyer, the indentor, and its supplier who is usually a non-resident manufacturer residing
m the country where the goods are to be bought. An indentor may be best described as
one for compensation, acts as one middleman in bringing a purchase and sale of goods
between a foreign supplier and a local purchaser. He is in the same class as a commercial
broker and a commission merchant. He is to some extent an agent of both the vendor and
the vendee. (Schmid & Oberly, Inc. vs. RJL Martinez Fishing Corp., 166 SCRA 493 [1988].)

844

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 144-145

in the Philippines for a period or periods totaling 180 days or
more;
(4) Participating in the management, supervision or control of
any domesticbusiness firm, entity or corporation in the Philippines;
and
(5) Any other act or acts that imply a continuity of commercial
dealings or arrangements, and contemplate to that extent the
performance of acts or works, or the exercise of some of the functions
normally incident to, and in progressive prosecution of, commercial
gain or for the purpose and object of the business organization. (Sec.
65, E.O. No. 226; Sec. 3[d], R.A. No. 7042.)
Under the implementing rules of the Foreign Investments Act,
these activities, among other activities, shall not be deemed as doing
business in the Philippines:
(1) appointing a representative or distributor domiciled in
the Philippines which transacts business in the representative's
or distributor's own name and account;
(2) the publication of a general advertisement through any
print or broadcast media;

(3) collecting information in the Philippines; and

(4) performing services auxiliary to an existing isolated
contract of sale which are not on a continuing basis, such as in¬
stalling in the Philippines machinery it has manufactured or ex¬
ported to the Philippines, servicing the same, training domestic
workers to operate it, and similar incidental services. (Imple¬
menting Rules and Regulations of R.A. No. 7042, as amended
by R.A. No. 8179, Section l.f.)

What the Revised Corporation Code seeks to prevent through
the provisions on licensing requirements, is the circumvention
by foreign corporations doing business in the Philippines of the
requirements through the device of employing local representatives.
Doing business through websites.

In the United States, there is currently no statutory law which
addresses this issue and no relevant case law has considered the
question of whether owning or operating a website or online
platform constitutes "doing business". Numerous court opinions,

Secs. 142-143

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

845

however, address a similar issue: whether a corporation's internet
activities in a foreign state constitutes "doing business" sufficient
to justify the court of that state in exercising "personal jurisdiction"
over the corporation. Exploring the issue of "jurisdiction" with
regard to websites can be useful when trying to determine a
corporation's need to "qualify [or obtain a license] to do business"
based on its website or online activities. One pre-requisite for the
court to obtain "personal jurisdiction" is that the corporation has
"minimum contacts" with the foreign state, such that its ability to be
sued there "does not offend the traditional notions of fair play and
substance."
Currently, most courts in the United States apply a Sliding Scale
Test tailored to internet activities to determine the level or types of
activities that will constitute "minimum contacts" for jurisdictional
purposes. This Sliding Scale Test is based on the premise that
"the likelihood that 'personal jurisdiction' can be constitutionally
exercised is directly proportionate to the nature and quantity of
commercial activity that an entity conducts over the internet." At
one end of the scale are "passive" websites, which alone generally
do not generate sufficient contacts with a foreign state to establish
personal jurisdiction since they are only used to post information
therein. At the other end of the scale are "active" websites, which
generate sufficient business over the internet to establish personal
jurisdiction. "Interactive" websites fall in the center of the scale
since they are hybrid sites that contain elements of both passive and
active websites, and courts determine whether to exercise personal
jurisdiction over the interactive website owner on a case-by-case
basis. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 03-17, April 4, 2017.)
Penal sanction.
The Supreme Court has stated that the prohibition against doing
business without first securing a license under Section 133 (now
Section 150) has a penal sanction under Section 144 (now Section
170). (Home Insurance Co. vs. Eastern Shipping Lines, 123 SCRA
424 [1983].) The Supreme Court subsequently clarified that such
statement is obiter dictum. (lent vs. Tullett Prebon [Philippines], Inc.,
803 PHIL 163-207 [2017].) Unlike Section 144 of the old Corporation
Code, Section 170 of the Revised Corporation Code no longer
contains the penalty of imprisonment.

846

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 144-145

Sec. 144. Who May Be a Resident Agent. — A resident
agent may be either an individual residing in the
Philippines or a domestic corporation lawfully transacting
business in the Philippines: Provided, That an individual
resident agent must be of good moral character and of
sound financial standing: Provided, further. That In case of
a domestic corporation who will act as a_LesidenLagent,
it must likewise be of sound financial standing and must
show proof that it is in good standing as certified bv the

Commission.
Sec. 145. Resident Agent; Service of Process. — As a
condition precedent to the issuance of the license for a
foreign corporation to transact business in the Philippines
such corporation shall file with the Commission a written
power of attorney designating a person who must be a
resident of the Philippines, on whom summons and other
legal processes may be served in all actions or other legal
proceedings against such corporation, and consenting
that service upon such resident agent shall be admitted
and held as valid as if served upon the duly authorized
officers of the foreign corporation at its home office. Such
foreign corporation shall likewise execute and file with
the Commission an agreement or stipulation, executed
by the proper authorities of said corporation, in form and
substance as follows:

“The (name of foreign corporation) hereby
stipulates and agrees, in consideration of being granted
a license to transact business in the Philippines, that
if the corporation shall cease to transact business
in the Philippines, or shall be without any resident
agent in the Philippines on whom any summons or
legal process may be served, then service of any
summons or other legal process may be made upon
the Commission in any action or proceeding arising
out of any business or transaction which occurred in
the Philippines, and such service shall have the same
force and effect as if made upon the duly-authorized
officers of the corporation at its home office.”

Whenever such service of summons or other process
Is made upon the Commission, the Commission, shall
within ten (10) days thereafter, transmit by mail a copy of

Secs. 144-145

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

847

such commons or other legal process to the corporation
at its home or principal office. The sending of such copy
by the Commission shall be a necessary part of and shall
complete such service. All expenses Incurred by the
Commission for such service shall be paid in advance by
the party at whose instance the service is made.
It shall be the duty of the resident agent, to immediately
notify in writing the Commission in writing of anv change
in the resident agent’s address-

Resident agent.
The resident agent is: (a) an individual who must be of good
moral character and of sound financial standing, residing in the
Philippines; or (b) a domestic corporation lawfully transacting
business in the Philippines, of sound financial standing, and in
good standing (Sec. 144.), designated in a written power of attorney,
by a foreign corporation authorized to transact business in the
Philippines, "on whom any summons and other legal processes
may be served in all actions or other legal proceedings against such
corporation."
(1) Function of resident agent.
Under Section 145, the only
function of a resident agent is to receive in behalf of a foreign
corporation notices, summons and other legal processes in
connection with actions against such corporation. He has no control
over the assets of the corporation. The service of any such papers on
such resident agent has the same force and effect as if made upon
the duly authorized officers of the foreign corporation at its home
office. (Sec. 145, par. 1.)
Such agent, as a representative of the foreign corporation,
is tasked only to receive legal processes on behalf of its principal
and not to answer personally for any claim against the foreign
corporation. Being a mere agent and representative, he is not the
real party-in-interest in an action by or against his principal.' (Smith
Bell & Co., Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 530 [1997].)

—

'The resident agent Ls not specifically authorized to execute a certificate of non-forum

shopping as required by Sec. 5, Rule 7, Rules of Court. This is because while a resident

agent may be aware of actions filed against his principal, he may not be aware of actions
initiated by his principal, whether in the Philippines against a domestic corporation
or private individual, or in the country where such corporation was organized
and
registered against a Philippine registered corporation or a Filipino citizen. (Expertravel &
Tours, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 459 SCRA 147 [2005].)

848

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 144-145

—

Under Section
(2) Modes of service of summons and notices.
12, Rule 14 of the Revised Rules of Court, when the defendant is
a foreign private juridical entity which has transacted business in
the Philippines, service may be made on the foreign corporation's
"resident agent designated in accordance with law for that purpose,
or, if there be no such agent, on the government official designated
by law to that effect, or on any of its officers or agents within the

Philippines." Where the foreign corporation has designated a
resident agent to receive service of summons and other notices
affecting it, that designation is exclusive and service is without force
and effect unless made upon him.
If the foreign private juridical entity is not registered in the
Philippines or has no resident agent, service may, with leave of
court, be effected out of the Philippines through the these means:
(a) By personal service coursed through the appropriate
court in the foreign country with the assistance of the Department
of Foreign Affairs;
(b) By publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the country where the defendant may be found
and by serving a copy of the summons and the court order by
registered mail at the last known address of the defendant;
(c) By facsimile or any recognized electronic means that
could generate proof of service; or
(d) By such other means as the court may in its discretion
direct. (Revised Rules of Court, Rules 14, section 12; see Luzon
Iron Development Group Corp. vs. Bridestone Mining and
Development Corp., 802 PHIL 839-860 [2016].)
As used in Section 144, the term "agent" refers to its general
meaning, i.e., one who acts in behalf of the principal. (Signetics
Corporation vs. Court of Appeals, 225 SCRA 737 [1992].)
(3) Suit and judgment against foreign corporation. Service upon
any agent of a foreign corporation, whether or not engaged in
business in the Philippines, constitutes personal service upon the
corporation and, accordingly, judgment may be rendered against
said foreign corporation. Indeed, if a foreign corporation not engaged
in business in the Philippines is not barred from seeking redress
from courts in the Philippines, a fortiori, that same corporation
cannot claim exemption from being sued in Philippine courts for

—

Sec. 146

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

849

acts done against a person or persons in the Philippines. (Facilities
Management Corp. vs. De la Rosa, 89 SCRA 131 [1979]; Royale
Crown Internationale vs. National Labor Relations Commission,
178 SCRA 569 [1989].)
(4) Replacement of resident agent.
In the replacement of
a resident agent, the SEC requires the submission of a duly
authenticated copy of the board resolution or a certification from
the authorized officer of the company formally revoking his
appointment as a resident agent of the corporation, accompanied
by a duly authenticated written power of attorney designating the
substitute or the new resident agent. The appointment of a resident
agent of a foreign corporation is revocable at any time at the instance
of the corporation. (SEC Opinion, Sept. 4, 1990.)
(5) Establishing fact of doing business. For purposes of acquiring
jurisdiction by way of service of summons, it is not required that
the fact of doing business in the Philippines must first be proved.
It is sufficient that such fact is established by appropriate private
allegations in the complaint. If a foreign corporation does not do
business here, that should be ventilated on the merits, but not in
a motion to dismiss. (Signetics Corporation vs. Court of Appeals,
supra.)

—

—

—

(6) Failure to appoint a resident agent.
The appointment and
maintenance of a resident agent during the entire operations of the
foreign corporation in the Philippines are mandatory requirements
under the law. Otherwise, the license of the foreign corporation may
be subject to revocation proceedings if it fails to comply with such
mandate, (see Sec. 151[b]; SEC Opinion No. 11-04, Feb. 24, 2004.)

Sec. 146. Law Applicable. — A foreign corporation
lawfully doing business in the Philippines shall be bound
by all laws, rules and regulations applicable to domestic
corporations of the same class, except those which provide
for the creation, formation, organization or dissolution of
corporations or those which fix the relations, liabilities,
responsibilities, or duties of stockholders, members or
officers of corporations to each other or to the corporation.

Laws applicable to foreign corporations.
(1) Philippine laws.

—

A foreign corporation licensed to do

business in the Philippines is subject to the laws of the Philippines.

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

850

(2) Laws of state of creation.

—

Sec. 146

However, matters relative to:

(a) the creation, formation, organization, or dissolution of
corporations; and
(b) the relations, liabilities, responsibilities, or duties of
members, stockholders, or offices of corporations to each other
or to the corporation,

are governed by the laws of the State of its creation.

In other words, matters relating to the organization or internal
affairs of the corporation are governed by the laws of the home
or incorporating State unless they offend any public policy of the

Philippines.
Thus, the right of the stockholders in a foreign corporation (e.g.,
right to receive dividends, right to inspect corporate books, etc.)
relating as they do merely to the internal management of the affairs
of the corporation shall not be governed by Philippine corporation
laws but by the law under which such foreign corporation was
incorporated. Therefore, the bylaws of a foreign corporation fixing
the relations, etc. of members, etc. to each other or the corporation
need not be filed with the SEC. (SEC Opinion, Oct. 17, 1975.) But the
amendment of its corporate name is subject to Philippine laws, not
being one of those enumerated in Section 146. (SEC Opinion, Feb.
8, 1988.)

—

(3) Proof of foreign laws.
It is well-settled that foreign laws
do not prove themselves in our jurisdiction and our courts are not
authorized to take judicial notice of them. Like any other fact, they
must be alleged and proved; otherwise, that will be presumed to be
the same as those of the Philippines. (Collector of Internal Revenue
vs. Fisher, 1 SCRA 93 [1961].)

Powers of a foreign corporation subject
to Philippine laws.
(1) Although the power of a foreign corporation depends
upon the law of the State from which its existence is derived, in the
exercise of such power in another jurisdiction, the corporation must
conform to local laws and public policy.

Sec 147

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

851

(a) The validity of and effect of its acts in states other than
the State of incorporation, even though such acts are within its
charter, must depend upon the law of the jurisdiction in which
such exercise takes place and in which such acts are done.
(b) Its submission to do business within the State is not by
right, but by comity only, and it is, in respect of business done
within the State, generally subject to, and bound by, the local
laws, and unable to exercise powers or perform acts whether
authorized by its charter or not, which are contrary thereto.
(c) The foreign corporation tacitly submits itself, when it
voluntarily enters the State and engages in business there, to
the valid laws of the State and to the jurisdiction of process of its
courts to the extent required by such laws. (36 Am. Jur. 2d 63.)
(2) Conformably to Section 146, the license issued by the SEC
to foreign corporations desiring to do business in the jurisdiction
contains, among others, the conditions that such corporations
be "subject to the prohibitions and limitations of the laws of the
Philippines as regards foreign corporations and as regards domestic
corporations of like nature." (SEC Opinion, March 5, 1963.)
Sec. 147. Amendments to Articles of Incorporation or
bylaws of Foreign Corporations. — Whenever the articles of
Incorporation or bylaws of a foreign corporation authorized
to transact business in the Philippines are amended, such
foreign corporation shall, within sixty (60) days after the
amendment becomes effective, file with the Commission,
and in the proper cases with the appropriate government
agency, a duly authenticated copy of the amended articles
of incorporation or bylaws, indicating clearly in capital
letters or underscoring the change or changes made,
duly certified by the authorized official or officials of the
country or State of incorporation. Such filing shall not in
Itself enlarge or alter the purpose or purposes for which
such corporation is authorized to transact business in the

A

Philippines.

Amendment of articles of incorporation
and bylaws.

—

(1) Effectivity. The amendments to the articles of incorporation
or the bylaws of a foreign corporation licensed to transact business in

852

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 148

the Philippines may become effective even before they are filed with
the SEC, and in the proper cases, with the appropriate government
agency. (Sec. 147.)
With respect to domestic corporations, the amendment to die
articles of incorporation shall take effect only upon its approval by
the SEC. (Sec. 15, last par.)
(2) Purpose. The foreign corporation's license to do business
in the Philippines states the purpose or purposes for which such
corporation is authorized to transact in the Philippines. (Sec
142[eJ; Sec. 148.) The filing of the amended articles of incorporation
or bylaws by the foreign corporation does not of itself enlarge or
alter the purpose or purposes for which it is authorized to transact
business in the Philippines. (Sec. 147.)

—

Sec. 148. Amended License. — A foreign corporation
authorized to transact business in the Philippines shall
obtain an amended license in the event it changes its
corporate name, or desires to pursue other or additional

purposes in the Philippines, by submitting an application
with the Commission, favorably endorsed by the
appropriate government agency in the proper cases.

When amended license required.
(1) Section 148 requires a foreign corporation authorized to
transact business in the Philippines to obtain an amended license in
case:
(a) it changes its corporate name; or
(b) it desires to pursue in the Philippines other or addition¬

al purposes.

In the first case, the amendment is necessary because the
foreign corporation is authorized to do business under its original
corporate name as stated in its articles of incorporation (see Sec.
142, par. 1.) and not in its new name, and in the second case, only
"for the purpose or purposes specified in such license." (Ibid., [e];
Sec. 143, par. 1.) and not for the "other or additional purpose." The
application for an amended license must be submitted to the SEC
favorably endorsed by the appropriate government agency in the
proper cases, (see SEC Opinion, May 30, 1988.)

Sec 149

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

853

A foreign corporation that fails to comply with Section 148
and conducts business operations in the Philippines outside its
authorized purpose may not intervene in any action before any
court or administrative agency here but such corporation may be
sued. (Sec. 150.) Its license shall also be subject to revocation by the
SEC. (see Sec. 151[g].)
(2) But an isolated or incidental transaction by a foreign
corporation outside its corporate franchise does not constitute
engaging in that line of business which would require the filing of an
amended license. Thus, a foreign corporation licensed to do business
in the Philippines may lease a condominium unit held in ownership
by such corporation and acquired in line with the purposes for which
it ventured to operate in the Philippines, without being considered
as engaging in the leasing business, where the end envisioned was
not realized and the foreign corporation would want to exercise
its prerogative as unit owner to recover its investment by resale or
lease thereof, for such contract of lease may be considered merely as
an isolated and incidental transaction which the foreign corporation
may validly enter into without the need to amend the license issued
to it. (SEC Opinion, July 27, 1976.)
Sec. 149. Merger or Consolidation Involving a Foreign
Corporation Licensed in the Philippines. — One or more
foreign corporations authorized to transact business in the
Philippines may merge or consolidate with any domestic
corporation or corporations if permitted under Philippine
laws and by the law of its Incorporation: Provided, That the
requirements on merger or consolidation as provided in
this Code are followed.

Whenever a foreign corporation authorized to
transact business in the Philippines shall be a party to a

merger or consolidation In its home country or State as
permitted by the law authorizing Its incorporation, such
foreign corporation shall, within sixty (60) days after the
effectivity of such merger or consolidation, file with the

Commission, and in proper cases with the appropriate
government agency, a copy of the articles of merger or

consolidation duly authenticated by the proper official
or officials of the country or State under whose laws the
merger or consolidation was effected: Provided, however,
That If the absorbed corporation Is the foreign corporation

854

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 149

doing business in the Philippines, the latter shall at the
same time file a petition for withdrawal of its license in
accordance with this Title.

Merger or consolidation involving
a foreign corporation.

—

The merger or consolidation
(1) With a domestic corporation.
is allowed provided that such is permitted under Philippine laws
and by the law of incorporation in the home country or State of

the licensed foreign corporation and the requirements on merger
or consolidation as provided in this Code (Title IX.) are followed.
In other words, there must be concurrent legislation in each State
of constituent foreign and domestic corporations authorizing the
merger, for neither corporation can have authority to merge or
consolidate except by virtue of a law of the State creating it.
(a) Corporations have no inherent power to merge or
consolidate with foreign corporations. The SEC previously
ruled that as there is no express provision in the old Corporation
Code or any other statute authorizing merger of a domestic
corporation with a foreign corporation, such merger is not
allowed in our jurisdiction, but should the merger take place
in foreign jurisdiction, the corresponding dissolution of the
domestic corporation should be effected in accordance with
the Corporation Code to safeguard the interest of third parties.
(SEC Opinion, Oct. 23, 1985.)
However, the SEC subsequently ruled that Section 132 (now
Section 149) is the express provision authorizing that merger.
According to the SEC, the correct interpretation of Paragraph 1
of Section 132 is that it authorizes a foreign corporation licensed
to do business in the Philippines to merge with a domestic
corporation, provided that the former can prove that there is a
similar authorizing law in its home jurisdiction. Such merger will
be governed by the Revised Corporation Code and other relevant
laws. In this regard, the phrase "if such is permitted under
Philippine laws" should be construed to include our nationality
laws. Thus, foreign equity restrictions in the Philippines would
prevent a merger between a domestic corporation and licensed
foreign corporation if the surviving corporation will be engaged
in a nationalized industry and foreign control of such surviving

Sec. 150

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

855

corporation will exceed the limits imposed by law. (SEC-OGC
Opinion No. 18-18, Nov. 16, 2018.)
(b) To achieve a combination, it is not always necessary to
resort to the statutory provisions on merger or consolidation.
One obvious alternative of two corporations is to have one of
them sell all its assets to the other in exchange for the latter's
stock. If the acquiring corporation also assumes the payment
of the corporation's liabilities and the latter shortens its term,
dissolves, liquidates and distributes the stock received to its
stockholders in exchange for its own stock, as a liquidating
distribution, the parties would end up in the same position they
would have been under the statutory provisions on merger or
consolidation. (SEC Opinion, Dec. 13, 1985, citing Campos &
Campos, The Corporation Code, 1981 Ed., p. 959.)
(2) With another foreign corporation.
If the licensed foreign
corporation is a party to the merger or consolidation in its home
country or State as permitted by the law of its incorporation, it must
file the articles of merger or consolidation as prescribed in Section
149 and at the same time, if it is the absorbed corporation, a petition
for withdrawal of its license as provided in Section 153. (par. 2.) It
is, in effect, dissolved because of the merger or consolidation. (SECOGC Opinion No. 14-12,1 August 28, 2012; see SEC-OGC Opinion
No. 11-18, June 5, 2018.) If the surviving foreign corporation wishes
to continue doing business in the Philippines, it must file its own
application for a license to do business in the Philippines, i.e.,
establish its own Philippine branch. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 14-12,
Aug. 28, 2012.)

—

Sec. 150. Doing Business Without a License. — No
foreign corporation transacting in the Philippines without
a license, or its successors or assigns, shall be permitted
to maintain or intervene in any action, suit or proceeding
in any court or administrative agency of the Philippines;
but such corporation may be sued or proceeded against
before Philippine courts or administrative tribunals on any
valid cause of action recognized under Philippine laws.

’Gting De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 812 [2002].

856

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 150

Effects of doing business without a license.
Section 150 states the effect of doing business in the Philippines
without a license.

—

The foreign corporation
(1) Suit by foreign corporation.
transacting business without a license or its successors or assigns
shall not be permitted, subject to certain exceptions (Infra.), to
maintain or intervene in any action, suit, or proceeding in any court
or administrative agency of the Philippines. If a foreign corporation
operates in the Philippines without submitting to its laws, it is only
just that it be not allowed to invoke them in our courts when it
should need them later for its protection.2 (Granger Associates vs.
Microwave Systems, Inc., 189 SCRA 63 [1990].)
It is not the lack of the prescribed license (to do business in
the Philippines) but doing business without such a license which
bars a foreign corporation from access to our courts. (Universal
Shipping Lines, Inc. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 188 SCRA
178 [1990]; Huang Lung Bank, Ltd. vs. Saulog, 201 SCRA 137 [1991];
MR Holdings, Ltd. vs. Bajar, 380 SCRA 617 [2002]; Aboitiz Shipping
Corp. vs. Insurance Company of America, 561 SCRA 262 [2008].)
To be doing or "transacting business in the Philippines for
purposes of Section 150, the foreign corporation must actually
transact business in the Philippines, that is, perform specific business
transactions within the Philippine territory on a continuing business
in its own name and for its own account. If a foreign corporation
does not transact such kind of business in the Philippines, even if
it exports its products to the Philippines, the Philippines has no
jurisdiction to require such foreign corporation to secure a Philippine
license in order to initiate and maintain a suit in the Philippines. (B
Van Zuiden Bros. Ltd. vs. GTVL Manufacturing Industries, Inc., 523
SCRA 233 [2007].)

’it has been held, however, that a counterclaim filed by the defendant against a
foreign corporation doing business without a license partakes of the nature of a complaint
and/or cause of action against the plaintiff corporation, making the latter a defendant
thereto, so that it cannot be said that said foreign corporation is maintaining a suit and
consequently. Sec. 69 (now Sec. 133.) of the Corporation Law is not applicable. (Phil.
Columbia Enterprises Co. vs. Lantin, 39 SCRA 376 [1971].)

Sec 150.

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

857

The lack of capacity at the time of the execution of the contract
can cured by the subsequent registration (i.e., subsequent issuance
of a license to do business in the Philippines). (Home Insurance Co.
vs. Eastern Shipping Lines, 123 SCRA 424 [1983].)
(2) Suit against foreign corporation.
The foreign corporation
may be sued or proceeded against before Philippine courts or
administrative tribunals on any valid cause of action recognized
under Philippine laws’ under the doctrine of quasi-estoppel by
acceptance of benefits. It shall not be allowed, under any circumstances,
to invoke its lack of license to impugn their jurisdiction. (Marubeni
Nedeland B.V. vs. Tensuan, 190 SCRA 105 [1990].) It is against justice
and equity for an unlicensed foreign corporation to execute contracts
with domestic firms and then repudiate their obligations thereunder
or plead immunity to Philippine jurisdiction just because it has not
obtained license in the Philippines. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 10, 1995.)
It has been held that where a local plaintiff and a foreign
corporation have agreed on Philippine courts as venue of action, evidence
as to whether such foreign corporation was doing business in
the Philippines is no longer necessary before it can be sued, and
for the expeditious determination of the controversy, summons
by publication can be made on it. (Lingner & Fisher GMBH vs.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 125 SCRA 522 [1983].)
(3) Application of the principle of estoppel. A foreign corporation
doing business in the Philippines with license may sue or be sued
before Philippine courts. However, estoppel, however, may set
in. This means that a foreign corporation doing business in the
Philippines may sue in Philippine courts a Philippine citizen or
entity who had contracted with the foreign corporation, although
it is not authorized to do business in the Philippines. A party is
estopped from challenging the personality of a corporation after
having acknowledged the same by entering into a contract with it
This would prevent a person contracting with a foreign corporation
from later taking advantage of its non-compliance with the statutes
chiefly in cases where such person has received the benefits of
the contract.4 (see Merryl Lynch Futures vs. Court of Appeals, 211

—

—

’In the United States, statutes permitting a resident of one State to sue in the State
court a corporation from another State are called "long arm statutes."

’The principle that one who has dealt with a corporation of foreign origin as a
corporate entity is estopped to deny its corporate existence and capacity, will be
applied

858

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 150

SCRA 824 [1992]; Georg Grotjahn GMBH v. Isnani, 235 SCRA 216
[1994]; Global Business Holdings, Inc. vs. Surecomp Software B.V.,
G.R. No. 173463, October 13, 2010; SEC-OGC Opinion No. 02-13,

April 5, 2013.)
A party to a contract
(4) Right to relief by other guilty party.
in pari delicto with a foreign corporation doing business in the
Philippines without a license is not entitles to relief from the latter.
Thus, where the contract entered into by a Philippine corporation
with a foreign corporation for the manufacture and marketing of the
latter's products is illegal for failure to secure a prior license from
the Board of Investments (under R.A. No. 5455.), the former cannot
ask the court to prohibit the foreign corporation from terminating
the contract and giving the production and distributorship rights
to another. The parties are charged with knowledge of existing law
at the time they enter into a contract and at the time it is to become
operative. Moreover, a person is presumed to be knowledgeable
about his own State law than his alien or foreign contemporary.
(Top-Weld Manufacturing, Inc. vs. ECED, S.A., 138 SCRA 118 [1985].)
It is implied from the rule
(5) Continuation of doing business.
established in Section 150 (2nd sentence) that the foreign corporation
shall not be permitted to continue transacting business in the
Philippines, unless it shall not have obtained the license required
by law and, until it complies with the law, shall not be permitted
to maintain any suit in the local courts, (see Marshall-Wells Co. vs.
Elser & Co., 46 Phil. 70 [1924]; Converse Rubber Corp. vs. Jacinto
Rubber & Plastics Co., Inc., 97 SCRA 158 [1980].)

—

—

to prevent a person contracting with a foreign corporation from later taking advantage
of the latter's non-compliance with the law, chiefly in cases where such person has
received the benefits of the contract. The rule is deeply rooted in the time-honored axiom
that no person ought to derive any advantage of his own wrong. This is especially true
where the business relations with the foreign corporation spanned a number of years
and it would appear quite inequitable for such person who was aware for the absence
of the requisite license on the part of the foreign corporation to evade payment of an
otherwise legitimate indebtedness due and owing to the latter. (Merill Lynch Futures,
Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 211 SCRA 824 [1992]; Communication Materials and Design,
Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 260 SCRA 673 [1996]; Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority vs.
Universal International Group of Taiwan, 340 SCRA 359 [2000); Agent Technologies, etc
vs. Integrated Silicon, etc, 427 SCRA 593 [2004]; European Resources & Technologies, Inc.
vs. Ingenieuburo, etc., 435 SCRA 246 [2004); Global Business Holdings, Inc. vs. Surecomp
Software, B.V., 633 SCRA 94 [2010].)

Sec 150

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

859

—

(6) Enforcement of foreign arbitral award.
The Supreme Court
has ruled that a foreign corporation not licensed to do business
in the Philippines but which collects royalties from entities in the
Philippines can sue to enforce a foreign arbitral award. According
to the Supreme Court, the Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of
2004 (Rep. Act. No. 9285), a special law, prevails over Section 133
(now Section 150) of the old Corporation Code, a general law. (see
Tuna Processing, Inc. vs. Philippine Kingford, Inc., G.R. No. 185882,
February 29, 2012.)

Sult by an unlicensed foreign corporation.
A foreign corporation without a license is not ipso facto barred
from bringing an action in Philippine courts. Thus, a foreign
corporation not transacting business in the Philippines may maintain
an action in our courts for relief, even if it has no license; reciprocally,
such corporation may likewise be sued in Philippine court for acts
done against a person or persons in the Philippines, provided that
in this case it would not be impossible for court processes to reach
the foreign corporation, a matter that can later be consequential in
the proper execution of judgment. (Signetics Corporation vs. Court
of Appeals, 225 SCRA 737 [1993].)
(1) To seek redress for an isolated business transaction.
The
implication of the law is that it was never the purpose of the
legislature to exclude a foreign corporation which happens to obtain
an isolated order for business from the Philippines from receiving
redress in Philippine courts and thus, in effect, to permit persons
to avoid contracts made with such foreign corporation or shield
debtors from their legitimate obligations. (General Garments Corp,
vs. Director of Patents, 41 SCRA 50 [1971]; National Sugar Trading
Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 246 SCRA 465 [1995]; Eriks Pte., Ltd. vs.
Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 567 [1997].)
(a) The term "isolated transaction" has not been construed
to literally mean "one" or a mere single act. (Lorenzo Shipping
Corp. vs. Chubb and Sons, Inc., 431 SCRA 266 [2004].) The
ascertainment of whether a foreign corporation is merely suing
on an isolated transaction or is actually doing business in the
Philippines requires evidence of a preponderant set of facts.
It cannot be answered through conjectures or unsubstantiated

—

860

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 150

allegations. (Rimbunan, etc. vs. Oriental Wood Processing
Corp., 470 SCRA 650 [2005].)
(b) The doctrine of lack of capacity to sue based on failure
to first acquire a local license is based on considerations of
sound public policy. It was never intended to favor domestic
corporations who enter into solitary transactions with unwary
foreign firms and then repudiate their obligations simply
because the latter are not licensed to do business in the
Philippines. "It is a common ploy of defaulting local companies
which are sued by unlicensed foreign companies not engaged
in business in the Philippines to invoke lack of capacity to sue."
(Antam Consolidated, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 143 SCRA 288
[1986]; Communication Materials and Design, Inc. vs. Court of
Appeals, 260 SCRA 673 [1996]; Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority
vs. Universal Group of Taiwan, 340 SCRA 359 [2000].)
(c) To deny a foreign corporation not licensed to do business
in the Philippines the right to file an action in our courts for
an isolated transaction in this country will hamper the growth
and development of business relations between Filipino citizens
and foreign nationals and, in effect, allow the law to serve as
a protective shield for unscrupulous Filipino citizens who
have business relationships abroad. (Huang Lung Bank, Ltd.
vs. Saulog, supra; see Comm, of Customs vs. K.M.K. Gani, 182
SCRA 591 [1990].)
(d) The doctrine of estoppel to deny corporate existence
applies to a foreign and to domestic corporations. One who
has dealt with a corporation of foreign origin as a corporate
entity is estopped to deny its corporate existence and capacity.
This principle is applied to prevent a person contracting
with a foreign corporation from later taking advantage of its
non-compliance with the statutes chiefly in cases where such
person has received thebenefits of the contract. (Communication
Materials and Design, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 260 SCRA 673
[1996]; Steelcase, Inc. vs. Design International Selections, Inc.,
670 SCRA 64 [2012].)

—

(2) To protect its corporate reputation, name and goodwill.
Similarly, an unlicensed foreign corporation which has never
transacted business in the Philippines may maintain an action in

Sec 150

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

861

local courts to protect its reputation, corporate name and goodwill
acquired through the sale by imposters and the use within the
country of its products bearing its corporate name or trademark,
or whenever that reputation, corporate name and goodwill have,
through the natural development of trade, established themselves.
(a) The right to the use of the corporate trade name is
property right, a right in rem, which the foreign corporation
may assert and protect in any of the courts in the world, even
in countries where it does not transact any business. (Western
Equipment & Supply Co. vs. Reyes, 51 Phil. 115 [1927]; General
Garments Corp. vs. Director of Patents, supra; Converse Rubber
Corp. vs. Jacinto Rubber & Plastics Co., Inc., 97 SCRA 158 [1980];
Universal Rubber Products, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 130
SCRA 104 [1984]; Converse Rubber Corp. vs. Universal Rubber
Products, Inc., 147 SCRA 154 [1987].)
(b) A foreign corporation has an exclusive right to the use of
its name which may be protected by injunction upon a principle
similar to that upon which persons are protected in the use of
trademarks and trade names. (Philips Export B.V. vs. Court of
Appeals, 206 SCRA 457 [1992].) It may sue in our jurisdiction for
infringement of trademark and unfair competition although it is
not doing business in the Philippines (Puma Sportschwhfabriken
Rudolf Dassler, K.G. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 158
SCRA 233 [1988].) under Section 21-A of the [old] Trademark
Law. (R.A. No. 166,’ as amended.)
The foreign corporation must additionally allege its personality
to sue i.e., that it is not doing business in the Philippines and its
action for infringement is anchored on an isolated transaction.
(Philip Morris, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 224 SCRA 580 [1993].) Also,
a foreign corporation cannot sue for unfair competition in Philippine
courts unless it complies with the legal requirements thereof that its
trademark has been registered with the Philippine Patent Office and
that it shows that the country of which it is a citizen, or in which
it is domiciled, grants a similar privilege to corporations of the
Philippines. (Leviton Industries vs. Salvador, 114 SCRA 420 [1982].)

’Repealed by R.A. No. 8293, the Intellectual Property Code, which now governs the
registration and protection of trademarks, trade names and service marks,
patents and

copyrights.

862

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 150

—

(3) To enforce its right not arising out of a business transaction.
Neither does the prohibition apply to a suit based on an act not
arising out of a business transaction in the Philippines.
(a) Thus, it has been held that a foreign corporation without
a license to engage in business in the Philippines may maintain a
suit to recover the value of goods that were part of the shipment
erroneously discharged in Manila and received by the defendant
and not returned (Swedish East Asia Co., Ltd. vs. Manila Port
Service, 25 SCRA 633 [1968].), or to recover damages sustained
by cargo shipped by a foreign corporation on defendant7s vessel
(Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. vs. Pacific State Lines, 80 SCRA
635 [1977].), or caused by failure of a shipping corporation to
deliver goods shipped to it by the foreign corporation to their
proper destination. (Bulakhidas vs. Navarro, 142 SCRA1 [1986].)

'

(b) A foreign insurance corporation may, as insurer¬
subrogee, sue in Philippine courts to recover from a Philippine
carrier the amounts paid by it to the consignee of the cargoes
insured, upon the marine insurance policies issued by it abroad
to cover international-bound cargoes shipped by the carrier,
even if it has no license to do business in the country. (Universal
Shipping Lines, Inc. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, supra.)

Suit against an unlicensed foreign corporation.

—

(1) Corporation not exempt from suit. If a foreign corporation
not engaged in business in the Philippines is not barred from
seeking redress from courts in the Philippines, a fortiori, that same
corporation cannot claim exemption from being sued in Philippine
courts for actionable wrongs or acts done against a person or persons
in the Philippines (Facilities Management Corp. vs. De la Osa, 89
SCRA 131 [1979]; FBA Aircraft, SA vs. Zosa, 110 SCRA 1 [1981].)
A foreign corporation actually doing business in the Philippines
amenable to process under the jurisdiction of the local courts.
(2) Reason for rule.
The rule is necessary to protect the
citizens; otherwise, a foreign corporation illegally doing business
here, because of its neglect or refusal to obtain the corresponding
license and authority to do business, may successfully though fairly,
plead such neglect or illegal act so as to avoid service and impugn
the jurisdiction of the local courts. (Gen. Corp, of the Phils, vs.
Union Society of Canton, Ltd., 87 Phil. 313 [1950].) Where a foreign

—

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

Sec. 150

863

corporation appears to have constituted a domestic liaison office in
the Philippines, the latter can be charged for the liabilities incurred
by the former in the country. (Ma vest [U.S.A.], Inc. vs. Sampaguita
Garment Corporation, 470 SCRA 440 [2005].)
Facts showing capacity to sue.
(1) Appropriate allegations in complaint by plaintiff foreign
corporation. A foreign corporation is either engaged in business in
the Philippines or it is not so engaged.
In the first, the corporation can maintain suit in this jurisdiction
if it is duly licensed. In the second, it can maintain such suit if the
transaction sued upon is singular and isolated, in which case no
license is required. In either case, compliance with the requirement
of license, or that the fact that the suing corporation is exempt
therefrom (i.e., it is not doing business in the Philippines), as the
case may be, cannot be inferred from the mere fact that the party
suing is a foreign corporation.
In any case, the right of a foreign corporation to sue is subject to
provisions of special laws.
(a) The qualifying circumstances, is being an essential part
of the plaintiffs capacity to sue, must be affirmatively pleaded
in the complaint,-4 otherwise, the court may choose to deny it the
right to sue. These are matters peculiarly within the knowledge
of the plaintiff alone, and it would be unfair to impose upon
the defendant the burden of asserting and proving the contrary.’

—

‘in a case, there is no allegation in the complaint for the recovery of value of
shipment lost that the transaction sued upon by an unlicensed foreign corporation
(insurance company and subrogee) is singular or isolated. The
court held that even

assuming the incapacity on the part of the foreign corporation to sue, no such incapacity
may be attributed to its co-plaintiff, a domestic corporation (consignee of the shipment
and subrogor). If necessary, the latter could quite easily execute a cancellation of the
deed
of subrogation. (Olympia Business Machines Co. vs. E. Razon, Inc., 155
SCRA 208 [ 1987) . )
’Sec. 4, Rule 8 of the Revised Rules of Court provides: "Sec. 4. Capacity. Facts
showing the capacity of a party to sue or to be sued or the authority of a party to sue or
to be sued in a representative capacity or the legal existence of
an organized association
of persons that is made a part must be averred." Under the
former Rules of Court (Sec.
U, Rule 15.) in force prior to the promulgation of the Revised Rules of
Court on January
1, 1964, it was not necessary to aver the
capacity of a party to sue except to the extent
required to show jurisdiction of the court.
The ruling in the Atlantic case seems to have set aside previous pronouncements
(Spreckles vs. Ward, 12 Phil. 414 [1909J; Marshall-Wells Co. vs. Elser & Co., 46 Phil 70

—

864

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 150

Hence, the ultimate fact that a foreign corporation is not doing
business in the Philippines must be first be disclosed for it
to be allowed to sue in Philippine courts under the isolated
transaction rule. (Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co. and Continental Ins.
Co. vs. Cebu Stevedoring Co., Inc., 17 SCRA 1037 [1966]; Comm,
of Customs vs. K.M.K. Gani, 182 SCRA 591 [1990]; New York
Marine Managers, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 249 SCRA 416

Sec 150

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

865

But a factual finding by the trial court that a foreign corporation

, was doing business in the Philippines without license binds the

Supreme Court absent exceptional circumstances that warrant a
different conclusion, and the foreign corporation has the burden
of showing that such finding falls under the exception and should
be reviewed and reversed. (Granger Associates vs. Microwave
Systems, Inc., 189 SCRA 631 [1990].)

[1995].)
(b) A court need to go beyond the allegations in the complaint
to determine whether a defendant foreign corporation is doing
business for the purpose of Section 14 (service of summons

upon a private corporation), Rule 14 of the Rules of Court
(Litton Mills, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 256 SCRA 696 [1996].)
A determination that the foreign corporation is doing business
is only tentative and is made only to enable the local court to
acquire jurisdiction over the foreign corporation through service
of summons. Such determination does not foreclose a contrary
finding should evidence later shows it is not transacting
business in the country. (Hahn vs. Court of Appeals, 266 SCRA
537 [1997].)
It has been held that the "isolated transaction rule" applies only
to foreign corporations. Any other business entity such as a single
proprietorship or a partnership cannot avail of the right to sue
within Philippine jurisdiction under the rule. (Comm, of Customs
vs. K.M.K. Gani, supra.)
A general
(2) Specific denial by defendant of plaintiffs capacity.
capacity
of
lack
a
corporation's
foreign
attack
to
denial is inadequate
as against its positive averment it is authorized to do so. Section
4, Rule 8 of the Rules of Court requires that "a party desiring to
raise an issue as to the legal existence of any party or the capacity
shall do so by specific denial, which shall include such supporting
particulars as are particularly within pleader's knowledge." (Home
Insurance Co. vs. Eastern Shipping Lines, 123 SCRA 424 [1983].)

—

Fletcher American National Bank of Indianapolis vs. Ang Cheng Lian, 65 Phil.
[1928].) imposing upon the defendant the duty of showing that a particular foreign
corporation may not sue in our courts that failure by the foreign corporation to comply
with Secs. 68 and 69 (now Secs. 125, 126, 133.) may be pleaded as an affirmative defense;
ereaftcr, the defendant must prove that the plaintiff: (1) is a foreign corporation, (2) is
by
transacting business in the Philippines, and (3) has not obtained the license required
the law.

—

Validity of contracts of unlicensed
foreign corporations.

If the foreign corporation does business in the Philippines
without obtaining the required license (Secs. 140, 150.), are contracts
entered into by it in the course of its transacting business void, or
merely voidable or unenforceable? The Revised Corporation Code
is silent on this question, while American decisions are conflicting.
(1) Contract void. Article 5 of the Civil Code provides:
"Acts executed against the provisions of mandatory or
prohibitory laws shall be void except when the law itself
authorizes their validity."
It has been opined that under the above provision, such contracts
are void and, therefore, subsequent compliance with the legal
requirement will not cure the defect of the contract. (SEC Opinion,
March 12, 1975.)
(2) Contract valid as to innocent parties.
It has been held,
however, that such a contract "shall prejudice only the guilty
corporation and not innocent parties who may have dealt with the
said corporation in good faith" (Bough vs. Cantiveros, 40 Phil. 209
[1919].) for it is unjust that the non-complying foreign corporation
and persons standing in its shoesshould escape liability on contracts
had by it by setting up its non-compliance.’

—

—

•"Art. 1412. If the act in which the unlawful or forbidden cause consists does not
constitute a criminal offense, the following rules shall be observed:
(1) When the fault is on the part of both contracting parties, neither may recover
what he has given by virtue of the contract, or demand the performance of the other's
undertaking;

(2) When only one of the contracting parties is at fault, he cannot
what he
has given by reason of the contract, or ask for the fulfillment of what hasrecover
been
him. The other, who is not at fault, may demand the return of what he has givenpromised
without
any obligation to comply with his promise." (Civil Code)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

866

Sec. 151

Secs. 151-152

—

"The
(3) Contract enforceable upon compliance with the law.
weight
greater
the
and
better reason, the wiser and fairer policy,
lie with those decisions which hold that where (as in our Revised
Corporation Code, Sec. 170.) there is a prohibition with a penalty,
with no express or implied declaration respecting the validity or
enforceability of contracts made by qualified foreign corporations,
are enforceable . . . upon compliance with the
the contracts
(Home
Insurance Co. vs. Eastern Shipping Lines, 123 SCRA
law."
424 [1983], citing Peter & Burghard Stone Co. v. Cerper, 172 N.E.
319 [1930]; see Eriks Pte., Ltd. vs. Court of Appeals, 267 SCRA 567

...

[1997].)

It is unnecessary to declare the contract void as against die erring
foreign corporation. The penalties for the violation and the denial of
access to our courts and administrative bodies are sufficient from
the viewpoint of legislative policy. The lack of capacity at the time
of execution of the contracts is cured by the subsequent registration
of the unlicensed foreign corporation. (Ibid.)
Sec. 151. Revocation of License. — Without prejudice to
other grounds provided under special laws, the license of a
foreign corporation to transact business in the Philippines
may be revoked or suspended by the Commission upon
any of the following grounds:
(a) Failure to file its annual report or pay any fees as
required by this Code;
(b) Failure to appoint and maintain a resident agent In
the Philippines as required by this Title;
(c) Failure, after change of its resident agent or
address, to submit to the Commission a statement of such
change as required by this Title;

to submit to the Commission an
authenticated copy of any amendment to its articles of
incorporation or bylaws or of any articles of merger or
consolidation within the time prescribed by this Title;
(d) Failure

(e) A misinterpretation of any material matter in any
application, report, affidavit or other document submitted
by such corporation pursuant to this Title;

''

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

867

(f) Failure to pay any and all taxes, impost,
assessments or penalties, If any, lawfully due to the

*

,

Philippine Government or any of its agencies or political
subdivisions;
(g) Transacting business in the Philippines outside
of the purpose or purposes for which such corporation is
authorized under its license;

(h) Transacting business in the Philippines as agent
of or acting on and in behalf of any foreign corporation or
entity not duly licensed to do business in the Philippines;

or

(I) Any other ground as would render it unfit to
transact business in the Philippines.

Sec. 152. Issuance of Certificate of Revocation. — Upon
the revocation of the license to transact business in the
Philippines, the Commission shall issue a corresponding
certificate of revocation, furnishing a copy thereof to the
appropriate government agency in the proper cases.
The Commission shall also mail the notice and copy
of the certificate of revocation to the corporation at Its
registered office in the Philippines. (N)

Revocation of license of foreign corporation.
Section 151 enumerates the grounds for revoking or suspending
the license of a foreign corporation. The grounds are without
prejudice to other grounds as would render it unfit to do business
in the Philippines or provided by special laws.
After revocation, the SEC is required to issue a corresponding
certificate of revocation, furnishing a copy thereof to the appropriate
government agency in the proper cases and mailing a notice of such
revocation accompanied with a copy of the certificate to the foreign

corporation. (Sec. 152.)

Effects of revocation.

—

(1) Validity of contract entered into before/after revocation. The
revocation of the license of a foreign corporation cannot affect the
validity of contracts entered into by it before the revocation nor its
right to maintain an action to enforce them. (Billmeyer Lumber Co.

\
868

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 153

\

\

Sec 153

•

TITLE XV. FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

869

\

v. Merchants' Coal Co., 69 S.E. 1073; see SEC-OGC Opinion No. 0710,1 February 5, 2010.) It may still bring or maintain an action based
on such contracts.
It has been opined
(2) Right to seek redress from the courts.
that the revocation shall not affect the validity of contracts entered
into by a foreign corporation after revocation. The only effect of
the revocation is that the foreign corporation cannot seek redress
from the courts to enforce such contracts. It simply removes its legal
standing to sue. (SEC Opinion No. 07-10, Feb. 5, 2010.)
If innocent parties can still enforce such contracts, it makes no
difference whether they are considered valid or invalid.
Under Section 150,
(3) Right to transact business and to sue.
business in the
transact
no
longer
can
the foreign corporation
in any court
or
action
suit
maintain
any
cannot
and
it
Philippines,
or administrative agency in the Philippines although it may be sued
on any valid cause of action. (SEC-OGC Opinion No. 07-10,2 Feb. 25,
2010.)

—

—

—

Subject
Sec. 153. Withdrawal of Foreign Corporations.
to existing laws and regulations, a foreign corporation
licensed to transact business in the Philippines may be
allowed to withdraw from the Philippines by filing a petition
for withdrawal of license. No certificate of withdrawal shall
be issued by the Commission unless all the following
requirements are met:

(a) All claims which have accrued In the Philippines
have been paid, compromised or settled;
(b) All taxes, imposts, assessments, and penalties If
any, lawfully due to the Philippine Government or any of its
agencies or political subdivisions have been paid; and
(c) The petition for withdrawal of license has been
published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks In
a newspaper of general circulation in the Philippines.

’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 824 (2002).
’Citing De Leon, The Corporation Code of the Philippines Annotated, p. 806 [2006).

Withdrawal of a foreign corporation.
Section 153 prescribes the rules for the withdrawal of a foreign
corporation from business in the Philippines.
(1) A petition for withdrawal of license must be filed with
the SEC which shall issue a certificate of withdrawal only after
compliance with all the requirements mentioned in Section 153.
(2) To ascertain that the foreign corporation has no outstanding
liabilities to residents in the Philippines, the SEC shall have to make
an examination and inspection of its books and records. If the SEC
is aware of pending cases against the foreign corporation, it may
not declare that such corporation has no outstanding liabilities in
the Philippines, (see Scottish Union & National Insurance Co. vs.
Macadaeg, 91 Phil. 89 11952].)
(3) The courts may review the action of the SEC approving
the withdrawal of a foreign corporation, for the law should not be
interpreted as to permit a foreign corporation to escape the result of
pending action against it by withdrawing from the Philippines with
all the securities it has deposited, provided it gets the sanction of the
SEC. (see Ibid.)

Suits against a foreign corporation that has
ceased to do business.

When the right to do business of a foreign corporation duly
licensed to do so in another State is revoked or such foreign
corporation subsequently withdraws its business from the State,
the cessation of its business works a quasi-dissolution of the foreign
corporation. Consequently, the corporation is placed in the same
situation in that State as if its charter had expired or terminated. (SEC
Opinion, March 5, 1963.) It is subject to the rules of law governing
expired domestic corporations in respect to action against it. (Ibid.,
citing Frazier v. Steel & Tube [W. Va.], 132 S.E. 723, 45 ALR 1442.)
Accordingly, Section 139 (corporate liquidation) applies to a
branch of a foreign corporation withdrawing from doing business
in the Philippines, insofar as suits by or against it are concerned, in
connection with its business transactions done in the Philippines.

Secs. 154-157

TITLE XVI. INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES,
AND PENALTIES

871

The ex parte order shall be valid for a maximum period
of twenty (20) days, without prejudice to the order being
made permanent after due notice and hearing.

Title XVI

INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES,
AND PENALTIES (N)
Sec. 154. Investigation and Prosecution of Offenses. — The
Commission may investigate an alleged violation of this
Code, or of a rule, regulation, or order of the Commission.

The Commission may publish its findings, orders,
opinions, advisories, or information concerning any such
violation, as may be relevant to the general public or to the
parties concerned, subject to the provisions of Republic
Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Act
of 2012", and other pertinent laws.
The Commission shall give reasonable notice to and
coordinate with the appropriate regulatory agency prior
to any such publication involving companies under their
regulatory jurisdiction.

Sec. 155. Administration of Oaths, Subpoena of Witnesses
and Documents. — The Commission, through its designated
officer, may administer oaths and affirmations, issue
subpoena and subpoena duces tecum, take testimony in
any inquiry or investigation, and may perform other acts
necessary to the proceedings or to the investigation.
Sec. 156. Cease and Desist Orders.
Whenever the
Commission has reasonable basis to believe that a person
has violated, or is about to violate this Code, a rule,
regulation, or order of the Commission, it may direct such
person to desist from committing the act constituting the

—

violation.

The Commission may issue a cease and desist order
ex parte to enjoin an act or practice which is fraudulent or
can be reasonably expected to cause significant, imminent,
and irreparable danger or injury to public safety or welfare.
870

Thereafter,
may
proceed
Commission
the
administratively against such person in accordance with
Section 158 of this Code, and/ or transmit evidence to the
Department of Justice for preliminary investigation or
criminal prosecution and/or initiate criminal prosecution
for any violation of this Code, rule, or regulation.

Sec. 157. Contempt. — Any person who, without
justifiable cause, fails or refuses to comply with any lawful
order, decision, or subpoena issued by the Commission
shall, after due notice and hearing, be held in contempt
and fined in an amount not exceeding Thirty thousand
pesos (P30,000.00). When the refusal amounts to clear
and open defiance of the Commission’s order, decision,
or subpoena, the Commission may impose a daily fine of
One thousand pesos (P1,000.00) until the order, decision,
or subpoena Is complied with.

Investigative powers of the SEC.

The SEC has no power to prosecute criminal cases in court. If the
evidence so warrants, it shall transmit the same to the Department
of Justice for preliminary investigation and/or criminal prosecution
for any violation of the Revised Corporation Code, or its rule or

regulation. (Sec. 156.)
In exercising of its power of investigation, the SEC is given by
the Revised Corporation Code these incidental powers:
(1) To publish its findings, order, etc., concerning such
violations;
(2) To administer oaths and affirmation, issue subpoena and
subpoena duces tecum take testimony, and perform with other acts as
may be necessary in its investigation;

(3) To issue a cease and desist order ex parte to enjoin an act
constituting any such violations, or which is fraudulent; or expected
to cause great danger injury to public safety or welfare; and

(4) To impose fine for contempt. (Secs. 154-157.)

872

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 158-160

—

Sec. 158. Administrative Sanctions. If, after due notice
and hearing, the Commission finds that any provision of
this Code, rules or regulations, or any of the Commission's
orders has been violated, the Commission may impose any
or all of the following sanctions, taking into consideration
the extent of participation, nature, effects, frequency and
seriousness of the violation:
(a) Imposition of a fine ranging from Five thousand
pesos (P5.000.00) to Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00),
and not more than One thousand pesos (P1,000.00) for
each day of continuing violation but in no case to exceed
Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00);
(b) Issuance of a permanent cease and desist order;
(c) Suspension or revocation of the certificate of
incorporation; and
(d) Dissolution of the corporation and forfeiture of its
assets under the conditions in Title XIV of this Code.

Administrative powers of the SEC.

The SEC may proceed administratively against the violator.
Section 158(a) empowers the SEC to impose a fine ranging "from
P5,000.00 to two (2) million pesos. It is not clear whether only the
courts can impose fines for violations mentioned in Section 159 to
172. In any case, the SEC may impose the fine if the offense involves
a violation of its rule, regulation, or order.
Sec. 159. Unauthorized Use of Corporate Name; Penalties.
The
unauthorized use of a corporate name shall be
—
punished with a fine ranging from Ten thousand pesos
(P10,000.00) to Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00).
Sec. 160. Violation of Disqualification Provision; Penalties.

— When, despite the knowledge of the existence of a

ground for disqualification as provided in Section 26
of this Code, a director, trustee or officer willfully holds
office, or willfully conceals such disqualification, such
director, trustee or officer shall be punished with a fine
ranging from Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) to Two
hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) at the discretion of
the court, and shall be permanently disqualified from being

Secs. 161-163 -i'

873

TITLE XVI. INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES,
AND PENALTIES

a director, trustee or officer of any corporation. When the
violation of this provision is injurious or detrimental to
the public, the penalty shall be a fine ranging from Twenty
thousand pesos (P20,000.00) to Four hundred thousand
pesos (P400,000.00).
Sec. 161. Violation of Duty to Maintain Records, to Allow
their Inspection or Reproduction; Penalties. — The unjustified
failure or refusal by the corporation, or by those responsible
for keeping and maintaining corporate records, to comply
with Sections 45, 73, 92, 128, 177 and other pertinent rules
and provisions of this Code on inspection and reproduction
of records shall be punished with a fine ranging from Ten
thousand pesos (P10,000.00) to Two hundred thousand
pesos (P200.000.00), at the discretion of the court, taking
into consideration the seriousness of the violation and
its implications. When the violation of this provision is
injurious or detrimental to the public, the penalty Is a fine
ranging from Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000.00) to Four
hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00).

The penalties imposed under this section shall be
without prejudice to the Commission’s exercise of its
contempt powers under Section 157 hereof.
Sec. 162. Willful Certification of Incomplete, Inaccurate,
False, or Misleading Statements or Reports; Penalties.
Any person who willfully certifies a report required under
this Code, knowing that the same contains incomplete,
Inaccurate, false, or misleading information or statements,
shall be punished with a fine ranging from Twenty
thousand pesos (P20,000.00) to Two hundred thousand
pesos (P200,000.00). When the wrongful certification Is
injurious or detrimental to the public, the auditor or the
responsible person may also be punished with a fine
ranging from Forty thousand pesos (P40,000.00) to Four
hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00).

—

Sec. 163. Independent Auditor Collusion; Penalties.
An independent auditor who, In collusion with the
corporation’s directors or representatives, certifies
the corporation’s financial statements despite Its
Incompleteness or inaccuracy, its failure to give a fair and
accurate presentation of the corporation’s condition, or

—

874

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 164-166

despite containing false or misleading statements, shall
be punished with a fine ranging from Eighty thousand
(P80,000.00) to Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00).
When the statement or report certified is fraudulent, or
has the effect of causing injury to the general public, the
auditor or responsible officer may be punished with a fine
ranging from One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
to Six hundred thousand pesos (P600,000.00).

Sec. 164. Obtaining Corporate Registration Through
Fraud; Penalties.
Those responsible for the formation
of a corporation through fraud, or who assisted directly
or indirectly therein, shall be punished with a fine ranging
from Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) to Two
million pesos (P2,000,000.00). When the violation of this
provision is injurious or detrimental to the public, the
penalty is a fine ranging from Four hundred thousand
pesos (P400,000.00) to Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00).

—

—

Sec. 165. Fraudulent Conduct of Business; Penalties.
A corporation that conducts its business through fraud
shall be punished with a fine ranging from Two hundred
thousand pesos (P200.000.00) to Two million pesos
(P2,000,000.00). When the violation of this provision is
Injurious or detrimental to the public, the penalty is a fine
ranging from Four hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00)
to Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00).
Sec. 166. Acting as Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt
Practices; Penalties. — A corporation used for fraud, or for
committing or concealing graft and corrupt practices as
defined under pertinent statutes, shall be liable for a fine
ranging from One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
to Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00).

When there Is a finding that any of Its directors, officers,
employees, agents, or representatives are engaged in graft
and corrupt practices, the corporation's failure to install:
(a) safeguards for the transparent and lawful delivery of
services; and (b) policies, code of ethics, and procedures
against graft and corruption shall be prima facie evidence
of corporate liability under this section.

Secs. 167-170

TITLE XVI. INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES,
AND PENALTIES

875

Sec. 167. Engaging Intermediaries for Graft and Corrupt
Practices; Penalties. — A corporation that appoints an
intermediary who engages in graft and corrupt practices
for the corporation’s benefit or interest shall be punished
with a fine ranging from One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) to One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).
Sec. 168. Tolerating Graft and Corrupt Practices;
Penalties. — A director, trustee, or officer who knowingly
fails to sanction, report, or file the appropriate action with
proper agencies, allows or tolerates the graft and corrupt
practices or fraudulent acts committed by a corporation’s
directors, trustees, officers, or employees shall be
punished with a fine ranging from Five hundred thousand
pesos (P500,000.00) to One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).
Sec. 169. Retaliation Against Whistleblowers. — A
whistleblower refers to any person who provides truthful
information relating to the commission or possible
commission of any offense or violation under this Code.
Any person who, knowingly and with intent to retaliate,
commits acts detrimental to a whistleblower such as
interfering with the lawful employment or livelihood of
the whistleblower, shall, at the discretion of the court, be
punished with a fine ranging from One hundred thousand
pesos (P100,000.00) to One million pesos (P1,000,000.00).
Sec. 170. Other Violations of the Code; Separate Liability.
Violations of any of the other provisions of this Code
or its amendments not otherwise specifically penalized
therein shall be punished by a fine of not less than Ten
thousand pesos (P10,000.00) but not more than One
million pesos (P1,000,000.00). If the violation Is committed
by a corporation, the same may, after notice and hearing,
be dissolved in appropriate proceedings before the
Commission: Provided, That such dissolution shall not
preclude the institution of the appropriate action against the
director, trustee, or officer of the corporation responsible
for said violation: Provided, further, That nothing in this
section shall be construed to repeal the other causes for
dissolution of a corporation provided in this Code.

—

Liability for any of the foregoing offenses shall be
separate from any other administrative, civil, or criminal
liability under this Code and other laws.

876

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 171-172

Sec. 171. Liability of Directors, Trustees, Officers, or
Other Employees. — If the offender is a corporation, the
penalty may, at the discretion of the court, be imposed
upon such corporation and/or upon its directors, trustees,
stockholders, members, officers, oremployees responsible
for the violation or indispensable to its commission.
Sec. 172. Liability of Aiders and Abettors and Other
Anyone who shall aid, abet, counsel,
Secondary Liability.
command, induce, or cause any violation of this Code, or
any rule, regulation, or order of the Commission shall be
punished with a fine not exceeding that imposed on the
principal offenders, at the discretion of the court, after
taking into account their participation in the offense.

—

Offenses and penalties.
(1) Sections 159 to 169 prescribe the penalties for specific
offenses not provided in the old Corporation Code. Sections 171
and 172 speak of the liability of directors, trustees, officers, or
other employees of the corporation responsible for the violation
or indispensable to its commission and of aiders and abettors and
other secondarily liable taking into account their participation in the
offense.

(2) The old Corporation Code in Section 144 (now Sec. 170.)
merely provided for a general penalty on violations "not otherwise
specifically penalized therein." The violations referred to in Section
170 should cover only violations not included in Section 159 to 169
specifically penalized therein.

General penalty.

Section 170 (formerly Sec. 144.) is the general provision of
the Revised Corporation Code on penalty. In addition to specific
penalties or sanctions provided by the Revised Corporation Code
for violation of any of its provisions or amendments thereto, the
Revised Corporation Code expressly provides a general penalty for
violations "not otherwise specifically penalized therein."
(1) If the violation is committed by a director or trustee, officer
or stockholder or member of a corporation, he shall be punished by

Secs. 159-172

TITLE XVI. INVESTIGATIONS, OFFENSES,
AND PENALTIES

fine or by imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the court, (see
Sec. 73, par. 2.)
(2) If the violation is committed by the corporation, the same
shall be dissolved after appropriate proceedings before the SEC (see
Sec. 138.) without prejudice to the institution of appropriate action
against the director, trustee or officer of the corporation responsible
for the violation.
(3) The "violations" referred to in Section 170 should cover only
mandatory provisions (i.e., Sec. 73, par. 3.) in the Revised Corporation
Code non-compliance with which is intended by the legislature to
constitute a criminal offense subject to penal sanctions.
(4) The involuntary dissolution of an erring corporation is not
imposed as a criminal sanction, but rather it is an administrative

penalty.

— —
oOo

Sec. 173

Title XVII

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

—

The term
Sec. 173. Outstanding capital stock defined.
“outstanding capital stock,” as used in this Code, shall
mean the total shares of stock issued under binding
subscription contracts to subscribers or stockholders,
whether fully or partially paid, except treasury shares.

Outstanding capital stock defined.

Outstanding capital stock, as defined in Section 173, includes
all shares of stock issued to subscribers or stockholders of a stock
corporation which are fully paid, and even if they are unpaid or only
partially paid, as long as there is binding subscription agreement
between the subscriber or stockholder and the corporation, (see Sec
59.)

The term refers to the "total shares," that is, the number of shares,
and thus includes unpaid subscription unless the subscription
agreement provides otherwise. Except treasury shares' which are
excluded from the meaning of the terms, Section 173 makes no
distinction between the different classes of shares.*2
Distinguished from issued and
subscribed shares.
(1) An "outstanding" share of stock is necessarily "issued" but
an "issued" share may not have the status of an "outstanding" share
such as treasury shares, (see Sec. 9.) To be considered outstanding,
'Although they are in the nature of unissued shares as long as they are held in the
treasury (see Sec. 56.), for they may be issued again to subscribers or stockholders.
’For purposes of the next paragraph of Art. 6, right of holders of non-voting shares
to vote in the eight (8) cases enumerated "outstanding capital stock" as defined in Art
137, shall be deemed to include preferred shares. (SEC Memo. Circ. No. 4-2004, May 17,
2004.)

878

TITLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

879

the share of stock must be held by persons other than the corporation
itself.
An "issued" share may refer to the following:
(a) Shares acquired by subscription which are fully paid;
(b) Shares (subscribed shares) acquired by subscription
which are unpaid or partially paid;
(c) Shares acquired by a stockholder by transfer from a
previous stockholder;
(d) Shares acquired by a stockholder by purchase of treasury
shares from the corporation; and
(e) Treasury shares or shares issued and subsequently
reacquired by the corporation and which remain in the treasury.
All the issued shares of a corporation except treasury shares
are outstanding. So, the term "issued" share is broader than
"outstanding" share.’
(2) Technically speaking, shares fully paid are "issued" not
merely "subscribed" shares although the latter are also categorized
as "issued" and, therefore, "outstanding" even if unpaid or
only partially paid. (Sec. 173.) In its strict signification, the term
"subscribed" shares should be limited to shares acquired by
subscription which are unpaid or only partially paid.
But a subscription to shares in a corporation (see Sec. 59.) does
not constitute the subscriber a stockholder until the acceptance by
the corporation of the subscription. Before such acceptance, the
subscription amounts to nothing more than an offer to take stock,
and, therefore, the subscribed shares cannot be considered issued or
outstanding.4 The payments due on the subscribed shares become a
’Under Sec. 6 (par. 4.), except in the eight (8) cases enumerated when even
non-voting shares may also vote (par. 3.) Whenever is necessary to approve a particular
corporate act, such vote "shall be deemed to refer only to stock with voting rights." This
means that in the determination of the percentage of votes necessary for the approval
of any such corporate acts, the phrase "outstanding capital stock" refers only to voting

shares.
4In fine, all outstanding shares are "issued" but not all issued shares are
"outstanding" as in the case of treasury shares. All subscribed shares (assuming there is
a binding subscription agreement) are "outstanding" but not all outstanding shares are
"subscribed" as in the case of: (a) shares acquired by subscription but which are already
fully paid, and (b) shares acquired by transfer from a previous stockholder or by purchase
from a corporation of treasury shares.

880

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 174-175

debt to the corporation payable on the date specified in the contract
of subscription or on the date stated in the call made by the board of
directors. (Sec. 66, par. 2.)
Sec. 174. Designation of Governing Boards. — The
provisions of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding,
nonstock or special corporations may, through their
articles of incorporation or their bylaws, designate their
governing boards by any name other than as board of
trustees.

Designation of governing boards.

The authority given by Section 174 covers only nonstock
corporations (see Title XI.) and special corporations. (Title XIII.)
It accommodates the practice in various nonstock corporations
where their governing boards are called by a name other than as
"board of trustees." Thus, the governing board of a nonstock
educational corporation may be designated as board of regents,
board of governors, etc. Educational institutions may be organized
as stock corporations. (Sec. 106, last par.)
Sec. 175. Collection and Use of Registration, Incorporation
For a more effective implementation of
and Other Fees.
this Code, the Commission Is hereby authorized to collect,
retain, and use fees, fines, and other charges pursuant
to this Code and its rules and regulations. The amount
collected shall be deposited and maintained in a separate
account which shall form a fund for its modernization
and to augment its operational expenses such as, but not
limited to, capital outlay, increase in compensation and
benefits comparable with prevailing rates in the private
sector, reasonable employee allowance, employee health
care services, and other Insurance, employee career

—

To assist in the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) and
to ensure timely access to adequate, accurate, and /current information in the beneficial
ownership and control of SEC over registered domestic corporations, both stock and
nonstock, and prevent their misuse for money laundering and terrorist financing
purposes, the SEC revised the general information sheet to include beneficial ownership
information. It issued Memo. Circ. No. 15-19, July 26, 2019, the amended version of SEC
Memo. Circ. No. 17-18, November 27, series of 2018.

Sec 176

TITLE XVn. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

881

advancement and professionalization, legal assistance,
seminars, and other professional fees. (SA)

Collection of fees.
The SEC is authorized to collect, retain and use fees, and other
charges pursuant to the Revised Corporation Code and authorized
by law (such as P.D. No. 902-A, R.A. No. 1143, R.A. No. 3531, and
B.P. Big. 178.) and by rules and regulations promulgated by it. Thus,
the SEC collects fees, among others, for examining and filing articles
of incorporation and bylaws, and amendments thereto, certificates
of increase or decrease of the capital stock, or certificates incurring,
creating, or increasing bonded indebtedness; for granting exemption
of securities from its registration requirements, etc.

The fees are not taxes in the appropriate sense of the word
and the legislature, by their imposition, does not impliedly divest
itself of powers of taxing a corporation. (18 Am. Jur. 2d 588.) The
fees collected by the SEC are for purely regulatory purposes in the
exercise of police power; hence, they should only be of sufficient
amount to cover the expenses of direct regulation and the incidental
expenses.
Taxes are imposed for revenue. As a rule, there is no limit as to
the amount or rate of tax that may be imposed.

—

Pursuant
Sec. 176. Stock Ownership in Corporations.
to the duties specified by Article XIV of the Constitution,
the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)
shall, from time to time, determine if the corporate vehicle
has been used by any corporation, business, or industry to
frustrate the provisions of this Code or applicable laws, and
shall submit to Congress, whenever deemed necessary, a
report of Its findings, including recommendations for their
prevention or correction.

The Congress of the Philippines may set maximum
limits for stock ownership of individuals or groups of

Individuals related to each other by consanguinity, affinity,
or by close business interests, in corporations declared to
be vested with public interest pursuant to the provisions
of this section, or whenever necessary to prevent anti¬
competitive practices as provided In Republic Art No.
10667. otherwise known as the “Philippine Competition

882

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 176

Act*’, or to implement national economic policies designed
to promote general welfare and economic development, as

Sec 176

TITLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

883

declared in laws, rules, and regulations.

The State shall protect the nation's marine wealth in its archipelagic waters, territorial
sea, and exclusive economic zone, and reserve its use and enjoyment exclusively to

In recommending to the Congress which corporations,
businesses and industries will be declared as vested with
public interest, and in formulating proposals for limitations
on stock ownership, the NEDA shall consider the type and
nature of the industry, size of the enterprise, economies of
scale, geographic location, extent of Filipino ownership,
labor intensity of the activity, export potential, as well as
other factors which are germane to the realization and
promotion of business and industry.

Filipino citizens.
The Congress may, by law, allow small-scale utilization of natural resources
by Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish farming, with priority to subsistence
fishermen and fishworkers in rivers, lakes, bays, and lagoons.
The President may enter into agreements with foreign-owned corporations
involving either technical or financial assistance for large-scale exploration, development,
and utilization of minerals, petroleum, and other mineral oils according to the general
terms and conditions provided by law, based on real contributions to the economic
growth and general welfare of the country. In such agreements, the State shall promote
the development and use of local scientific and technical resources.
The President shaU notify the Congress of every contract entered into in accordance
with this provision, within thirty days from its execution." (Art. XII.)
"Sec. 3. Lands of the public domain are classified into agricultural, forest or timber,
mineral lands, and national parks. Agricultural lands of the public domain may be
further classified by law according the uses to which they may be devoted. Alienable
lands of the public domain shall be limited to agricultural lands. Private corporations or
associations may not hold such alienable lands of the public domain except by lease, for
a period not exceeding twenty-five years, renewable for not more than twenty-five years,
and not to exceed one thousand hectares in area. Citizens of the Philippines may lease
not more than five hundred hectares or acquire not more than twelve hectares thereof by
purchase, homestead, or grant.
Taking into account the requirements of conservation, ecology, and development,
and subject to the requirements of agrarian reform, the Congress shall determine, by law,
the size of lands of the public domain which may be acquired, developed, held, or leased
and the conditions thereof." (Ibid.)
"Sec. 9. The Congress may establish an independent economic and planning agency
headed by the President which shall, after consultations with the appropriate public
agencies, various private sectors, and local government units, recommend to Congress
and implement continuing integrated and coordinated programs and policies for national

Limitation of stock ownership In corporations
vested with public interest.

Congress may set maximum limits for stockholdings in
corporations declared by it to be vested with public interest upon
the recommendation of the NEDA, belonging to individuals or
groups of individuals related to each other by consanguinity or
affinity or by close business interests in corporations declared to be
vested with public interest, or whenever necessary to prevent anti¬
competitive practices such as illegal monopolies or combinations in
restraint of trade or to implement national economic policies. (Sec.
176.)

The provisions of the Constitution relating to the NEDA
and prescribing limits to ownership and management of certain
corporations are found in Sections 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, and 19, Article XU;
in Section 4(2), Article XIV; and in Section 11, Article XVI thereof.'
'"Sec. 2. All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and
other mineral oils, all forces of potential energy, fisheries, forests or timber, wildlife, flora
and fauna, and other natural resources are owned by the State. With the exception of
agricultural lands, all other natural resources shall not be alienated. The exploration,
development, and utilization of natural resources shall be under the full control and
supervision of the State. The State may directly undertake such activities, or it may
enter into co-production, joint venture, or production-sharing agreements with Filipino
citizens, or corporations or associations at least sixty per centrum of whose capital is
owned by such citizens. Such agreements may be for a period not exceeding twentyfive years, renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and under such terms and
conditions as may be provided by law. In cases of water rights for irrigation, water supply,
fisheries, or industrial uses other than the development of water power, beneficial use
may be the measure and limit of the grant.

development." (Ibid.)
"Sec. 10. The Congress shall, upon recommendation of the economic and planning
agency, when the national interest dictates, reserve to citizens of the Philippines or to
corporations or associations at least sixty per centrum of whose capital is owned by
such citizens, or such higher percentage as Congress may prescribed, certain areas of
investments. The Congress shall enact measures that will encourage the formation and
operation of enterprises whose capital is wholly owned by Filipinos.
In the grant of rights, privileges, and concessions covering the national economy
and patrimony, the State shall give preference to qualified Filipinos.
The State shall regulate and exercise authority over foreign investments within its'
national jurisdiction and in accordance with its national goals and priorities." (Ibid.)
"Sec. II . No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authorization for the operation
of a public utility shall be granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or
associations organized under the law of the Philippines at least sixty per centrum of whose
capital is owned by such citizens, nor shall such franchise, certificate, or authorization be
exclusive in character for a longer period than fifty years. Neither shall any such franchise
or right be granted except under the condition that it shall be subject to amendment,
alteration, or repeal by the Congress when the common good so requires. The State shall
encourage equity participation in public utilities by the general public. The participation
of foreign investors in the governing body of any public utility enterprise shall be limited

884

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 176

Section 176 (par. 1.) imposes upon the NEDA the duty to make,
from time to time, determination of whether the corporate form
of organization has been used to frustrate said provisions or those
of applicable laws, and whenever it deems necessary, to submit to
Congress a report of its findings including recommendations for
their prevention or correction. The NEDA shall consider the factors
mentioned in Section 140 in recommending to Congress which
corporations, businesses and industries will be declared as vested
with public interest and formulating proposals for limitations on
stock ownership.
Illegal monopolies and combinations
in restraint of trade.

—

(1) Constitutional provision.
The Constitution and the law
prohibit combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition.
Thus, Section 19 of Article XII of the Constitution provides: "The
State shall regulate private monopolies when the public interest so
to their proportionate share in its capital and all the executive and managing officers of
such corporation or association must be citizens of the Philippines." (Ibid.)
"Sec. 19. The State shall regulate or prohibit monopolies when the public interest so
requires. No combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition shall be allowed."
(Ibid.)

"Sea 4. (2) Educational institutions, other than those established by religious groups
and mission boards, shall be owned solely by citizens of the Philippines or corporations
or associations at least sixty per centrum of the capital of which is owned by such citizens.
The Congress may, however, require increased Filipino equity participation in an
educational institution.
The control and administration shall be vested in citizens of the Philippines." (Art
XIV.)
"Sec. 11. (1) The ownership and management of mass media shall be limited to
citizens of the Philippines, or to corporations, cooperatives or associations, whollyowned and managed by such citizens.
The Congress shall regulate or prohibit monopolies in commercial mass media when
the public interest so requires. No combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition

therein shall be allowed.
(2) The advertising industry is impressed with public interest, and shall be
regulated by law for the protection of consumers and the promotion of the general
welfare.
Only Filipino citizens or corporations or associations at least seventy per centrum
of the capital of which is owned by such citizens shall be allowed to engage in the
advertising industry.
The participation of foreign investors in the governing body of entities in such
industry shall be limited to their proportionate share in the capital thereof, and all the
executive and managing officers of such entities must be citizens of the Philippines."
(Art. XVI.)

TITLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sea 177

885

requires. No combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition

shall be allowed."
The use of the word "regulate" in the Constitution indicates
that some monopolies, properly regulated, are in the public interest.
In the field of public utilities, for instance, the force of competition
when left wholly free, might be prejudicial to the common good.
(2) Existing legislation.
Republic Act No. 10667, otherwise
known as the "Philippine Competition Act", is the principal law
governing restraint of trade and unfair competition.

—

Sec. 177. Reportorial Requirements of Corporations.

—

Exceptas-Otherwise provided in this Code or in the rules

Issued bv the Commission, every corporation, domestic or

foreign, doing business in the Philippines shall submit to
the Commission:
(a) Annual financial statements audited by an
Independent certified public accountant: Provided, That If
the total assets or total liabilities of the corporation are
less than Six hundred thousand pesos (P600.Q0Q.QQ), the
financial statements shall be certified under oath bv the
corporation’s treasurer or chief financial officer: and
(b) A general information sheet.
Corporations vested with public interest must also
submit the following:
(1) A director or trustee compensation report; and
(2) A director or trustee appraisal or performance
report and the standards or criteria used to assess
each director or trustee. (N, from [b] to [2].)
The reportorial requirements shall be submitted
annually and within such period as may be prescribed by
the Commission.

The Commission may place the corporation under
delinquent status in case of failure to submit the reportorial
requirements three(3)times, consecutively orintermittently,
within a period of five (5) years. The Commission shall give
reasonable notice to and coordinate with the appropriate
regulatory agency prior to placing on delinquent status
companies under their special regulatory jurisdiction. (N)

886

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 177

Any person required to file a report with the Commission
may redact confidential information from such required
report: Provided, That such confidential information shall
be filed in a supplemental report prominently labelled
“confidential’, together with a request for confidential
treatment of the report and the specific grounds for the
grant thereof. (N)

Submission of the audited annual
financial statements.
Every corporation, domestic or foreign doing business in
the Philippines, is required to furnish its requesting stockholder
or member its most recent financial statements in such form and
substance or may be prescribed by the SEC.
(1) If the total assets or liabilities of the corporation are less than
P600,000, or such other amount as may be deemed appropriate by
the Department of Finance, the statements may be certified under
oath by both the treasurer and the president.
(2) Section 177 makes the submission of reportorial
requirements obligatory. The SEC may place the corporation
under delinquent status in case of failure to submit the reportorial
requirements. However, in case of suspension of corporate business,
a corporation may be exempted from submitting its annual financial
statements by filing with the SEC in duplicate an affidavit of its
manager stating the fact of suspension of file corporate business and
the cause thereof. (SEC Opinion, Jan. 2, 1973.)
(3) Under SEC Memorandum Circular No. 03-21 (March 9,
2021), corporations must submit online, through the SEC's Online
Submission Tool, their audited financial statements, general

information sheet, and other covered reports.
.

u

Corporations covered by the requirement

These entities are required to submit general information sheets
and financial statements to the SEC:
(a) domestic corporations (whether stock or nonstock);
(b) branch office of a foreign corporation;
(c) representative office of a foreign corporation;

TITLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec 178

887

(d) regional operating headquarters and regional headquarters
of multinational companies; and
(e) foundations.
The SEC has prescribed the forms of the general information
sheet for these entities.1
Sec. 178. Visitorial Power and Confidential Nature of
Examination Results.
The Commission shall exercise
visitorial powers over all corporations, which powers
shall include the examination and inspection of records,
regulation and supervision of activities, enforcement of
compliance, and imposition of sanctions in accordance
with this Code. (N)

—

Should the corporation, without justifiable cause,
refuse or obstruct the Commission’s exercise of its
visitorial powers, the Commission may revoke its certificate
of incorporation, without prejudice to the imposition of
other penalties and sanctions under this Code. (N)
All interrogatories propounded by the Commission
and the answers thereto, as well as the results of any
examination made by the Commission or by any other
official authorized by law to make an examination of
the operations, books, and records of any corporation,
shall be kept strictly confidential, except when the law
requires the same to be made public, when necessary for
the Commission to take action to protect the public or to
ias.ue orders in the exercise of its powers under this Code,
or where such interrogatories, answers or results are
necessary to be presented as evidence before any court

Visitorial power In general.
Visitorial power or right of visitation is the power of the State

through the proper governmental agency to examine the business

affairs, administration, and condition of corporations.

—

(1) Nature. It is a public right as distinguished from the right
of inspection of the corporate books and records by a stockholder
(see Sec. 73, par. 2.), which is merely a private right existing in virtue
1

See https://www.sec.gov.ph/reportorial-requirements/corporations-with-prima-

ry-licenses/ (last accessed on July 10, 2021)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

888

Sec. 178

of his stock ownership. (Harkness v. Guthrine, 72 Utah 248, 75 P.
624.)

—

The purpose of visitation is to supervise and
control the management of corporations and keep them within the
limits of their legitimate powers. (Ibid.)
It extends to "any corporation" transacting
(3) Scope.
business in the Philippines (Sec.177.) even, therefore, to corporations
created by special laws and foreign corporations. In the exercise of
its right of visitation, for purposes of taxation and regulation, or to
facilitate the accomplishment of any other proper end, the State has
the power to compel corporations to render reports. (18 Am. Jur. 2d
(2) Purpose.

—

705.)

Visitorial power granted certain
governmental agencies.

The visitorial power is vested in the State, particularly in the
law-making body. By special laws, the following, among others,
have been granted visitorial powers which they may exercise motu
proprio or upon complaint of a party-in-interested:
(1) The SEC, as to books of corporations and partnerships when
such is necessary in the enforcement of the Revised Corporation Code.
The SEC has the power to require corporations and partnerships
registered with it to submit such reports, financial or otherwise, as
may be necessary in the public interest or for the proper discharge
of its duties, (see Sec. 177.) Confidential information obtained by the
SEC shall remain such unless the law requires the same to be made
public to protect the public or when necessary to be presented or as
evidence before any court. Under the Securities Regulation Code,
it may order the examination, search and seizure of all documents,
papers, files and records, tax returns, and books of accounts of any
entity or person under investigation as may be necessary for the
proper disposition of the cases before it, subject to existing laws.
Section 178 declares as confidential all interrogatories
propounded by the SEC and the answers thereto by any corporation
and the result of the examination of its operations, its books and
records except (a) when otherwise provided by law or (b) when they
are necessary to be presented as evidence before any court;

Sec. 178

TITLE XVR MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

889

(2) The Bureau of Internal Revenue, with respect to liability of
corporations for taxes (Secs. 232-235, Rep. Act No. 8424 [National
Internal Revenue Code], as amended.);

(3) The Insurance Commission, over all the Philippines companies
(Secs. 252-253, P.D. No. 612 [Insurance Code of the Philippines], as
amended.);

(4) The supervising and examining department head of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, over all banking and quasi-banking
institutions operating in the Philippines (Sec. 28, R.A. No. 7653 [The
new Central Bank Act].);
(5) The National Telecommunications Commission, as to radio

and television broadcasting companies, operators of radio
communications systems, wire or wireless telephone systems, and
other similar public utilities (see Secs. 14 and 15, E.O. No. 546; see
Rep. Act No. 7925.);
(6) The Department of Labor and Employment or its duly authorized
representative, as to employer's records and premises, when such is
necessary to determine compliance with or in aid in enforcement
of the Labor Code (P.D. No. 442, as amended.) or the rules and the
regulations issued thereunder (see Sec. 1, Rule VI, Book HI, Rules
and Regulations Implementing the Labor Code.);

(7) The Commission on Audit, as to books, papers, and documents
filed by individuals and corporations with, and which are in the
custody of, government offices in connection with government
revenue collection operations, for the sole purpose of ascertaining
that all funds determined by the appropriate agencies as collectible
and due the government have been actually collected, except as
otherwise provided in the National Internal Revenue Code. (Sec. 28,

P.D. No. 1445 [Auditing Code of the Philippines].)

The Commission has visitorial authority over non-govemment
entities subsidized by the government, those required to pay levies
or government share, those which have received counterpart funds
from the government, the said authority, however, pertaining only
to the audit of those funds or subsidiaries coming from or through
the government. Upon direction of the President, the Commission
shall likewise exercise visitorial authority over non-govemmental
entities whose loans are guaranteed by the government, but such

890

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

authority shall pertain only to the audit of the government's
contingent liability (Sec. 28, Ibid.); and
(8) The National Housing Authority as to the business affairs,
administration, and condition of any person, corporation,
partnership, cooperative, or association engaged in the business of
selling subdivision lots and condominium units. For this purpose,
the official authorized to do so shall have the authority to examine
under oath the directors, officers, stockholders or members of any
corporation, partnership, association, cooperative or other persons
associated or connected with the business and to issue subpoena or
subpoena duces tecum in relation to any investigation that may arise
therefrom.
The Authority may also authorize the Provincial, City, or
Municipal Engineer, as the case may be, to conduct an ocular
inspection of the project to determine whether the development of
said project conforms to the standards and specifications prescribed
by the government. The books, papers, letters, and other documents
belonging to the person or entities herein mentioned shall be open
to inspection by the Authority or its duly authorized representative.
(Sec. 34, P.D. No. 957 [Subdivision and Condominium Buyers'
Protective Decree], as amended.)
Judicial supervision, generally.
Although the general visitorial powers of the State may be
exercised by the courts, courts will not interfere with the internal
management of a corporation. It will not do so at the instance of
minority stockholders if those in control are acting honestly and
within their discretionary powers.
However, the rule is not absolute or inflexible. Where the action
of a board of directors or the stockholders is an abuse of discretion,
or is forbidden by law or is against public policy, or is ultra vires,
or is a fraud upon minority stockholders, or will result in waste,
dissipation, or misapplication of the corporate assets, the courts
have the power to grant relief. (19 Am. Jur. 2d 834.)
Sec. 179. Powers, Functions, and Jurisdiction of the
Commission. — The Commission shall have the power and
authority to:

Sec. 179

TITLE XVD. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

891

(a) Exercise supervision and jurisdiction over all
corporations and persons acting on their behalf, except as
otherwise provided under this Code;
(b) Pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 902-A, retain
Jurisdiction over pending cases involving intra-corporate
disputes submitted for final resolution. The Commission
shall retain jurisdiction over pending suspension of
payment/rehabllitation cases filed as of 30 June 2000 until
finally disposed;
(c) Impose sanctions for the violation of this Code, its
implementing rules and orders of the Commission;
(d) Promote corporate governance and the protection
of minority investors, through, among others, the issuance
of rules and regulations consistent with international best
practices;
(e) Issue opinions to clarify the application of laws,
rules and regulations;

(f) Issue cease and desist orders ex parte to prevent
imminent fraud or injury to the public;
(g) Hold corporations In direct and indirect contempt;
(h) Issue subpoena duces tecum and summon
witnesses to appear in proceedings before the Commission;

(I) In appropriate cases, order the examination,
search and seizure of documents, papers, files and
records, and books of accounts of any entity or person
under investigation as may be necessary for the proper
disposition of the cases, subject to the provisions of
existing laws;

G) Suspend or revoke the certificate of incorporation
after proper notice and hearing;

(k) Dissolve or impose sanctions on corporations,
upon final court order, for committing, aiding In the
commission of, or in any manner furthering securities
violations, smuggling, tax evasion, money laundering,
graft and corrupt practices, or other fraudulent or Illegal
acts;

892

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

(I) Issue writs of execution and attachment to enforce
payment of fees, administrative fines, and other dues
collectible under this Code;
(m) Prescribe the number of independent directors
and the minimum criteria in determining the independence
of a director;
(n) Impose or recommend new modes by which a
stockholder, member, director, or trustee may attend
meetings or cast their votes, as technology may allow,
taking into account the company’s scale, number of
shareholders or members, structure, and other factors
consistent with the basic right of corporate suffrage;
(o) Formulate and enforce standards, guidelines,
policies, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions
of this Code; and

(p) Exercise such other powers provided by law or
those which may be necessary or incidental to carrying
out the powers expressly granted to the Commission. (N,
from [a] to [p].)
In imposing penalties and additional monitoring and
supervision requirements, the Commission shall take
into consideration the size, nature of the business, and
capacity of the corporation. (N)
No court below the Court of Appeals shall have
jurisdiction to issue a restraining order, preliminary
injunction, or preliminary mandatory injunction in any
case, dispute, or controversy that directly or Indirectly
interferes with the exercise of the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Commission that falls exclusively
within its jurisdiction. (N)

The SEC.
(1) Supervision. The SEC was created by Commonwealth Act
No. 83 (Sec. 3 thereof.), otherwise known as the Securities Act.

—

(a) The SEC was placed by the Act under the executive
supervision of the Department of Justice. Subsequently, it was
transferred to the Department of Commerce and Industry.
With the creation of the Department of Trade and Tourism,

Sec. 179

TITLE xvn. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

893

administrative supervision was transferred to this new
Department which was later on split into the Department of
Trade and the Department of Tourism (see RD. No. 189.), with
the Commission remaining under the Department of Trade' until
the issuance of Presidential Decree No. 902-A which recognized
the SEC and placed it under the direct general supervision of
the Office of the President.
(b) Letter of Instructions No. 1117 (April 3, 1981) placed
the SEC under the administrative supervision of the Cabinet
Standing Committee "in order to assure better consonance of
the operations and activities of the Securities and Exchange
Commission with national policies and objectives relative to
the regulations of the corporate sector, and in order to realize
an effective link between the Commission and the President in
the expeditious resolution of problems as may arise from such
operations and activities."
(c) "To align the thrusts and activities of the SEC more with
the overall economicand financial programs of the government,"
the supervision of the SEC was assigned to the Ministry of
Finance by virtue of Exec. Order No. 708 (July 27, 1981) until
it was detached from the Ministry (now Department) by Exec.
Order No. 127 (Jan. 20, 1987). The SEC was transferred again
to the Department of Finance by Exec. Order No. 202 (Sept. 22,
1994), as amended by Exec. Order No. 285. (Nov. 24, 1995) The
Department exercised administrative supervision over the SEC
with relationship between the two agencies being governed by
Exec. Order No. 292, the Administrative Code of 1987. (Subsec.
1, Sec. 38, Chap. 7, Book IV thereof.)
(d) "To have a more efficient and more effective coordination
between the SEC, now under the supervision of the Department
of Finance, and other offices to enable SEC to perform its
mandated functions consistent with (the) national policy and
objective" to "encourage a more active participation of private
corporations and enterprises in the development of the domestic
capital market and the promotion of foreign investments," Exec.

'Now, Department of Trade and Industry.

894

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

Order No. 60 (Jan. 13, 1999) transferred direct supervisory power
over the SEC to the Office of the President which "shall assume
all oversight and other functions, administrative and otherwise,

over the SEC."
(e) Exec. Order No. 192 (Jan. 11, 2000) reverted the SEC
from the Office of the President again to the Department of
Finance which assumed "administrative supervision over the
SEC including but not limited to the formation of capital market
development and savings mobilization policies, as may be
consistent with the provision of Sec. 38, Chapter 7, Title DI, Book
IV of the Administrative Code of 1987."
(f) Exec. Order No. 810 (July 8, 2009) transferred the
administrative supervision of the Commission again to the
Department of Trade and Industry.
(g) Exec. Order No. 37 (April 19, 2011) placed the SEC back
under the Department of Finance to "ensure better coordination
and effective implementation of strong and stable financial

policies."
(2) Composition and appointment of members.
From a single
headed agency, it was reorganized on September 29, 1975 into a
collegial body of three (3), which was later expanded to include
two (2) additional Commissioner pursuant to Pres. Decree No. 1758
promulgated on January 2, 1981. Pres. Decree No. 902-A provided for
a collegial body of Chairman and four (4) Associate Commissioner
who shall be appointed by the President. (Sec. 2, par. 1 thereof.)
This composition is retained by R.A. No. 8799, the Securities
Regulation Code. (Sec. 4, thereof.)
(3) Terms of office of members. The Chairman and the four (4)
Associate Commissioners first appointed shall serve for a period
of seven (7) years each and who shall serve as such until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified. A Commissioner
appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which his/her predecessor was appointed shall serve only
for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ibid.)

—

—

—

(4) Qualifications.
The Commissioners must be naturalbom citizens of the Philippines, at least 40 years of age for the
Chairperson and at least 35 years of age for the Commissioners, of
good moral character, of unquestionable integrity, of known probity

Sea 179

TITLE XVn. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

895

and patriotism, and with recognized competence in social and
economic disciplines.
The majority of Commissioners, including the Chairperson,
shall be members of the Philippines Bar. (Ibid.)
(5) Chairperson.
The Chairperson is the chief executive
officer of the SEC. The Chairperson shall execute and administer
the policies, decisions, orders and resolutions approved by the SEC
and shall have the general executive direction and supervision of
the work operation of the SEC and of its members, bodies, boards,

—

offices, personnel and all its administrative business. (Ibid.)

—

(6) Salary.
The salary of the Chairperson and the
Commissioner shall be fixed by the President of the Philippines
based on the objective classification system, at a sum comparable
to the members of the Monetary Board and commensurate to the
importance and responsibilities attached to the position. (Ibid.)
(7) Meetings and quorum. The Commission shall hold meetings
at least once a week for the conduct of business or as often as may be
necessary upon call of the Chairperson or upon the request of three
(3) Commissioners. The notice of the meeting shall be given to all
Commissioners and the presence of three (3) Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum.
In the absence of the Chairperson, the most senior Commissioner
shall act as presiding officer of the meeting. (Ibid.)
(8) Delegation of function and administrative review.
As an
administrative agency with both regulatory and adjudicatory
functions, the SEC may, for purposes of efficiency, delegate any of
its functions, inter alia to any of its various operating departments,
or office of the SEC, an individual Commissioner or staff member
of the SEC except its review or appellate authority and its power to
adopt, alter and supplement any rule or regulation.
The SEC may review upon its own initiative or upon the petition
of any interested party any action of any department or office,
individual Commissioner, or staff member of the SEC.2 (Ibid.)

—

—

^.D. No. 902-A provides for the position of Secretary and Executive Director as
follows: "There shall be a Secretary to the Commission, who shall be equal rank or level

'vith that of a Director of the Department and shall be recorder and official reporter of the

896

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec 179

—

(9) Judicial review of commission'$ order. A person aggrieved by
an order of the SEC may appeal the order to the Court of Appeals
by petition for review in accordance with the pertinent provisions of
the Rules of Court? (Sec. 70, Securities Regulation Code.)

Powers and functions of the SEC.

The SEC shall act with transparency and shall have the powers
and functions provided by the Securities Regulation Code, Pres.
Decree No. 902-A, the Revised Corporation Code, the Investment
House Law, the Financing Company Act and other existing laws. It
acts as a collegial body in issuing opinions and approving rules and

regulations.
Pursuant thereto, the SEC shall have, among others, these
powers and functions:
(1) Have jurisdiction and supervision over all corporations,
proceedings of the Commission and shall have authority to administer oath in al) matters
coming under the jurisdiction of the Commission."
"There shall be an Executive Director of the Commission who shall be responsible
for the effective implementation of the policies, rules and standards promulgated by the
Commission, to coordinate and supervise the activities of the different operating units, to
report to the Chairman the operation of such units, and to perform such functions as may
be assigned to him by the Chairman and/or by the Commissioner."
’The procedure for appeal is as follows:
"(4) Period of appeal. - The appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days from notice
of the ruling, award, order, decision, or judgment or from the date of its last publication,
if publication is required by law for its effectivity. One (1) morion for reconsideration of
said ruling, award, order, decision, or judgment may be allowed. If the motion is denied,
the movant may appeal during the remaining period for appeal reckoned from notice of
the resolution of denial.
(5) Haw appeal taken. - Appeals shall be taken by filling a verified petition for
review in six (6) legible copies, with the Court of Appeals, a copy of which shall be served
on the adverse party and on the court or agency a quo. Proof of service of the petition on
the adverse party and on the court or agency a quo shall be attached to the petition.
(6) Contents of the petition. - The petition for review shall contain a concise
statement of the facts and issues involved and the grounds relied upon for the review,
and shall be accompanied by a duplicate, original or a certified true copy of the ruling,
award, order, decision or judgment appealed from, together with certified true copies
of such material portions of the record as are referred to therein and other supporting
papers. The petition shall state the specific materials dates showing that it was filed
within the period fixed herein."
The decision of the Court of Appeals may be appealed to the Supreme Court by
Petition for Certiorari within 15 days from notice of judgment or of the denial of the
motion for reconsideration filed in due time. (Rules of Court, Rule 45, Sec. 1.)

Sec 179

TITLE XVD. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

897

partnerships or associations who are the grantees of primary

franchises and/or licenses or permit issued by the government;

(2) Formulate policies and recommendations on issues
concerning the securities market, advise Congress and other
government agencies on all aspects of the securities market and
propose legislation and amendment thereto;
(3) Approve, reject, suspend, revoke ore require amendments to
registration statement, and registration and licensing applications;
(4) Regulate, investigate or supervise the activities of persons
ensure
compliance;
to
(5) Supervise, monitor, suspend or take over the activities of
exchanges, clearing agencies and other SROs;
(6) Impose sanctions for the violation of laws and the rules,
regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto;
(7) Prepare, approve, amend or repeal rules, regulations and
orders, and issue opinions and provide guidance on and supervise
compliance with such rules, regulations and orders;

(8) Enlist the aid and support of and/or deputize any and all
enforcement agencies of the government, dvil or military as well as
any private institution, corporation, firm, association or person in
the implementation of its powers and functions under the Securities
Regulation Code;

(9) Issue cease and desist orders to prevent fraud or injury to

the investigating public;

(10) Punish for contempt of the SEC, both direct and indirect, in
accordance with the pertinent provision of the penalties prescribed
by the Rules of Court;

(11) Compel the officers of any registered corporation or
association to call meetings of stockholders or members thereof
under its supervision;
(12) Issue subpoena duces tecum and summon witnesses to
appear in any proceedings of the SEC and in appropriate cases,

order the examination, search and seizure of all documents, papers,
files and records, tax returns, and books of accounts of any entity

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

898

Sec 179

or person under investigation as may be necessary for the proper
disposition of the cases before it, subject to the provision of existing
laws;

(13) Suspend, or revoke, after proper notice and hearing the
franchise or certificate of registration of corporations, partnerships
or associations, upon any of the grounds provided by law; and
(14) Exercise such other powers as may be provided by law as
well as those which may be implied from, or which are necessary
or incidental to the carrying out of, the express powers granted the
SEC to achieve the objectives and purpose of these laws. (Sec. 5,
SRC.)
Among the other powers provided in Section 6 of Pres. Decree
No. 902-A are:
(a) To issue preliminary or permanent injunctions, whether
prohibitory or mandatory, in all cases in which it has jurisdiction,
and in which cases the pertinent provisions of the Rules of Court

shall apply;
(b) To issue writs of attachment in cases in which it has
jurisdiction, in order to preserve the rights of parties and in such
cases the pertinent provisions of the Rules of Court shall apply;
(c) To appoint one or more receivers of the property, real
and personal, which is the subject of the action pending before
the Commission . . .p
(d) To create and appoint a management committee, board,
or body upon petition or motu propio1 . . .;
See Garcia vs. Philippine Airlines, Inc., 531 SCRA 564 (2007); Uniwide Holdings,
Inc. vs. Jandees Transportation Co., Inc., 541 SCRA 158 (2007); Rizal Commercial
Banking Corp. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 320 SCRA 279 (1999). The suspension
contemplated under Sec. 6(c) of P.D. No. 902-A refers only to claims involving actions
which are pecuniary in value. A claim within the contemplation of P.D. No. 902-A is
construed to refer to debts or demands of a pecuniary nature. (Finasia Investment 4
Finance Corp. vs. Court of Appeals, 237 SCRA 446 [1994]; Malayan Insurance Co. vs.
Victoria Milling Co. Inc., 856 SCRA 45 [2009].) The filing of a case for violation of the
Bouncing Check Law (B.P. Big. 22.) is not, however, a claim that can be enjoined within
the purview of Sec. 6(c) the purpose of suspending the proceedings under P.D. No. 902-A
is to prevent a creditor from obtaining an advantage or preference over another and to
protect and preserve the rights of party litigants as well as the interest of the investing
public or creditors. (Rosario vs. Co, 563 SCRA 239 [2008].)
’When the dissention among stockholders is such that the corporation cannot
successfully carry on its corporate functions, the appointment of a management committee

Sec. 179

TITLE XVTL MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

899

(g) To pass upon the validity of the issuance and use of
proxies and voting trust agreements for absent stockholders or

members;

(j) To authorize the establishment and operation of stock
exchanges, commodity exchanges and such other similar
organizations and to supervise and regulate the same, including
the authority to determine their number, size and location, in
the light of national or regional requirements of such activities
with the view to promote, conserve or rationalize investment;
and
(k) To pass upon, refuse or deny, after consultation
with the Board of Investments, Department of Industry,
National Economic and Development Authority or any other
appropriate government agency, the application for registration
of any corporation, partnership or association or any form of
organization falling within its jurisdiction, if their establishment,
organization or operation will not be consistent with the declared
national economic policies. (Sec. 6, thereof.)

The SEC, being a mere administrative agency, is a tribunal of
limited jurisdiction, and as such, can only exercise those powers
specifically granted to it by enabling statutes. (Tee vs. Bangkok Bank
Public Company, Limited, 42 SCRA 447 [2011].)

becomes imperative, especially where there is imminent danger of dissipation, loss,
wastage or destruction of corporate assets. Mere disagreement amount stockholders as to
the affairs of the corporation would not in itself suffice as a ground for the appointment of

a management committee. (Jadnto vs. First Women's Credit Corporation, 410 SCRA 140

[2003].) Having the power to create a management committee, a Regional Trial Court can
order the reorganization of the existing management committee. The appointment of new
members does not mean the creation of a new management committee. (Punongbayan
vs. Punongbayan, Jr., 491 SCRA 447 [2006].) All actions for claims (whether secured or
unsecured) against a corporation pending before any court, tribunal or board shall ipso
jure be suspended in whatever stage such actions may be found upon the appointment
by the SEC of a management committee or a rehabilitation receiver. (Philippine Airlines,
Inc. vs. Zamora, 514 SCRA 584 [2007].)
See Phil. Airlines, Inc. vs. PAL Employees Assoc., 525 SCRA 29 (2007); Union Bank
of the Phils, vs. Concepcion, 525 SCRA 672 (2007); Cordova vs. Reyes, etc., Law Offices,
526 SCRA 300 (2007); Phil. Airlines, Inc. vs. Heirs of B.J. Zamora, 538 SCRA 456 (2007).

900

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

Jurisdiction of Commission over corporations.

The SEC has jurisdiction and supervision over all corporations,
partnerships or associations, who are the grantees of primary
franchise and/or license or permit issued by the government to
operate in the Philippines; and in the exercise of its authority, it has
the power to enlist the aid and support of and/or deputize any and
all enforcement agencies of the government, civil or military, as well
as any private institution, corporation, firm, association, or person
in the implementation of its powers and functions. (Sec. 5[a], [h],
SRC.)

The certificate of incorporation gives juridical personality
to a corporation and places it within the SEC's jurisdiction. This
jurisdiction is not affected even if the authority to operate a certain
specialized activity is withdrawn by the appropriate regulatory body
other than the SEC. (Pilipinas Loan Company, Inc. vs. Securities and
Exchange Commission, 356 SCRA 193 (2001]; Orosa, Jr. vs. Court of
Appeals, 193 SCRA 391 [1991].)

—

(1) Corporations covered. Section 5 above plainly vests the SEC
with jurisdiction and supervision over all corporations enfranchised
to act as corporate entities. It does not restrict that jurisdiction to
entities other than those granted permits or licenses to operate
by another government regulatory body. It is the certificate of

incorporation that gives juridical personality to a corporation and
places it within the SEC's jurisdiction.6 (see Orosa, Jr. vs. Court of
Appeals, 193 SCRA 391 [1991].) Even with their religious nature,
the SEC may exercise jurisdiction over ecclesiastical corporations in
matters that are legal and corporate. (United Church of Christ in
the Philippines, Inc. vs. Bradford United Church of Christ, Ina, 674
SCRA 92 [2012].)

‘The SEC's regulatory authority over private corporations provided in the Securities
Regulation Code (supra.) encompasses a wide margin of areas, touching nearly all of a
corporation's concerns. This authority springs from the fact that a corporation owes its
existence to the concession of its corporate franchise from the State. (Philippine Stock
Exchange, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 281 SCRA 232 [1997].) Thus, the determination as
to which of two stock and transfer book (STB) is authentic and duly registered with it,
whether a SIB registration may be cancelled, or whether a certification with respect
to a STB may be revoked, is an issue that necessarily belongs to the SEC as part of its
regulatory jurisdiction, and not with the Regional Trial Court. (Provident International
Resources Corp. vs. Venus, 554 SCRA 540 [2008].)

Sec 179

TITLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

901

The SEC, however, has no jurisdiction over corporations created
by a special law and not under the Revised Corporation Code or the
former Corporation Law. (infra.) Thus:
(a) The SEC has no power of supervision or control over
the activities of juridical entities known as "water districts"
created by Pres. Decree No. 198 although considered as quasi¬
public corporations as they are entirely distinct from the
corporations organized under the Revised Corporation Code.
The function of supervision or control over them is entrusted by
law to the Local Water Utilities Administration. (Marilao Water
Consumers Assoc., Inc. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 201
SCRA 437 [1991]; see Davao City Water District vs. Civil Service
Commission, 201 SCRA 593 [1991].) Even with their religious
nature, the SEC may exercise jurisdiction over ecclesiastical
corporations in matters that are legal and corporate. (United
Church of Christ in the Philippines, Inc. vs. Bradford United
Church of Christ, Inc., 674 SCRA 92 [2012].)

(b) Quo warranto actions against corporations or persons
using corporate offices fall under the jurisdiction of the SEC
unless otherwise provided for by law, as in the case where
the corporate entities involved are homeowners associations
in which jurisdiction is lodged with the Home Insurance and
Guarantee Corporation (HIGC), the new name given by Exec.
Order No. 90, Section 1(d) to what was formerly the Home
Financing Corporation created under R.A. No. 580. Under
Section 2 of Exec. Order No. 535, implemented by HIGC's
Revised Rules of Procedure, the HIGC shall "exercise all the
powers, authorities and responsibilities that are vested on the
SEC with respect to homeowners association." (Unilongo vs.
Court of Appeals, 305 SCRA 561 [2000].)

—

(2) Matter or cases contemplated. The jurisdiction of the SEC
is limited to matters intrinsically connected with the regulation
of corporations, partnerships, and associations. It is not vested
with absolute jurisdiction and control in all matters affecting
corporations, partnerships and associations, for to uphold such
a proposition would remove without legal imprimatur from the
regular courts all conflicts over matters involving or affecting them,
regardless of the transactions which gave rise to such disputes.

902

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

(Peneyra vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, 181 SCRA 244 [1990];
DMRC Enterprises vs. Este del Sol Mountain Reserve, Inc., 132
SCRA 293 [1984]; Dee vs. Securities and Exchange Commission, 199
SCRA 238 [1991].) The SEC has authority to hear cases whether or
not an action involves cases cognizable by the regional trial courts,
provided that the SEC would only act upon those which are merely
administrative and regulating in character. (Roman, Jr. vs. SEC, 791
SCRA 638 [2016].)

—

(3) Jurisdiction and powers strictly construed.
Administrative
agencies like the SEC are tribunals of limited jurisdiction, and
can exercise only those powers specifically granted to them by
their enabling statutes and their jurisdiction should be interpreted
strictissimi juris.lt is likewise the rule, however, that an administrative
agency has also such powers as are necessarily implied in the
exercise of its express powers.

It is a well-settled rule, however, that findings of quasi-judicial
agencies, like the SEC, which have acquired expertise in the matters
entrusted to their jurisdiction are generally accorded by the Supreme
Court not only great weight and respect but with finality if they are

supported by substantial evidence.

—

(4) Corporations subject to its secondary jurisdiction.
In cases
where a government agency regulates the operation of a certain
type of business or activity by virtue of a special law, that agency
has the primary jurisdiction over the same while the SEC assumes
only secondary jurisdiction with respect to matters involving its
authority to enforce the Revised Corporation Code and the Securities
Regulation Code.
(a) Thus, the SEC has no jurisdiction over matters relating
to the implementation of the Insurance Code (RD. No. 1460.)
which is entrusted to the Insurance Commission. While it can
impose sanctions on insurance companies for violations of the
Revised Corporation Code, it has no power to go after erring
insurance companies for violation of the Insurance Code. (SEC
Opinion, Oct. 9, 1989.)

(b) Also, while the SEC has no jurisdiction over the business
operation of the Philippine National Bank (now a private bank)
which was created by a special law and is not registered with it
and although the bank's securities are exempt from registration

Sec. 179

TITLE XVH. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

903

requirements under die Revised Securities Act (now Securities
Regulation Code), it has jurisdiction to intervene on matters
pertaining to the listing of securities in the stock exchange.’(SEC
Opinion Oct. 10, 1991.)

Indemnification and responsibilities
of Commissioners.
(1) The SEC shall indemnify each Commissioner and other
officials of the SEC, including personnel performing supervision
and examination functions for all costs and expenses reasonably
incurred by such persons in connection with any civil or criminal
actions, suits or proceedings to which they may be or made a party
by reason of the performance of their functions or duties, unless
they are finally adjudged in such actions or proceedings to be liable
for gross negligence or misconduct.
(a) In the event of settlement or compromise, indemnification
shall be provided only in connection with such matters covered
by the settlement as to which the SEC is advised by external
counsel that the persons to be indemnified did not commit any
gross negligence or misconduct.
(b) The costs and expenses incurred in defending the
aforementioned action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the
SEC in advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or
proceeding upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of
the Commissioner, officer or employee to repay the amount
advanced should it ultimately be determined by the SEC that
he /she is not entitled to be indemnified as provided in this
subsection.
(2) The Commissioners, officers and employees of the SEC
who willfully violate the Securities Regulation Code or who
are guilty of negligence, abuse or acts of malfeasance or fail to

’The SEC retains its administrative regulatory and oversight power over all
corporations, partnerships and associations which are grantees of primary franchises
and/or a license or permit issued by the government, (see Orendain vs. B.F. Homes, Inc.,
506 SCRA 348 [2006].) However, intra-corporate controversies have been transferred by
R.A. No. 8799 (SRC) to regional trial courts. Concomitant to the power of regional trial
courts to hear and decide, intra-corporate controversies is the authority to issue orders
necessary or incidental to the carrying out of the powers expressly granted to it. (Yuyuico
vs. Quiambao, 513 SCRA 243 [2007].)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

90«

Sec. 179

exercise extraordinary diligence in the performance of their duties
shall be held liable for any loss or injury suffered by the SEC or
other institutions as a result of such violation, negligence, abuse,
malfeasance, or failure to exercise extraordinary diligence.
(3) Similar responsibility shall apply to the Commissioners,
officers and employees of the SEC for:
(a) the disclosure of any information, discussion or
resolution of the SEC of a confidential nature, or about the
confidential operations of the SEC, unless the disclosure is in
connection with the performance of official functions with the
SEC or with prior authorization of the Commissioners; or
(b) the use of such information for personal gain or the
detriment of the government, the SEC, or third parties.

Any data or information required to be submitted to the
President and/or Congress or its appropriate committee, or to be
published under the provisions of the Securities Regulation Code
shall not be considered confidential. (Sec. 6, Securities Regulation
Code.)

Jurisdiction over cases transferred
to ordinary courts.

The jurisdiction of the SEC "over all cases enumerated under
Section 5 of Pres. Decree No. 902-A is hereby transferred to the courts
of general jurisdiction or the appropriate Regional Trial Court."'
The Supreme Court in exercising its authority may designate the
Regional Trial Court branches that shall exercise jurisdiction over
the cases.’ (Sec. 5.2, Securities Regulation Code.)
'Also withdrawn are the incidental and ancillary powers enumerated in Sec. 6 thereof.
Other matters may brought be before the SEC for resolution based on the regulatory
powers it exercises over corporations, partnerships, and associations. (Securities and
Exchange Commission vs. Court of Appeals, 739 SCRA 99 [2014]; see Gonzales vs. GHJ

Land, Inc., 774 SCRA 242 [2016].)
Congress recognized that the intra-corporate disputes are not that much of a
technical matter that requires the competence of a specialized agency like the SEC Thus,
even a regular trial court can resolve such disputes.
’"The Commission shall retain jurisdiction over pending suspension of payments/
rehabilitation cases filed as of 30 June 2000 until finally disposed."

Sec. 179

TITLE XVn. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

905

Jurisdiction over intra-corporate controversies.
Under Section 5(a, b, c) of Pres. Decree No. 902-A, as amended,
the SEC is given original and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
decide cases involving intra-corporate controversies.
Pursuant to the Securities Regulation Code which took effect
on August 8, 2000, the jurisdiction of the SEC to decide cases
involving intra-corporate disputes was transferred to courts of
general jurisdiction and in accordance therewith, all cases of this
nature with the exception only of those submitted for decision, were
transferred to the regular courts.
(1) Meaning of an intra-corporate controversy.
An intra¬
corporate controversy pertains to the following relationships:
(a) between the corporation, partnership, or association
and the public; or

—

(b) between the corporation, partnership, or association
and its stockholders, partners, members, or officers; or
(c) between the corporation, partnership, or association,
and the State insofar as its franchise, permit or license to operate
is concerned; or
(d) among the stockholders, partners, or associates them¬
selves. (Embassy Farms, Inc. vs. Court of Appeals, 188 SCRA 492
[1990]; Rivera vs. Florendo, 144 SCRA 643 [1986]; Abejo vs. De
la Cruz, 149 SCRA 654 [1987]; Dee vs. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 199 SCRA 239 [1991]).

Under the relationship test, the existence of any of the above
intra-corporate relations makes the case intra-corporate.
Under the nature of the controversy test, the controversy must not
only be rooted in the existence of an intra-corporate relationship, but
must as well pertain to the enforcement of the parties' correlative
rights and obligations under the Revised Corporation Code and the
internal and intra-corporate regulatory rules of the corporation. In
other words, jurisdiction should be determined by considering both
the relationship of the parties as well as the nature of the question
involved. (Medical Plaza Makati Condominium Corporation vs.
Cullen, G.R. No. 181416, November 11, 2013.)

906

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 179

—

(2) Previous quasi-judicial powers of SEC delimited.
The
unqualified application of the relationship test above was modified
because it effectively divested regular courts of jurisdiction over
cases for the sole reason that the suit was between the corporation
and/or its corporators. It was considered the better policy in
determining which body, the SEC or the regular court, has
jurisdiction over a dispute, that not only the status or relationship
of the parties (which requires that the controversy must arise out
of intra-corporate or partnership relations) but also the nature of
the question (nature of controversy test) that is the subject of the
controversy (which require that the dispute itself among the parties
be intrinsically connected with the regulation of the corporation, etc.,
or deal with its internal affairs) must be considered. Thus, not every
conflict or disagreement between a corporation and its stockholders
could be classified as intra-corporate and resolved by the SEC in the
exercise of its adjudicatory or quasi-judicial jurisdiction. The mere
existence of intra-corporate relationship alone does not ipso facto
make the dispute intra-corporate. It must be ascertained whether
the controversy itself is intra-corporate.
(a) If, for example, a person leases an apartment owned
by a corporation of which he is a stockholder, a complaint for
ejectment for non-payment of rentals would come under the
jurisdiction of the regular courts. (Viray vs. Court of Appeals,
191 SCRA 308 [1990]; see Torio vs. Court of Appeals, 230 SCRA
626 [1994]; San Jose vs. Ozamis, 831 SCRA 51 [2017].) His
position as a stockholder of the corporation is incidental only to
the issue of his liability for unpaid rentals.

(b) A claim for unpaid wages and separation pay filed
by a corporate officer against a corporation involves a labor
dispute as it relates to an employer-employee relationship,
which is distinct from the corporate relationship of one with
the other. (Mainland Construction Co., Inc. vs. Movilla, 250
SCRA 290 [1995].) Article 226 of the Labor Code vests upon the
Bureau of Labor Relations original and exclusive authority and
jurisdiction to act on all inter-union and intra-union disputes.
The controversy between two (2) sets of officers of a labor
union both claiming to be entitled to the release of the union
dues collected by the company with whom it had an existing
collective bargaining agreement is an intra-union dispute over

Sec 180

TITLE XVH. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

which the SEC (now RTC) has no jurisdiction. (Cebu Seamen's
Assoc., Inc. vs. Ferrer, 212 SCRA 50 [1992].)
Rule-making power of the SEC.

—

(1) Rules governing corporations. In the exercise of its general
power and authority to implement the provisions of the Revised
Corporation Code, the SEC has the power to promulgate rules and
regulations governing corporation reasonably necessary to enable it
to perform the duties imposed upon it by the Revised Corporation
Code, particularly in the prevention of fraud and abuses on the part
of the controlling stockholders, members, directors, trustees, or
officers." (Sec. 179[o].)
(2) Rules governing securities.

—

To effect the provisions and
purposes of the Securities Regulation Code, the SEC may issue,
amend, and rescind such rules and regulations and orders necessary
or appropriate, including rules and regulations defining accounting,
technical, and trade terms used in the Revised Corporation Code,
and prescribing the form or forms in which information required in
registration statements, applications, and reports to the SEC shall be

set forth, (see Sec. 72.)

—

(3) Rules prescribing fines and/or penalties.
Furthermore, the
SEC may impose fines and/or penalties for violations of the Revised
Corporation Code, or any other laws being implemented, by it, the
pertinent rules and regulations, its orders, decisions, and / or rulings.
(Ibid., Sec. 6[f]; see also, Sec. l[b], R.A. No. 1143.) Thus, a corporation
may be dissolved by the SEC on grounds provided by its rules and
regulations. The SEC is authorized to collect and receive fees under
rules and regulations promulgated by it. (Sec. 175.)

Sec. 180. Development end Implementation of Electronic
Filing and Monitoring System. — The Commission shall
develop and Implement an electronic filing and monitoring
system. The Commission shall promulgate rules to
facilitate and expedite, among others, corporate name
reservation and registration, incorporation, submission

"There are certain provisions in the 1999 SEC new Rules of Procedure that suggest
the availability of Petitions for Certiorari to be filed with the SEC en banc as against
interlocutory orders. (Yamaoka vs. Pescarich Manufacturing Corporations, 361 SCRA 672
[2001].)

908

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 181

of reports, notices, and documents required under this
Code, and sharing of pertinent information with other
government agencies. (N)

Electronic filing and monitoring system.
The SEC is mandated to develop and implement an electronic
filing and monitoring system.
The implementing rules to be promulgated by the SEC shall
aim to facilitate and expedite its transactions or dealings with
corporations, its stockholders or members, other government
agencies and the general public.1
Sec. 181. Arbitration for Corporations. — An arbitration
agreement may be provided in the articles of incorporation
or bylaws of a corporation. When such an agreement is in
place, disputes between the corporation, its stockholders
or members, which arise from the implementation of the
articles of incorporation or bylaws, or from intra-corporate
relations, shall be referred to arbitration. A dispute shall
be non-arbitrable when it Involves criminal offenses and
interests of third parties. (N)

The arbitration agreement shall be binding on the
corporation, its directors, trustees, officers, and executives
or managers. (N)

To be enforceable, the arbitration agreement should
Indicate the number of arbitrators and the procedure for
their appointment. The power to appoint the arbitrators
forming the arbitral tribunal shall be granted to a
designated independent third party. Should the third party
fail to appoint the arbitrators in the manner and within the
period specified in the arbitration agreement, the parties
may request the Commission to appoint the arbitrators. In
any case, arbitrators must be accredited or must belong to
organizations accredited for the purpose of arbitration. (N)

The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on its
own jurisdiction and on questions relating to the validity of
the arbitration agreement. When an intra-corporate dispute
'SEC Memo. Circ. No. 10-20 (March 20, 2020) prescribes guidelines on submission
by electronic mail of the genera! information sheet and the annual financial statements.

Sec. 182

TITLE XVD. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

909

is filed with a Regional Trial Court, the court shall dismiss
the case before the termination of the pretrial conference,
if it determines that an arbitration agreement is written in
the corporation's articles of incorporation, bylaws, or in a
separate agreement. (N)
The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to grant
interim measures necessary to ensure enforcement of
the award, prevent a miscarriage of justice, or otherwise
protect the rights of the parties. (N )
A final arbitral award under this section shall be
executory after the lapse of fifteen (15) days from receipt
thereof by the parties and shall be stayed only by the filing
of a bond or the issuance by the appellate court of an
injunctive writ (N)

The Commission shall formulate the rules and
regulations, which shall govern arbitration under this
section, subject to existing laws on arbitration. (N)
Arbitration by corporation.

By arbitration, the contending parties, voluntarily or under a
binding arbitration agreement, submit their controversy to a third
party for resolution.
Under Section 181, if an arbitration agreement is provided in the
articles of incorporation or bylaws of the corporation, the disputes
mentioned in Section 181 shall be referred to arbitration except only
when the dispute is non-arbitrable because it involves criminal
offenses or interests of third parties. An award shall bind the parties
whether the submission to arbitration is voluntary or compulsory.
The arbitrator must be accredited or must belong to an organization
accredited for the purpose of arbitration.
The SEC shall formulate the rules and regulations to implement
Section 182 on arbitration subject to existing laws and regulations.
Sec. 182. Jurisdiction over Party-List Organizations. — The
powers, authorities, and responsibilities of the Commission
Involving party-list organizations are transferred to the
Commission on Elections (COMELEC). (N)

910

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Sec. 183

Within six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act,
the monitoring, supervision, and regulation of such
corporations shall be deemed automatically transferred to
the COMELEC. (N)

For this purpose, the COMELEC, In coordination with
the Commission, shall promulgate the corresponding
implementing rules for the transfer of Jurisdiction over the
abovementioned corporations. (N)

Jurisdiction over party-list organizations.
The party-list system institutionalizes sectored representation
by providing for the election of candidates endorsed by party-list
organizations over and above those who win in their respective
legislative districts. Under the system, 20% of the total memberships
of the House of Representatives shall be elected from a list if
registered national, regional, and sectoral parties or organizations.
Section 182 transfers the powers and jurisdiction over party¬
list organizations from SEC to the Commission on Elections
(COMELEC). The transfer is consistent with the text and intent
of the Constitution to give to the COMELEC exclusive and broad
powers to enforce and administer all election laws and regulations.
(C-Sec. 2(1], Art. DC thereof.) Incidentally, party-list organizations are
considered by Section 182 (last par.) as corporations in connection
with the promulgation of implementing rules and regulation to
effect the transfer of jurisdiction.

—

Nothing In this
Sec. 183. Applicability of the Code.
Act shall be construed as amending existing provisions
of special laws governing the registration, regulation,
monitoring and supervision of special corporations such
as banks, nonbank financial institutions and Insurance
companies. (N)

Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
regulators such as the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the
Insurance Commission shall exercise primary authority
over special corporations such as banks, nonbank
financial Institutions, and insurance companies under
their supervision and regulation. (N)

Secs. 184-185

TITLE XVn. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

911

Sec. 184. Effect of Amendment or Repeal of this Code, or
the Dissolution of a Corporation. — No right or remedy in favor

of or against any corporation, its stockholders, members,
directors, trustees, or officers, nor any liability incurred by
any such corporation, stockholders, members, directors,
trustees, or officers, shall be removed or impaired either
by the subsequent dissolution of said corporation or by
any subsequent amendment or repeal of this Code or of
any part thereof.

Limitations on legislative power to amend
or repeal.
(1) Right against impairment of obligations of contracts and vested
rights. Under Section 145, any remedy or right already acquired
by or against, or any liability already incurred by any corporation,
its stockholders, members, directors, trustees, or officers shall
not be removed or impaired by the subsequent dissolution of the
corporation or by any subsequent amendment or repeal of the
Revised Corporation Code or of any part thereof. There is here a
recognition of the right against impairment of the obligations of a
contract or of vested rights.
(2) Right survives dissolution of corporation.
The reserved
power of "amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress" (see
Constitution, Art. XU, Sec. 11.) is subject to the provision of the
Constitution against impairing the obligation of contracts. (Art.
HI, Sec. 10 thereof.) The obligation of contracts entered into by the
corporation and vested or acquired rights to survive its dissolution.
Thus, an educational institution whose charter has expired in the
middle of a school year may continue holding classes up to the end
of such school year where the enrollment for such classes was made
before the date of its dissolution. (SEC Opinion, Aug. 24, 1971.)

—

—

—

(3) Right to compensation for property taken. The right to amend
does not also authorize the taking of the corporation's property
without just compensation. (Constitution, Art. EQ, Sec. 9.)
Sec. 185. Applicability to Existing Corporations.

—

A

corporation lawfully existing and doing business In the
Philippines affected by the new requirements of this Code
shall be given a period of not more than two (2) years from
the effectivity of this Act within which to comply. (SA)

912

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES Secs. 186-187

Applicability of Code to existing
corporations.

All lawfully existing corporations including foreign corporations
licensed by the SEC before the effectivity of the Revised Corporation
Code shall be deemed licensed under the Revised Corporation
Code, and shall continue to have such authority under the terms and
conditions of their licenses but subject to the Revised Corporation
Code.

—

If any provision of
Sec. 186. Separability Clause.
this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other
provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

Effect of invalidity or unconstitutionality
of certain provisions.

The invalidity or unconstitutionality of a provision of the
Revised Corporation Code does not affect its other provisions.

—

Batas Pambansa Big.
Sec. 187. Repealing Clause.
68, otherwise known as “The Corporation Code of the
Philippines”; is hereby repealed. Any law, presidential
decree or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction,
administrative order, rule or regulation contrary to or
inconsistent with any provision of this Act is hereby
repealed or modified accordingly. (N)

Former Corporation Code repealed.
The Revised Corporation Code repeals Batas Pambansa Big. 68
(as amended), the old Corporation Code.
Repeal of other laws.

All other laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations
or parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of
the Revised Corporation Code shall also be deemed repealed or
modified accordingly.
(1) Implied repeals.
Repeals by implication are not favored as
laws are presumed to be passed with full knowledge for existing
laws.

—

TITLE XVH. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec 187

913

While as rule, implied repeal of a former statute by a later one
is not favored, yet if the later act covers the whole subject of the
earlier one and is clearly intended as a substitute, it will operate as a
repeal of the earlier act, and in such a revision of the law, whatever
is excluded is discarded and repealed. (In re: Guzman, 73 Phil. 52
[1941]; Joaquin vs. Navarro, 81 Phil. 373 [1948]; Iloilo Palay and
Com Planters Assoc., Inc. vs. Feliciano, 13 SCRA377 [1965].)

—

(2) Presumption against implied repeals.
It has been held,
that a repealing clause which states that "all laws or parts thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly" is not an express repealing clause because it
fails to identify or designate the Act or Acts that are intended to be
repealed or modified accordingly.
Such being the case, the presumption against implied repeals
still applies unless an irreconcilable inconsistency or repugnancy
exists in the terms of the new and prior laws. (Iloilo Palay and Com
Planters Assoc., Inc. vs. Feliciano, supra; Quimsing vs. Lachica, 2
SCRA 182 [1961].)
(3) Suppletory application of the Revised Corporation Code to Special
Laws. The enactment of a later general law cannot be construed
to have impliedly repealed a previously enacted special law. Repeal
by implication is disfavored as laws are presumed to be passed with
deliberation and full knowledge of all laws existing on the subject,
the congruent application of which the courts must generally
presume. (Quintero, Jr. vs. Commission on Audit, 791 SCRA 54
[2016].) The established rule is that a special statute, providing for
a particular case or class of cases, is not repealed by a subsequent
statute, general in its terms, provisions and applications, unless there
is a specific and express repeal or at least the intent to repeal or alter
is manifest, although the terms of the general law (like the Revised
Corporation Code) are broad enough to include the cases embraced
in the special law (like the General Banking Law). (National Power
Corporation vs. Area, 25 SCRA 931 [1968].)
Such "particular case or class of cases" shall be governed by the
provisions of the general law only "insofar as they are applicable"
(see Sec. 4.), either because they are not inconsistent with or
are expressly made applicable by the special law. The Revised
Corporation Code is general law applying to all types of private
corporations their formation, organization, and regulation.

—

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

914

APPENDICES

Sec. 188

Appendix A

—

This Act shall take effect upon
Sec. 188. Effectivity.
completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. (N)

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 16

Series of 2019

Effectivity of the Revised Corporation Code.

The Revised Corporation Code was approved on February 20,
2019. Notwithstanding the provision of Section 188, the Revised
Corporation Code did not take effect immediately upon its approval.
The prior publication of laws is a requirement of constitutional
due process and cannot be dispensed with. Laws take effect
after 15 days following the completion of their publication in the
Official Gazette, publication being counted from the date of release
thereof for circulation. The law may provide for its publication in a
newspaper of general circulation, (see Tanada vs. Tuvera, 146 SCRA
446 [1986]; Almario vs. Alba, 127 SCRA 69 [1984]; see Art 2, Civil

SIC
Series of 2019

Creator Ito. 18

TO

I

AU. CONCERNED

SUBJECT

t

GUIDEUNES ON THE NUMBER AND QUALIFICATIONS
OF INCORPORATORS UNDER THE REVISED
CORPORATION CODE

Code.)

Note that Section 188 requires publication, if not in the Official
Gazette, "in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. The
Revised Corporation Code was published in the Manila Bulletin
and Business Mirror on February 23, 2019.

WHEREAS, Section 10 of Republic Act Na 11232. otherwise known as the Revised
Corporation Code of the Philippines, allows any person, partnership, association or
corporation, singly or jointly with ochers but not more than fifteen (15) in number, to
organize a corporation for any lawful purpose or purposes;
WHEREAS, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) deems It necessary to
issue guidelines for the dear and proper Implementation of the foregoing provision of

tew.
WHEREFORE. the SEC adopts the following guidelines on the composition of
incorporators for the registration of domestic corporations under the Revised
Corporation Code:
WCXlM

IWaMTOr IBCwpOTaCOTV

For the purpose of forming a new domestic corporation under the Revised
Corporation Code, two (2) or more persons, but not more than fifteen (15). may
organise themselves and form a corporation.
Only a One Person Corporation (OPC) may have a single stockholder, as well as
a sole director. Accordingly, Its registration must comply with the
corresponding separate guidelines on the establishment of an OPC

Section 2. Definition of Incorporators

Incorporators are those stockholders or members mentioned In the Articles of
Incorporation as originally forming and composing the corporation, and who
are signatories thereof.

Rhllahad.RdUgdraOadly lx»dme, A«at 1, 2DS
*nlto Than,

1, 3»

915

1

916

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

917

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 16
Appendix A

Section 3. QuaKftcatioas of Incorporators
Each incorporator of a stock corporation must own, or be a subscriber to. at
least one (1) share of the capital stock. Each incorporator of a nonstock
corporation must be a member of the corporation.
The incorporators may be composed of any combination of natural persoo/s,
SEC-registered partnership/s. SEC-registered domestic corporation/* or
association/*, as well as foreign corporation/*.
Incorporators who are natural persons must be of legal age. and must sign the
Articles of Incorporation/ Bytaws.
Section 4. Partnerships as Incorporators

In the event that an SEC-recorded partnership is made an incorporator, the
application for registration must be accompanied by a Partners' Affidavit, duly
executed by all the partners, to the effect that they have authorized the
partnership to invest in the corporation about to be formed and that they have
designated one of the partners to become a signatory to the incorporation
documents.
Partnerships under “dissolved' or 'expired* status with the SEC shall not be
authorized to become an Incorporator.

Section 5, Domestic Corporations or Associations as Incorporators
In the event that an SEC-registered domestic corporation or association Is made
an incorporator, its Investment In the new corporation must be approved by a
majority of the board of directors or trustees and ratified by the stockholders
representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock, or by at
least two thirds (2/3) of the members In the case of nonstock corporations, at
a meeting duly called for the purpose.
A Directors'/Trustees' Certificate or a Secretary's Certificate, Indicating the
necessary approvals, as well as the authorized signatory to the Incorporation
documents, shall be executed under oath and submitted by the applicant

Domestic corporations under ‘delinquent*, ‘suspended’, ‘revoked* or
‘expired* status with the SEC shall not be authorized to become an
Incorporator.
Section 6. Foreign Corporations as Incorporators
In the event that a foreign corporation Is made an Incorporator, the application
for registration must be accompanied by a copy of a document (7.a Board
Resolution, Directors' Certificate, Secretary's Certificate, or Its equivalent), duly

2

authenticated1 by a Philippine Consulate or with an apostille1 affixed thereto,
authorizing the foreign corporation to Invest In the corporation being formed
and specifically naming the designated signatory on behalf of the foreign
corporation.
lectio* 7. Signatories of the Articles of Incorporation

Each Individual signing the Articles of Incorporation/ Bylaws must Indicate the
capacity upon which he/she Is affixing his/her signature thereto. (Ie.
Incorporator or Representative of XYZ Corp.)
An individual designated to sign the Articles of Incorporation/ Bylaws on behalf
of an Incorporator. which Is not a natural person, must also Indicate the
corporate or partnership name of the entity being represented and for whom
he/she is executing the Articles of Incorporation/ Bylaws.
The Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) of the principal, as well as the
designated signatory, should both be Indicated In the Articles of Incorporation.

No application for Incorporation shall be accepted unless the registration
documents reflect the TIN or passport number of al) Its foreign Investors other
than foreign corporations which have not yet been issued a Taxpayer
Identification Number.
After Incorporation, all the foreign Investors, natural or Juridical. shall secure a
Taxpayer Identification Number. All documents to be filed with the SEC after
Incorporation (eg. General Information Sheets) shall not be accepted unless the
TIN of all Its foreign Investors, natural or Juridical, resident or non-resident, are
Indicated therein.
Section •. DesigMtioe of Incorporators as Directors or Trustees

An Individual who signs the Articles of Incorporation on behalf of an
incorporator, which is not a natural person, may not be named as a director or
trustee In the same Articles of Incorporation, unless when the said Individual Is
also the owner of at least one (1) share of stock, or is also a member, of the
corporation being formed.

Section 9. Foreign Nationals la the Articles of Incorporation

The Inclusion of foreign nationals in the Articles of Incorporation shall be
subject to the applicable constitutional, statutory, and regulatory restrictions,
as well as conditions, with respect to foreign participation In certainInvestment
areas or activities.
fw docusMati executed In countries sad territories which are not ApoatlUe-contracting parties.
For doesneats executed tn countries end tan toilet which are ApottiUe-contractlng parties.

3

918

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Appendix B
SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 22
Series of 2020

Section 10. Additional Reqatlrenetits for Certain Corporatioa*
Institutions,
No Articles of Incorporation of banks, banking and quasi-banking
preneed. Insurance and trust companies, NSSLAS. pawnshops, and other
financial intermediaries shall be approved unless accompanied by a favorable
recommendation of the appropriate government agency to the effect that the
Articles of Incorporation are In accordance with law.

Section IL Processing of Applications
The processing of applications for registration In accordance with the new
provisions of the Revised Corporation Code shall be done manually by the
Company Registration and Monitoring Department and the Extension Offices of
the SEC, until further notice.

sac MmutiWw Circular N*. 22
Settea of 2*20
TO:

I

AU. CONCERNED

StMlCT

I

GUIDELINES ON CORPORATE TERM
(Section 11 of the Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines)

Section 12. Repealing dense

This Memorandum Circular shall amend all issuances, orders, rules and
regulations of the Commission that may be inconsistent withIt

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 11232. otherwise known as ‘An Act Providing foe the
Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines* (RCt) was signed into law on February 20, 2019
and took effect on February 23, 2019;

Section 13. Effect!vtty

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect Immediately upon Its publication
in a newspaper of general circulation.

30 July

2019 Pasay Qty, Philippines.

WHIR1AS. under Section 11 of the RCC a corporation shall have perpetual saUtaera
unices Its articles of Incorporation provides otherwise; and
WHEREAS. under paragraph 2 of Section 11 of the RCC a corporation with cartiOcateof
Incorporation Issued prior to the effectivicy of the RCC and which continue to exist shall have
perpetual existence, unless the corporation, upon a voce of Its stockholders representing a
maJorlty of its outstanding capital stock. notifies the Commission that It elects to retain its specific
corporate term pursuant to its articles of Incorporation, without prejudice to the appraisal right
of dissenting stockholders in accordance with the provisions of the RCC
NOW THEREFORE. to impUtnent Section 11 of the RCC the Commission hereby
promulgates the following guidelines:
Section 1. Corporations Incorporated under ILA. Ite 11232 (RrrlaM Corporattea Codeaf
the HrMppiaes)
Corporations Incorporated under the RCC shall have perpetual existence unless Its
articles of Incorporation provides a specific corporate terra.

Section 2. Corporations Incorporated seder B-P. No. M (Corporation Code ut the
RMNppfaes) and Act No, 1459 (The Corporation law)
A

The corporate term of a corporation with certificate of Incorporation Issued prior to
the effect!vity of the RCC and which continue to exist, shall be deemed perpetual upon
the effectivlty of the RCC without any action on the part of the corporation. The
corporation, subject to payment of filing fees, may amend Article Four to reflect its

perpetual corporate term Io Its Articles of Incorporation, by a vote of majority of Its
Board of Directors or Trustees and by a vote of Its stockholders representing a
majority of Its outstanding capital stock Including the non-voting shares, or a
of the members. In case of a non-stock corporation. Provided that for all
other provisions to be amended In one same amended artides of Incorporation. the
required voce should be vote of majority of Its Board of Directors or Trustees and
vote of its stockholders representing a two-thirds (2/3) of Its outstanding capital
stock or members, in case of a non-stock corporation.
H NCC lecretartal IrlWip Foaoy Oy |

•

(«W) alUlX / (HM) SIS-F7U

www.aocpov.ph | hqukydaac povph

Pubkhed

PNEppinn Daily Inquirer. August 23, 2020
Philippine Star, August 23.

919

920

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

h A corporation with certificate of Incorporation Issued prior to dw effectivity of th*
RCC and which continue to exist. that elects to continue with their present corporate
term pursuant to the corporation's Articles of Incorporation, shall notify th*
Commission by Hlln| a Notice with attached Directors’ Certificate, certifying that the
decision to retain the specific corporate term as specified In the Articles of
Incorporation was approved In meeting duly held for the purpose by a majority

•

vote of th* Board of Directors or Trustees and by the vote of the stockholders

representing a majority of th* outstanding capital stock. Including the non-voting
shares, or a majority of the members. in case of a noo-stock corporation.
c. The Notice to be submitted to the Commission must be signed by at least a majority
of the members of th* Board of Directors or Trustees, and attested by the Corporate
Secretary. The corporation may follow the attached sample format of th* Notice to
facilitate Its compliance with the requirement of the RCC
d. The Notice must be submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Company
Registration and Monitoring Department (CRMD), any SEC Sateillt* Office or SEC
Extension Office, within a period of two yean from February 23, 2019, or until
February 23, 2021. pursuant to Section IBS of the RCC A Certificate of Filing Notice
to Retain Specific Corporate Term shall be Issued to the corporation.
The corporate term of corporations which tall to comply with th* required
*.
notification shall be treated as perpetual after the lapse of the two-year period.
Section 3. Amendment to Extend or Shorten the Corporate Term

a.

b

c.

Corporations Incorporated under the RCC whose articles of Incorporation provide tor
a specific term of existence and existing corporations Incorporated under the Th*
Corporation Code and The Corporation Law that opted to retain Its specific corporate
term, may file an amendment of articles of Incorporation to extend or shorten the
specific corporate term pursuant to Section 11, paragraph 3 of the RCC The
amendment must be approved by vote or written assent of majority of the Board of
Directors or Trustees and voce or written assent of the stockholders representing
at least two-thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock of th* corporation.
In no case shall any extension of corporations mentioned In the preceding paragraph
be made earlier than three (3) years prior to the original or subsequent expiration
date of the corporate term, unless there era Justifiable reasons for extension as may
be determined by the Commission.
Extension of the corporate term shall take effect only on the day following the original
or subsequent expiry date (s).

Section 4. Ameadment to Change Specific Corporate Term to Parpotaal Corpsrate Taras
Corporations Incorporated under the RCC whose articles of Incorporation provid*
for a specific term of existence and existing corporations Incorporated under Th*
Corporation Cod* and The Corporation Law that notified the Commission of the decision
to retain the specific corporate term, may subsequently amend It* specific corporate term
Io perpetual term of existence. The amendment must be approved by vote or writtea
assent of majority of the Board of Director* or Trustees and vote or written assent of
the stockholders representing at least two-thirds (2/3) of the ootetandtag capital
stock of th* corporation.

Section S, Amendment to Chaag* Perpetual Corporate Term to specific Corporate Tens
Corporations incorporated under the RCC whose article* of Incorporation provide
for perpetual term of existence, corporation* Incorporated under the Corporation Cod* of
th* Philippines and Old Corporation Code existing at the time of effectivity of th* RCC

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 22
Appendix B

whose corporate terms were treated perpetual for failure to comply with the notification
required under Section 2 of this Memorandum Circular, as well as corporations that
amended their articles of Incorporation to reflect their perpetual term of existence, may
subsequently amend Its perpetual term of existence to specific corporate term. The
amendment must be approved by vote or written assent of majority of the Board of
Director* or Trustee* and vote or written assent of the stockholders representing at
least two- thirds (2/3) of the outstanding capital stock of the corporation.

Section 4. Appraisal Right of Dissenting Stockholders
Any change In the corporate term pursuant to Section 11 shall be without
prejudice to the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders In accordance with the
provisions of the RCC

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect Immediately after it* publication In a
newspaper of general circulation.
August 2020 at Pasay City, Philippine*.

921

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 22
Appendix B

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

922

923

DIRECTORS’ CERTIFICATE

NOTICE

KNOW AU MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
We, the undersigned majority of the Dlrectors/Trustees and the Corporate Secretary of
hereby certify that the majority of the Board

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Secretariat Building, PICC Complex
Roxas Boulevard, Pasay City

Gentlemen:
(name of comoratian)
L the undersigned Corporate Secretary of
notifies the Securities and Exchange Commission ('Commission') that the aaafortty of the
Board of Dlrectors/Trustees and the stockholders representing a majority of the
outstanding capita) stock, including the non-voting shares/maforlty of the members of the
(no, of
corporation, elected to retain Its specific corporate term of existence of
as specified in the Articles of Incorporation/Amended Artides of Incorporation
yean)
approved on

.

of Dlrectors/Trustees and the stockholders representing a majority of the outstanding capital stock.
Including the non-vodng shares/majority of the members of the corporation, approved to retain the
corporation's specific corporate term of existence of
, as specified In
fnn of years)
the Articles of Incorporabon/Amended Articles of Incorporation approved on
. without prejudice to the appraisal right of dissenting stockholders In
accordance with the provisions of the Revised Corporation Code, during a meeting held on
at the principal office of the corporation.
The Corporate Secretary,
, was likewise
authorised to notify the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section 11 of the Revised
Corporation Code, that the corporation elected to retain Its specific corporate term.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto signed this certificate this
at

Attached is a copy of Directors' Certificate dated

Dats

Director

Director

TIN-

It

day of

.

TIN-

Director
TIN-

Corporate Secretary

Corporate Secretary
TIN-

SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this
day of
at
by the above-named persons who exhibited to me their valid
government Identification cards as indicated below:

NAME-

IDQfHflCATltlN DETAILS

DATE AND PLACE ISSUED
NOTARY PUBLIC

Doc Nou
Page Nou.
Book Na:
Series of

,

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 23
Appendix C

Appendix C
SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 23
Series of 2019

Audited Financial Statements), provided that it shall file the proper
Petition to Lift Its Revoked Status, which may be Incorporated in Its
Petition to Revive, and must settle the corresponding penalties thereof;
c An Expired Corporation whose Certificate of Registration has been
suspended. provided that it shall file the proper Petition to Lift its
Suspended Status, which may be Incorporated in Its Petition to Revive,
and must settle the corresponding penalties thereof; or

SBC McBoratulnm Orodar No. 83
Series of 2019
:

TO

SUBJECT

ALL CONCERNED

Guidelta** oath* Revival of Expired Corporation*
(Pursuant to Section 11 of the Revised Corporation Code of the
Philippines}

WHEREAS, Republic Ac* Na 11232. or th* Revised Corporation Cod* of the
Philippine* ("RCC"), was approved oo February 20, 2019 and took effect on February 23.

2019;
WHEREAS, under Section 11 of the RCC. th* term of axlsteoc* of a corporation

shall be perpetual unless It* art!de* of incorporation provide* otherwise;

d. Aa Expired Corporation whos* corporate name has already been
validly re-used, and Is currently being used, by another existing
corporation duly registered with the Commlsjlon. provided that the
former shall change Its corporate name within thirty (30) days from
th* issuance of Its Certificate of Revival of Corporate Existence.
Section 2. Who May Not Apply foe RevtvaJ

The following ar* no* allowed to file a Petition for Revival of Corporate
Existence:
a. An Expired Corporation which has completed th* liquidation of Its
assets;

WHEREAS, under th* sam* Section of the RCC. a corporation whose term has

("Expired Corporation"} may apply for a revival of Its corporate *xist*nc*,

expired
together with all the rights and privilege* under Its certificate of Incorporation aad
subject to all Its duties, debt* and liabilities existing prior to its revival;
WHEREAS, under the same Section of the RCC. no eppUcadoa for revival of
certificate of Incorporation of banks, banking and quasi-banking Institutions, preneed.
Insurance and trust companies, non-stock saving* and loan associations (NSSLAs),
pawnshops, corporations engaged In money service business, and other financial
Intarmedlarie* shall be approved by the Commission unleu accompanied by a favorable
recommendation of the appropriate government agency,

NOW THEREFORE. the Commission hereby promulgates the following guldeito**
on the revival of an Expired Corporation:
lection 1. Applicability

Th* following corporations may (Ue a Petition for Revival of Corporate
Existence:

a. Generally, a corporation who** term has expired;
b. An Expired Corporation whose Certificate of Registration has been
revoked for non-filing of reports (eg. General Information Short, and

b. A corporation whose Certificate of Registration has been revoked for
reasons other than non-flllng of reports (eg. General Information
Sheet and Audited Financial Statements);
t

A corporation dissolved by virtu* of Section* 6(c) and 6(d) of
Presidential Decree Na 902-A as amended by Presidential Decree Na

1799; or

d. An Expired Corporation which already availed of re-registration, in

accordant* with Memorandum Circular No. 13, series of 2019
(Amended Guidelines and Procedures on the Use of Corporate and
Partnership Names), or other memorandum circulars Issued by th*
Commission pertaining to re-registration. except when:

L The re-registered corporation has given Its consent to the Petitioner
to use its corporate name, and has undertaken to undergo voluntary
dissolution Immediately after th* Issuance of the Petitioner's
Certificate of Revival; or
IL Th* re-registered corporation has given its consent to the Petitioner
to use Its corporate name, and has undertaken to change Its
P*g*>«ft

Vagal of*

hod:
Philippine Star, December 6 2019
Manila Time*, Dooember 6, 2019

924

926

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 23
Appendix C

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Reconciliation of the changes In the composition of the
stockholders or members from the date of expiration of Its
corporate term up to the date of stockholders' or members'
approval of the resolution to file the Petition for Revival of
Corporate Existence, or the date of approval by the board of
directors, or trustees in the case of a nonstock corporation, of the
filing of said Petition, whichever is later, which shall provide for,
and refer to, the supporting evidence (eg Deed of Sale, Deed of
Assignment. Death Certificate of a stockholder/member, and
Extrajudicial Settlement of the Estate of a stockholder/member) of
the changes tn the composition of the stockholders or members:

corporate name immediately after the issuance of the Petitioner's
Certificate of Revival

Section 3. Required Vote to Initiate Revival

The required number of votes for the Revival of an Expired Stock Corporation
Is at least a majority vote of the board of directors, and the vote of at least
ma|ority of the outstanding capital stock. For nonstock corporations, at least a
majority vote of the board of trustees, and the vote of at least majority of the
members.
Section 4. Where to File the Petition for Revival of Corporate Existence

lit That the undersigned are the duly elected directors or trustees,
and officers of Petitioner:

The Petition for Revival of Corporate Existence may be filed with the
Commission’s Company Registration and Monitoring Department ('CRMDT,
any SEC Satellite Office, or any SEC Extension Office.

tv. That, as of the date of filing of the Petition for Revival, no action or
proceeding has been filed or is pending before any court or
tribunal Involving an intra-corporate dispute or claim by any
person or group against the directors, officers, or stockholders of
the Corporation;

Section S. Payment of Fees

The following fees must be paid for the Revival of Corporate Existence:

v. That the revival of Petitioner’s corporate term shall not cause

a. Petition Fee In the amount of Three thousand and sixty pesos
(P3,060.00), inclusive of Legal Research Fee and Documentary Stamp
Tax; and

damage, loss, or Injury to any third person or any government
agency;

b. Filing Fee for the extension of term of existence, based on the present
authorized capital stock of the company (for stock corporations),
pursuant to SEC Memorandum Circular No. 3, Series of 2017
(Consolidated Schedule of Pees and Charges), or other amendments
thereto.

vi. If Petitioner's corporate name has already been validly reused, and
is currently being used, by another existing corporation duly
registered with the Commission, that Petitioner shall change Its
corporate name within thirty (30) days from the Issuance of Its
Certificate of Revival of Corporate Existence (Petitioner must also
state in Its Petition its proposed new corporate name, which must
be duly reserved with the Commission); and

>

Section 6. Procedure of Revival

a Petitioner, or Its duly authorized representative, shall file a verified
Petition for the Revival of Corporate Existence. In accordance with the
SBC Rules of Procedure, and must contain the following statements:

L That the revival of Petitioner's corporate term was approved by a
vote of at least majority of the outstanding capital stock, or by at
least majority of the members in the case of a nonstock
corporation;

• s-

IL If there has been a change in the composition of the stockholders
or members since the expiration of Petitioner's corporate term, a

’r v

Psge Sot»

vit If Petitioner Is an expired corporation which already availed of re¬
registration. in accordance with Memorandum Circular No. 13,
Series of 2019 (Amended Guidelines and Procedures on the Use of
Corporate and Partnership Names), or other memorandum
circulars issued by the Commission pertaining to re-reglstration,

that

>•

•

1) The re-registered corporation has given Its consent to the
Petitioner to use Its corporate name, and has undertaken to
undergo voluntary dissolution immediately after the
issuance of the Petitioner's Certificate of Revival; or
page* of*

928

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 23
Appendix C

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

comparison with the photocopies of the supporting documents
attached with the Petition for Revival A party opposing the Petition for
Revival, or his/her/lts duly authorized representative, upon filing of
the Opposition or during a scheduled conference, shall pre-mark all
evidence to be Introduced. The parties shall make accessible to the
adverse party the original of the evidence presented. In order to verity
and compare In case of doubt on its authenticity. In lieu of a scheduled
conference, the Petitioner or a party opposing the Petition for Revival
may stipulate In their respective Petition or Opposition that each of the
documents submitted is an authentic copy of the original complete,
and all statements and Information provided therein are true and

2) The re-reglstered corporation has given Its consent to the
Petitioner to use its corporate name, and has undertaken to
change Its corporate name immediately after the issuance of
the Petitioner's Certificate of Revival

b. Within fifteen (15) days from fllir< Petitioner, or Its duly authorized
representative, shall publish tn a newspaper of general circulation its
Petition for Revival, stamped 'Received' by the Commission, with the
corresponding docket number.

correct

c. Within fifteen (15) days from publication. Petitioner, or Its duly
authorized representative, shall file with the Commission the following
pieces of evidence of the publication of the Verified Petition for Revival
in a newspaper of general circulation;
I Affidavit

of

the

Newspaper's

h. The Commission may call the parti** for a Gartficatory Conference to
clarify factual and legal I(sues.

Bditor-ln-Chief/Managlng

I If th* Commission finds that the Petition is meritorious. It shall grant
the Petition and Issue a Certificate of Revival of Corporate Existence,
which shall be evidence of Petitioner's revival together with all the
rights and privilege* under Its Certlflcat* of Incorporation and subject
to all its duties, debts and liabilities existing prior to th* revival of its

Editor/Content Editor attesting to the fact of publication of the
Petition for Revival; and

11 Actual newspaper cutout of the publication showing the date and
name of the newspaper, and al the page* of the Petition with its
attachments.

d. Parties In interest may file a Verified Oppositioo to the Petition for
Revival, with a dear statement of the ground* relied upon, within
fifteen (15) days from the date of publication of the Verified Petition
for Revival The party opposing the Petition for Revival shall serve to
the Petitioner a copy of the Verified Opposition with its attachments,
and shall attach proof of such service in th* Verified Oppositioo to be
filed with the Commission.
e. The Petition for Revival and any Opposition thereto. shall be verified

In the same manner as the Verified Answer under Section 3-3. Rule HI
of Part II of the 2016 Rules of Procedure of the Securities and Exchange
Commission.

L A party In Interest shall file with the Commission the original
documents along with three (3) copies thereof, which shafi be property
marked.
g.

(JponfillngofthePetitlonforRevtvalorduringascheduledconferenca,

Petitioner, or its duly authorized representative, shall pre-mark all
evidence co be introduced, and shall present the original documents for
fogtsofa

929

1

corporate term.

I Th* Certificate of Revival shall provide for a perpetual term of

existence unless a specific corporate term Is stated by the applicant
corporation in the verified Petition for Revival

Tecti** 7. Doramentary Requirements

Petitioner shall file with, and refer to In. it* Petition for Revival the following
documents:
a. Photocopy of Petitioner's Certificate of Incorporation and Articles of
Incorporation;

bi Photocopy of Petitioner's Certificate^] ofFllingof Amended Articles of
Incorporation, with the respective Amended Articles of Incorporation,
If Petitioner's Article* of Incorporation were amended;
c Revived Articles of Incorporation, consisting of Petitioner's latest
Amended Articles of Incorporation and the proposed changes In the
corporate term to be effected by the revival, which shall be underlined;

••

Page of

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

930

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 23
Appendix C

931

MH Cxcnan^a
as of
d. Petitioner's duly accomplished General Information Sheet
the date of expiration of Its corporate term, or an equivalent document,
such as, but not II mlted to. the Secretary's Certificate indicating the Hst
of stockholders and officers with the corresponding stockholdings;

tn. If Petitioner Is an expired corporation which already availed of re¬

e. Notarized list of stockholders or members as of the date of approval of
the revival, stating their names, their nationalities, and number of
shares subscribed. amount subscribed and paid, or the respective
members' contributions for nonstock corporations, certified by the
Corporate Secretary,

registration, In accordance with Memorandum Circular No. 13, series
of 2019 (Amended Guidelines and Procedures on the Use of Corporate
and Partnership Names), or other memorandumcirculars Issued by the
Commission pertaining to re-reglstration, Certification, under oath,
issued by the Corporate Secretary of the re-registered corporation
stating that

CGIS*)

with the Commission, Proof of Reservation of Petitioner's Proposed
New Corporate Name; and

t If there has been a change In the composition of the stockholders or
members since the expiration of Petitioner's corporate term, the CIS of
the Petitioner as of the date of stockholders' or members' approval of
the resolution to file the Petition for Revival of its corporate existence,
or the date of the board of directors' or trustees' approval of the filing
of the said Petition, whichever Is later;

L the re-reglstered corporation has given Its consent to the
Petitioner to use Its corporate name, and has undertaken to
undergo voluntary dissolution Immediately after the Issuance of
the Petitioner's Certificate of Revival; or
H the re-reglstered corporation has given Its consent to the
Petitioner to use its corporate name, andhas undertaken to change
its corporate name Immediately after the Issuance of the

g Photocopy of the supporting evidence (eg Deed of Sale with the
Certificate Authorizing Registration, Deed of Assignment. Death
Certificate of a stockholder/member, and Extra|udldal Settlement of
the Estate of a stockholder/member) referred to In the Reconciliation
of the changes in the composition of the stockholders or members;

'

h. Photocopy of Petitioner's Audited Financial Statements as of the date
of expiration of Its corporate term. , and for the year Immediately
preceding as audited by an Independent Certified Public Accountant;

L Photocopy of Petitioner's Audited Financial Statements as of a date not
exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date of filing of
the Petition for Revival and for the year Immediately preceding as
audited by an Independent Certified Public Accountant;
t

). Photocopy of the Official Recelptfs) for the payment of the Petition fee
and Filing fee;

k. A favorable recommendation of the appropriate government agency la
the case of banks, banking and quasi-banking Institutions, preneed.
Insurance and trust companies, NSSLAs, pawnshops, corporations
engaged In money service business, andother financial Intermediaries;

L If Petitioner's corporate name has already been validly reused, and Is
currently being used, by another existing corporation duly registered
p^vofa

Petitioner's Certificate of Revival

No application for revival of certificate of incorporation of banks, banking and
quasi-banking Institutions. preneed, insurance and trust companies, NSSLAs,

pawnshops, corporations engaged In money service business, and other
financial intermediaries shall be approved by the Commission unless
accompanied by a favorable recommendation of the appropriate government

agency.

Section 9. Applicability of the Revised Corporation Code

To extend to ths revived corporations a benefit similar to that provided In
Section 185 of the RCC. a revived corporation shall be given a period of two (2)
years from the Issuance of Its Certificate of Revival to comply with the
provisions of the Revised Corporation Code, unless otherwise provided In these
guidelines.
Section 10. Appraisal Right

The revival of the corporate existence Is without prejudice to the appraisal right
of dissenting stockholders In accordance with the provisions of the Revised
Corporation Code.

PWetoft

932

Appendix D

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 13

Series of 2019
Bxchanae

Ml ComnSSwi
Section 1L When Exemption May B® Given
In the broader Interest of justice and In order to best serve public Interest, the
Commission may, in particular matter, exempt an Expired Corporation from
these Guidelines In exceptional cases and apply such suitable. Eair and
reasonable procedure to improve the delivery of public service and to assist the
parties In obtaining a speedy and judicious disposition of cases.

ar M

—

.ran AnwOmdarMa,

AH Concerned

TO

SUBflCT

I

Section 12. Applicability of Other Rules

The pertinent provisions of the Rules of Procedure of the Commission and the
Rules of Court of the Philippines may. In the interest of expeditious
dispensation of Justice and whenever practicable, be applied by analogy or In a
suppletory character and effect

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately upon its publication in a

13

Series of 2019

Amended Guidelines and Procedures on
the Use of Corporate and Partnership N ames

To keep abreast with developments In business and Information technology In the
couMiy, the Commission Is adopting the following guidelines and procedures tn the
registration of corporate, one person corporate and partnership names:

1.

newspaper of general circulation.

a) The corporate name shall contain the word 'Corporation' or 'Incorporated.*
or the abbreviations "Corp* or *1nc* respectively;
b) In the case of a One Person Corporation, the corporate name shall contain
the word 'OPC either below or at the end of Its corporate name;

November 2019, Pasay Qty.

c) The partnership name shall bear the word 'Company* or 'Co.* and If It is a
limited partnership, the word "Limited' or "Ltd.*. A professional partnership
name may bear the word 'Company,* 'Associates,* or 'Partners,* or other similar
descriptions;
d) The corporate name of a foundation shall use the word "Foundation*:

QUINO

e) The corporate name of all non-stock, non-profit corporations. Including non¬
governmental organizations and foundations, engaging In mlcronnance
activities shall use the word *Mlcroflnance* or *Mfarofinancing*; provided that
aid corporations shall state In the purpose clause of their Articles of
Incorporation that they shall conduct microfinance operations pursuant to
Republic Act No. 9425 or the Social Reform and Poverty Alleviation Act

2
A term that describes the business of a corporation In Its name should refer to Its
primary purpose. 1f there are two such terms, the first should refer to the primary purpose
and the second to the secondary purpose.
3.

a) Tbenameshallbedlstingulshablefromothercorporateorpartnershlpname
registered with the Commission, or with the Department of Trade and Industry,
In the case of sole proprietorships;

b) If the name applied for Is similar to that of a registered corporation or
partnership, the applicant shall add one or more distinctive words to the
proposed name to remove the similarity or differentiate It from the registered

name
Papa J of

•

However, the addition of one or more distinctive words shall not be allowed
If the registered name Is coined or unique unless the board of directors or

IWal:
*nUa BuUatin, Jtra 25. 309
Nardin Standard, dm 25, 2019

....

933

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 13
Appendix D

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

934

i

majority of the partners of the subject corporation or partnership gives Its
consent to the applied name.
c) Punctuation marks, spaces, signs, symbols, and other similar characters
regardless of their form or arrangement shall not be acceptable as
distinguishing words for purposes of differentiating a proposed name from a
registered name
d) A name that consist solely of special symbols, ptmctnatioa marks or specially

designed characters shall not be registered.

4.
Business or trade name which Is different from the corporate or partnership name
shallbe indicated in the articles of Incorporation or partnership. A company may have more
than one business or trade name.

S.
A trade name or trademark registered with the Intellectual Property Office may
be used as part of the corporate or partnership name of a party other than Its owner If the
latter gives Its consent to such use.
&

a} The full name or surname of a person may be used tn a corporate or
partnership name If he or she is a stockholder, member or partner of the said
entity and has consented to such use; If the person Is already deceased, the
consent shall be given by his or her estate;

b) A single stockholder of a One Person Corporation (OPC) may use his/her
name; provided, that said name shall be accompanied with descriptive words
aside from the suffix OPC.

The single stockholder may also use the name of another person provided
consent was given by the said person or If deceased, his estate. Provided that the

a) "Finance Company.' "Financing Company," "Finance and Leasing Company,"
and "Leasing Company,"Investment Company," 'Investment House* by entities
engaged In the financing or investment bouse business (RA 8556 and Pres.
Decree 129);

b) "Lending Company* and "Lending Investor* by lending companies (RA
9474). or "Pawnshop" by entitles authorized to operate pawndiops (PD. 114);

c) "Bank," 'Banking* "Banker," ‘Savings and Loan Association" (RA 8367).
"Trust Corporation,’ "Trust Company* or words of similar meaning by entities
engaged In the banking or trust business (RA 8791):
d) 'United Nations,* "UN," in foil or abbreviated form exclusively by the United
Nations and Its attached agencies (RA 226);
e) Bonded" by entities with licensed warehouses (RA 247);

f) "SPV-AMC* by corporations authorized to act as special purpose vehlde (RA
9182);
g) The name of an International governmental organization, such as
"International Criminal Police Organization* (INTERPOL), 'International
Monetary Fund" (IMF), and "International Labour Organization" (ILO) may not
be used as part of a corporate or partnership name unless when duly authorized
or allowed by the Commission*; and

h) ASEAN (protected under Article 6ter of the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property, adopted in 1883 and revised in Stockholm In
1967).

c) The Commission may require a registrant to explain to Its satisfaction the
reason for the use of a person's name;

The practice of a profession regulated by a special law which, among others,
10.
provides for the permissible use of the profession's name Io a firm, partnership or
association shall govern the use of the name, eg ‘Engineer* or ‘Engineering* (RA 1582),
"Architect* (RA 9266). or "Geodetic Engineer* (RA 8560).

d) The meaning of Initials used in a name shall be stated by the registrant in
the Articles of Incorporation. Articles of Partnership or In a separate
signed by an Incorporator, director or partner, as the case may be.

Notwithstanding the limitations mentioned above, any association registered by
entities engaged In the listed activities may use the profession's name, eg Association of
Engineers of the Philippines, Inc.

The name of an Internationally known foreign corporation, ar something similar
to It cannot be used by a domestic corporation unless It is its subsidiary and the parent
corporation has consented to such use.

Unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, the words and phrases
11.
enumerated below can be used only by the entities mentioned:

name shall be accompanied by the descriptive words other than the suffix OPC.

7.

However, a name written in a foreign language, aven If registered tn another
country, shall not be registered If the name violates good morals, public order or public
policy, or has an offensive or Indecorous meaning In any of the country's official languages
or major dialects.

a) ’Investment^)* or 'Capital* by entities organized as Investment house or
investment company;
b) "Capital* by entitles organized as Investment bouse. Investment company or
holding company;

Management.’
or
"Asset/lnvestznent/Fund/FInandal
'Asset/ Invettment/Fund/Finandal Adviser," or any similar words or phrases by

&
The name of a local geographical unit, site or location cannot be used as corporate
or partnership name unless It is accompanied by a descriptive word or phrase, eg. Pasay
Food Store, Inc.

c)

9.
Pursuant to existing laws, the following words and phrases can be used Ie the
corporate or partnership name In the manner enumerated below:

d) 'National' "Bureau." "Commission,* 'State,' and ocher similar words,
acronyms, abbreviations that have gained wide acceptance In the Philippines by
entities that perform governmental functions.

h*i«ra

entities organized as Investment company adviser or holders of Investment
management activities (IMA) license from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas;

r*s«

935

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 13
Appendix D

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

936

e)

'Association' and 'Organization' or similar words which pertain to non¬
stock corporations by entitles primarily engaged in non-profit activities; and

no property b transferred to the new corporation or, In case of stock corporatioos.
used for subscription payment without undergoing corporate liquidation process;

I) "Stock Exchange/Futures Exchange/Derivatlves Exchange,' "Stock
Broker /Securities Broker/DerivaUves Broker,* 'Commodity/FInandal Futures
Merchant/Broker," "Securities Dearing Agency/Stock Dearing Agency," "Plans'
or any similar words or phrases by entities organized as an exchange, broker
dealer, commodity futures broker, clearing agency, or pre- need company under
the Securities Regulation Code (RA. 8799).

there is no pending intra-corporate dispute or claim Involving the expired
b)
corporation (“provision from me no. 14 2017); and

12.
The Rod Cross, Rtd Crescent and Rod Crystal Embit ms’, the use of the words 'red cross*,
'red crescent*, or 'red crystal" or their translation In any official language and dialect
cannot be used or registered as part of a corporate or partnership name, unless with the
consent of ths Philippine Red Cross.

Pursuant to Republic Act 10530, or 'The Act Defining The Use end Protection Of

The enumeration In paragraphs 10. 11 and 12 are not exclusive and ouy Increase
13.
or decrease depending on future legislative Issuances or administrative orders of the
appropriate or duly authorized government offices.

The name of a corporation or partnership that has been dissolved or whose
14.
registration has been revoked shall not be used by another corporation or partnership
within five (5) years from the approval of dissolution or five (5) years from the date of
revocation, unless Its use has been allowed at the time of the dissolution or revocation by
the stockholders, members or partners who represent a majority of the outstanding
capital stock or membership of the dissolved corporation or partnership, as the case may
be.

that the expired corporation has no derogatory Information with the
c)
Commission at the time of Its application for re-reglstration.
Upon approval of the re-registration, tbe certificate of registration to be Issued to
the new corporation shall Indicate Its new SEC registration number and pregeoerated
Tax Identification Number (TIN) as confirmation that the same Is a separate and distinct
entity from the expired corporation.

A corporate or partnership name, which was previously used but become the
IS.
subject of amendment shall not be re-registered or used by another corporation or
partnership for a period of three (3) years from the data of the approval of the adoption
of the new corporate or partnership name.
An earlier period may be allowed for the registration or use of the former
corporate or partnership name provided that the corporation or partnership, which
previously owned the used corporate or partnership name, gives its consent The
requirement to wit as:

For Corporations:
Directors/Trustees' Certificate approved by the majority of the
a)
Directors/Trustees approving the use of the former name by another corporation
or partnership; and

No application for re-registration of the expired corporation, however, shall be
processed by the Commission unless the application is accompanied by the following

b)

Secretary Certificate of non-existence of Intracorporate dispute from the
Corporation that use the former corporate name.

documents:
L

Board Resolution, executed and signed under oath by the hold-over board of

For Partnerships:

directors/ trustees of the expired corporation, attesting that

ParaMrship's Resolution approved by the majority of the Partners
approving the use of the former name by another corporation or partnership.

a)

a)
the appl leant for re registration is a new corporation Intending to use the
name of the expired corporation (specially Identifying the corporate name and
registration number);

For One Person Corporations:

b)

the re-registration Is approved by the majority vote of the directors or
trustees and the vote of the stockholders representing the majority of the
outstanding capital stock or membership;

c)
they shall Indude a statement tn the articles of Incorporation of the new
corpora don that the same is using the name al the expired corporation; and

d)
If applicable, they will no longer file a petition to set aside tbe order of
revocation.

Tbe consent of the sole stockholder or. In cases of Incapacity or death,
his/her designated nominee, given In a notarized Instrument and countersigned

a)

by the Corporate Secretary.

16
Names of absorbed/constltuent corporation may not be used unless It Is the
surviving corporation Intending to use the said absorbed/constltuent corporate name.
Provided, however, that another corporation may use tbe names of absorbed/constituent
corporation if consent of the surviving corporation Is obtained such as
a)

Directors' Certificate of tbe surviving corporation permitting tbe usage of

the said absorbed/constltuent corporation by another corporation; and

11 Latest General Information Sheet of the expired corporation, stamped "recehvd"
by the Cotsmission; and

b)
HL Affidavit, executedunderoath by the bold-over corporate secretary, attesting that

a)
there are no properties owned by the dlssolved/revoked corporation due
for liquidation. or In case there are properties owned by the expired corporation.

937

Secretary’s Certificate of non-existence of Intracorporate dispute of tbe

Corporation from the Surviving Corporation.

.

17

The reservation or notice of availability of a name shall not constitute an
a)
approval of the use of such name or an application for a change of name;

r*a<4

938

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Appendix E
SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 14

Series of 2020

b)
No erasures, cbangts, atodiBcatfons or skeratloos on s rauoe ressmetioo
form shall ba allowed; and

c)

Appeals from or opposition to the approval of corporate and pertnenhlp

names of new companies, or complaints against proposed new names of existing
companies or partnerships, shall be resolved by the Company Registration and
Monitoring Department (CRMD). The decisions of CRMD may be appealed to the
Commission Fn Banc through the Office of the General Counsel
IB
At the time of Us registration, a corporation or partnership shag submit an
affidavit containing an unqualified undertaking to chanp its change the name
immediately upon receipt of notice from the Commission that another corporation,
partnership or person has acquired a prior right to the use of such name, that the name
hasbeen declared not distinguishable from a name already registered or reserved for the
use of another corporation, or that It Is contrary to law, public morals, good customs or
public policy. The affidavit shall be signed by at least two Incorporators or partners In the
form prescribed by the Commission. This affidavit shall not be required If the undertaking
is already Included asone of the provisions of the Artides of locorporatloo or Partnership
of the registrant

19.
This Memorandum Circular shall amend all Issuancas. orders, ndes aad
regulations of the Commission that may be Incondstent with k. aad shdl Ma effort
immediately.
2019 Pasaydty, Philippines.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.
Series of 2020

14

TO

PUBLICLY-LISTED COMPANIES

SUBJECT :

SHAREHOLDERS' RIGHT TO PUT ITEMS
ON THE AGENDA FOR REGULAR/ SPECIAL
STOCKHOLDERS' MEETINGS

To promote good corporate governance and the protection of minority
investors, the Securities and Exchange Commission, pursuant to its regulatory
power under Section 179(d) of Republic Act No. 11232, otherwise known as the
Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines (RCC), and Administrative Order No.
38, Series of 2013, resolved to issue the following rules:
(1) Shareholders who, alone or together with other shareholders, hold at least
five percent (5%) of the outstanding capital stock of a publicly-listed
company (PLC) shall have the right to include items on the agenda prior to
the regular/spedal stockholders' meeting.
(2) All items added on the agenda by qualified shareholder(s) pursuant to this
Memorandum Circular after the Definitive Information Statement (DIS) has
been filed with the Commission shall be filed under 'Other Matters.' In this
regard, the reporting PLC shall no longer be required to amend its DIS.

(3) Any officer or agent of the corporation who shall unjustly refuse to allow a
shareholder or group of shareholders, duly qualified and hokSng the
required percentage al outstanding shares of the corporation, to exercise
his/her right to put items on the agenda shall be liable under Section 1 58
al the RCC: Provided, that, if such refusal is made pursuant to a resolution
or order of the board of directors, the liability under this section for such
action shall be imposed upon the directors who voted for such refusal:
Provided, further, that It shall be a defense to any action under this
Memorandum Circular that the shareholder exorcising any of these rights
was not acting in good faith or for a legitimate purpose.
If, after due notice and hearing, the Commission finds that any provision of
this Memorandum Circular has been violated, or that any of the right hereunder has
been abused, the Commission may Impose any or all of the sanctions provided
under Section 158 of the RCC.

Published:
Manta Bulletin, April 30, 2020
Philippine Star, April 30, 2020
939

940

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

,

•

'•'

I

• '.
i

’

j!

'?■’<.*

Appendix F

‘ f.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Series of 2020

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect upon Its publication in two (2)
newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines
Pasay City, Philippines,

28 April 2020.

For the Commission:

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Series of 2020

:

TO

SUBJECT :

ALL CONCERNED
GUIDELINES ON THE ATTENDANCE ANO PARTICIPATION OF
DIRECTORS, TRUSTEES. STOCKHOLDERS, MEMBERS, AND
OTHER PERSONS OF CORPORATIONS IN REGULAR AND
SPECIAL MEETINGS THROUGH TELECONFERENCING, VIDEO
CONFERENCING AND OTHER REMOTE OR ELECTRONIC
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION

WHEREAS, Section 52 of Ropubkc Act No. 11232, or the Revised Corporation
Code of the Philippines authorizes directors or trustees who cannot physically attend or
vote at board meetings to participate and vole through remote communication;

WHEREAS. Section 49 of the Revised Corporation Coda provides that written
notice of regular meetings may bo sent to all stockholders or members of record through
electronic mal or such other manner aa the Commission shall allow under Its guidelines;

WHEREAS. Section 49 of the Revised Corporation Code, provides that the right
to vote of stockholders or members may bo exercised In person, through a proxy, or when
so authorized In the bylaws, through remote communication or In absentia.
WHEREAS, Section 50 of the Revised Corporation Code provides that when
attendance, participation, and voting are allowed by remote communication or In »bs»ntia.
the requirements and procedures to be followed when a stockholder or member elects
either option trial accompany each notice of meeting; and

WHEREAS, the Commission is mandated to continuously enhance the regulatory
frameworks to Improve the country's competitiveness and ease of doing business
consistent with the SEC Supervision 2025;

WHEREFORE, In view of the foregoing, the Commission hereby adopts the
lottowing guidelines:
Msrrws
SCC-UC IMings vis "Aanoti Conrmunfcaton'

Published:

Manila Bulletin, March 18, 2020
Philippine Star, March 19, 2020

941

942

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Appendix F

OBJECTIVES, COVERAGE AND DEFINITION

943

c. Vltfeoconferenctog Is the holding of a conference among people In remote
locations by means of transmitted audio and video slgnafs *

Sectton 1. Objactivoc. These guidelines provide corporation* guidance In
formulating their Internal procedure* and bylaw* which will allow their director*, trustees,
stockholder*. members and other persons to participate and vote in meetings m absentia
or through remote mode* of communication a* defined In these guidelines, pursuant Io
tie Revised Corporation Code.

d. Computer Confarandng to teleconferencing supported by one or more
computers*

e. Audio Confarandng is a conference In which people at different tocatione speak

These guidelines also operationalize the objectives of Republic Act No. 8792,
otherwise known as the Electronic Commerce Act. to faatitete domestic and International
dealings, transactions, arrangements, agreements through the utilization of electronic,
optical and similar medium, mode, instrumentality and technology and to promote the
universal use of electronic transaction.

to each other via telephone or Internet connections.*

BOARD MEETINGS
CT DIRECTORS OR TRUSTEES

Sectton 2 Application. These guidatnes shal apply to al corporations registered
rteh the Commission.

Section 4. Participation in Board itaotinga Through Ramota Communication;

Sectton 3. Dadnltion of Tarma. Except as otherwise defined herein. al forma
uaed shall have the same meaning as those terms that are defined In the Revised
Corporation Code and other related laws, as well as in Issuances by the Commission.

Iniamoi Procaduraa. Directors or trustees who cannot physically attend or vote at board
meetings can participate and vote through remote communication such as
videoconferencing, teleconferencing, or other alternative modes of communication that
aitow them reasonable opportunities to participate. However, directors or trustees cannot
attend or vote by proxy at board meetings. neon. mV

a. RamoreConvTNzntoattonmeansthetransferofdatabetwoentwoormorodevtoes
not located at the same sits.'
b. Teleconferencing is the holding of a conference among people remote from one
another by means of telecommunication device* such as telephone or computer

If a director or trustee Monde to perticipete In a meeting through remote
communication, he/sho Shan notify In advance the Presiding Officer end the Corporate
Secretary of his/her Intention. The Corporate Secretary shall note such fact In the Minutee
**- - rwvnray.
(X uw
»4

-At

terminal*.*

It refers to an interactive group communication (three or more people In two or
more locations) through an electronic medium. In general terms, teleconferencing
can bring people together under one roof even though they are separated by
hundred mHee.*

Corporations may issue their own Internal procedures for th* conduct of board
meetings through remote communication or other alternative modes of communication to
address admintetrativo, technical and logistical Issues.

Section & Quorum. Unless the Revised Corporation Code or the article* of
Incorporation or bylaw* of a corporation provid* for a greater majority. a majority of the
directors or trustees ss stated in th* articles of incorporation shall constitute a quorum.

pecan

i iirm>i>»iirii»iimumi/»ii
'****-"•*’ *"wi
*rmaMCt md rwrocternoe or co«are*KM0t*. owecrore;
or vkm off co. °*
ami orm ftesouace pouons, n couusum mo execurnt usion
1

CM OZCTWQMC

TFL£COMF£AtMCWG. HO COAFEftEMCMZ WeOCOMBUXMG AMD 0 rxfW DEMOTE

A director or trusts* who participate* through remote communication, ahM be

deemed present for th* purpose of attaining quorum.

17, 2019. C^ng

Cwwwawete OH Na Itsxza MrXOacMgj cw»S r^rwW .,«<< CarOwawtew
‘.P***’**7*'’?:
MVK
AB fXXM

4

flwv*0He«t«M.oar*t*3fofW)»MdBQOQ^

•MMla CompeMr CkMbrwsov Atewwd
* AMteOteMteH*

1 1. 2020.

It, 2090,

StC-MC MaaOnot via ’Ramon CommuntaAon'
SE&MC Mooting vie "Awncfe CommmMiwf

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Appendix F

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

944

Section 8. Notice of tho Hooting. The Corporate Secretary shall send the notice
of the meeting to all directors or trustees In accordance with the manner of giving notice
as provided In the bytaws or by board resolution.
Notice of meetings may be sent to ail directors or trustees through electronic mat.
messaging service or such other manner as may be provided In the bylaws or by board
resolution.
Notice of regular or special meetings stating the date, time and place of the
meeting must be sent to every director or trustee at least two (2) days prior to the
scheduled meeting, unless a longer time is provided In the bylaws. A director or trustee
may waive thia requirement, efther expressly or Impfiedty yicc« **.«
The notice of meetings shall Include the following information:

a. The data, time and place of the meeting;
b. The agenda of the meeting,
c. All pertinent materials for discussion which shall be numbered end merited In
such manner that the director or trustee can easily follow and parttdpete in ths
meeting;
d. That a Director or trustee may participate via remote communication;
e. Contact Information of the Corporals Secretary or office staff whom the director
or trustee may communicate;
f. When the meeting is for the election of directors or trustees or officers, the
requirements and procedure for nomination and election;
g. The fact that there win be a visual and/or audio recording of the meeting; and
h. Other instructions to facilitate participation In the meeting through remote
communicationa.
Section 7. Roll Coll. At the start of the meeting, the Presiding Officer sha* instruct

•* Corporate Secretary Io make a roll cal. Every attendee shall state for the record the
VuKMMnQ.

1. Full name and position;
2. Location,
3. Confirmation that hafehe can dearly hear andtor see the other attendees;
4. Confirmation that he/she received the Notice of the Meeting Including too
agenda and materials; and

945

5. Specify the device being used (is., smartphone, tablet, laptop, dtsMop.
tetevteton. etc.)
Thereafter, the Corporate Secretary shall confinn and note the participants and
certify the existence of quorum.

Soction t. Voting. In case of a need to vote in any Item or matter In the agenda,
tie Presiding Officer shal direct the Corporate Secretary to note the vote of each director

or trustee.
The dkector or trustee participating In the meeting via remote communication may
cast his vote through electronic msB. messaging service or such other manner as may be
provided in the Internal procedures. The vote shall be sent to the Presiding Officer and
the Corporate Secretary tor notation.

Section «. Other Dutioo of the Corporate Socrotary. The Corporate Secretary
shall also assume the following responsibilities:

1. Ensure that suitable equipment and facilities are available for the conduct of
meeting by remote communication (l.e. reiiabte internet connection, high
bandwidth availability capable of exporting numerous simultaneous
connections, ato.);

2. Ensure that the attendees are able to hear and see the other perticipente clearty
during the course of the meeting and that attendees should bo able to
communicate and understood by the other party;
1 Ensure that the visual and audio recordings of the meeting are secured;
4. Ensure that the visual and audio recotdingo of the election/meeting are current
and on-going and that there Is no stoppage or Interruption Should an
Interruption or stoppage occur, the recording shall restart from the point where
It was stopped or interrupted with proper statement of pointe In time;
5. Ensure to safe-keep and perpetuate In updated data storage equipment or
fecUty the visual and audio recordings; and

*te>«r*
SEC-MC Meetings We -Remote Canmunieoiioif

Austers
SCCOK Meetings We -Remote Corneunioeiian*

946

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Appendix F

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

8. Require those itoo ettended the meeting through remote communication, to
sign the minutes of the meeting whenever the act of signing to practicable, on
a reasonable time after the meeting.

Section 13. Internal Procedures. For the convenience of their stockholders and

members, corporations shall Issue their own Internal procedures embodying the
mechanisms for participation In meetings and voting through remote communication or In

absentia.
MEETINGS OF

STOCKHOLDERS OR MEMBERS
Sectton 10. Participation In Stockholders' or Members' Meetings Through
Nemoto Communication. When so provided in the bylaws or by majority of the board of
directors, stockholders or members who cannot physically attend at stockholders' or
members' meetings may participate In such meetings through remote oommunicatoos or
other aftemative modes of communication.

if a stockholder or member Intends to participate in a meeting through remote
communication, he/she shall notify In advance the Presiding Officer and the Corp
orate
Secretary of his/her Intention. The Corporate Secretary shall note such fact In the Minutee
of the meeting.

Section 11. Quorum In Meetings. Unless otherwise provided in the Revtoed
Corporation Code or In the bylaws, a quorum shall consist of the stockholders
representing a majority of the outstanding capital stock or a majority of the members in
the case of nonstock corporations, pccsii
A stockholder or member who participates through remote communicaMon or in
•boontia shal be deemed present for purposes of quorum, neejsssn

Section 1Z Voting In the Election of Directors. Trustees end Officer Through
Komota Communication. The right to vote of stockholders or members may be

exarciaed in person, through a proxy, or when so authorized In the bylaws, through remote
communication or in absentia. pcc-te. mtsei

The right to vote of stockholders or members may be exercised also through
remote communication or in absentia when authorized by a resolution of the majority of
the board of directors; Provided, That the resolution shal only be appkeabio for a

particular meeting, ytcczi « m

ln
® toction of directors, trustees and officers of corporations
vested with pubic
Interest, stockholders and members may vote through
remote communication or In
absentia, notwithstanding the absence of a provision In the bylaws of such corporator*

The Internal procedures may take into account the corporation's number of
stockholders or and members, location of stockholders or members, importance of the
matters to be discussed and voted upon in the meeting, promotion of minority rights and
other factors consistent with the protection and promotion of stockholders' or member's

rights.

The Internal procedures may provide for the following:

a. Mechanism to verify the Identity of the stockholders or members and who
among them have the right to vote during the meeting;
b. Measures to ensure that an stockholders or members have the opportunity to
participate In the meeting including an opportunity to read or hear the
discussion substantially.

c. Mechanism to enable stockholders or members to vote during the meeting
Including ensuring that the Integrity and secrecy of the votes are protected:
d. Procedures for documenting the meeting and any process/motion which may
be done afterwards: and
e. Mechanism In making the record of the meeting, either video or audio
recording, available to the stockholders or members.’
- f. Other matters to address administrative, technical and logistical issues.

Section 14. Notices. The Secretary shall send out the notices of the
etection/meeting to aH stockholders or members In accordance with the manner of giving
notice as stated in the bylaws.

Written notice of regular meetings may be sent to al stockholders or members
through electronic mail or such other similar manner as may be stated In the bylaws.
Notice of regular meetings which should state the date, time and place of the
meeting must be sent to every stockholders or members at least twenty one (21) days
prior to the scheduled meeting, unless a longer time Is provided In the bylaws, rec- «t

_t

pecs*

'FUOr. UhM. "VkWSWWMWMNMWXwwMMvM'SOnHtf L Un rOPVIO. 13V

rmnua
SEC-MC MeeMga via 'RamoM CtwMsnktobn*

emv rut
SEC-MC Meetings vie 'Remote Communication'

948

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Notice of special mooting* which should stale the date, time end ptace of Iha
meeting must be sent to every stockholders or members at least one (1) week prior to the
scheduled meeting, unless a longer time Is provided In the bylaws.
In caee of postponement of stockholders' or members' regular meetings, written
notice shall be sent to all stockholders or members of record at least two (2) weeks prior
to the date of the meeting, rcowy
The notice shan further bo accompanied by other relevant matters ouch as the
folowing:

a. Th* agenda of the mooting:
b When attendance, participation, and voting by remote communication or In
ob—ntia, are authorized, the requirements and procedures to be foiowed when a
stockholder or member elects either option;
c. Manner of casting of votes and the period during which vote by remote
communication or In absentia win be accepted;
d. Contact information of the Secretary or office staff whom the stockholder or
member may notify about his or her option;
e. When the meeting Is for the election of directors or trustees, the requiremsots and
procedure for nomination end election, and
f The fact that there wil be visual and audio recording of the meetings (for future
reference).
In case the election or mooting was conducted through teleconferencing or any
other similar means, a visual and audio recording of the election or meeting should be
secured. The Secretary is duty-bound to safe-keep and perpetuate In updated date
storage equipment or faciKy the visual and audio recordings.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 6
Appendix F

949

FINAL PROVISIONS
Suction 18. Tranaltory Provision. - In order to Immediately operationalize these
guidellnee. corporations, upon approval of this circular, may already conduct their board
meetings and stockholders' end members’ meetings through remote communication or
other attemativs modes of communication for the limited purpose of approving the
provisions In their bytews or internal procedures which will govern participation In board
meetings and stockholders' and members' meetings by means of remote communication
or other alternative modes of communication.

Section 17. RopoaUng Clou— - All other circulars, rules and regulations or parts
toereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum Circular are
hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
Section It. EffoctMty. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect upon its
approval.

Issued on 12 March 2020, Pasay City.

For the Commission:

AQUINO
rson

AI pertinent materials for discussion Shan be numbered and merited by the
Secretary in such manner that the stockholder or member participating through remote
communication can easily follow and participate.

Sitton IS Piece of Mootings of Stockhokion or Members. The presiding
officer shall call and preside the stockholders' or members' meetings, whether regular or
special, at the principal office of the corporation as provided In the articles of incorporation,
or, If not practicable. In the city or municipality where the principal office of the corporation

Is located, ytcceq

SEC-MC Mesttys ris Ttemote CommunMtan*
SCOkIC MoaOnga ri* Ttemote CammunkaSon*

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

Appendix G

951

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15

Series of 2019

E

F
G

H

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.
Series of 2019

I

TO:

ALL SEC REGISTERED DOMESTIC CORPORATIONS REQUIRED
TO SUBMIT THE GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET (GtS)

SUBJECT:

AMENDMENT OF SIC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17, SERIES OF
2018 ON THE REVISION OF THE GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET
(GIS) TO INCLUDE BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION
(•2019 REVISION or m GIT)

By the authority vested In the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under Republic Act Na
11232 otherwise known as the Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines (RCC) and pursuant
to Its mandate to assist in the Implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA). as
amended, and the Terrorist Financing Prevention and Suppression Act (TFPSA) and their
respective Implementing Rules and Regulations, the Commission En Banc In Its meeting on
09 July 2019 approved the herein amended version of SEC Memorandum Circular No. 17, Series
of 2018 on the Revision of Che General Information Sheet (GIS) tn Indude Beneftdal Ownership
Information.
SECTION 1. Coverage. This Memorandum Circular shall apply to all SBC registered Mock and
non-stodc domestic corporations required to submit the GIS under existing laws, roles and
regulations.

SECTION 2. DefleJrion of Terms 2X 'Bentfidal Ownar' nftn to any natural person(s) who ultimately own(s) or

controls) or exerdse(s) ultimate effective control over the corporation. This
definition covers the natural person(s) who actually own or control the
corporation as distinguished from the legal owners as defined herein. Such
beneficial ownership may be determined on the basis of the following:

ratagnij
A

C
D

Description
Natural person(s) owning directly or Indirectly or through a chain of
ownership, at least twenty- fl ve percent (25%) of the voting rights, voting
shares or capital of the reporting corporation. This Is without prejudice
to ownership thresholds that may be Imposed by other regulators
Natural person(s) who exercise control over the reporting corporation,
alone or together with others, through any contract, understanding
relationship, intermediary or tiered entity.
Natural person(s) having the ability to elect a majority of the board of
directors/trustees, or any similar body, of the corporation.
Natural person(s) having the ability to exart a dominant Influence over
the management or policies of the corporation.

950

Natural person(s) whose directions. Instructions or wishes In
conducting the affairs of the corporation are carried out by majority of
the members of the board of directors of such corporation who are
accustomed or under an obligation to act In accordance with such

person’s directions. Instructions or wishes.
Natural person(s) acting as stewards of the properties of corporations,
where such properties are under the care or administration of said
natural person(s).
Natural person(s) who actually ownor control the reporting corporation
through nominee shareholders or nominee directors acting for or on
behalf of such natural persons.
Natural person(s) ultimately owning or controlling or exercising
ultimate effective control over the corporation through other means not
falling under any of the foregoing categories.
Natural person(s) exercising control through positions held within a
corporation (Le, responsible for strategic decisions that fundamentally
affect the business practices or genera) direction of the corporation such
as the members of the board of directors or trustees or similar body
within the corporation; or exercising executive control over the dally or
regular affairs of the corporation through a senior management
position). This category is only applicable in exceptional cases where no
natural person Is Identifiable who ultimately owns or exerts control over
the corporation, the reporting corporation having exhausted all
reasonable means of identification and provided there are no grounds
for suspicion.

7-2. "BerwfldaZ Ownership Information” refers to the Identification documents or
information on the beneficial owner of the corporation as required under this
Circular.

2-3. TNrert Ownership' refers to ownership of shares In the reporting corporation
and not through ownership of shares In a corporate shareholder nor any
Intermediate layers of corporate shareholders.

2A. Ttomlnonr Influence” refers to a situation In which the Instructions or directions

givenby any natural person, who may or may not be a stockholder of the reporting
corporation, on the management or polities of the corporation, are always or
almost always followed or carried oul

23 TSB*referstotheGenerallnformatlonSheet
23 “Grandfather ftula“ refers to the "method by which the percentage of Filipino
equity In a corporation engaged In nationalized and/or partly nationalized areas
of activities, provided for under the Constitution and other nationalization laws, is
computed. In cases where corporate shareholders are present, by attributing the
nationality of the second or even subsequent tier of ownership to determine the
nationality of the corporate shareholder.*

‘

For the purpose of this Memorandum Circular, the reference to the Grandfather
Rule shall he limited only to the method of computing the percentage of indirect
ownership In determining the beneficial owner of the reporting corporation and
shall not affect its applicability In determining the nationality of corporate
*
shareholder.

Vaaawva Casar Lapux Ptubpplaa Corporate Law p $*. chad Ui Nana Mining and Ovvsloptaau Corp, at al vs.

""■IMCnaantideled Minn Corp. OR Ha 1«S«, Jani ary 20. 2015,
Psealota

952

-''••SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

2.7. "Indirect Ownership" refers to the type of ownerskip through one’s percestage
of ownership in a corporate shareholder of a corporation or through layers of
corporate shareholders.

2X "legal Owner" means the natural or Juridical person who, In accordance with the
pertinent provisions of Philippine law. owns or has the controlling ownership
Interest over the corporation or has the ability of taking relevant decisions within
the corporation and Impose those resolutions

953

SECTION 3. Diadosare of Beoefida, Ownership reformation. - To ensure timely access to
adequate, accurate and current Information on the beneficial ownership and control of SEC
registered corporations by competent authorities, all SEC registered corporations are required to
take reasonable measures to obtain and hold up-to-date laformatlon on their beneficial owners
as defined herein and to disclose the same In a timely manner In the CIS. Accordingly, the CIS Is
hereby revised to include such Information.

The following Information on the beneficial owner shall be provided, to wit:
a Complete name which shall Indude the surname, given name, middle name and name

2.9. "Multiple Layers" refers to the layers of corporations comprising the ownership
structure of the report!ng corporation.

2.10. "Reporting Corporation" refers to the corporation rubmittiag or required to
submit the GIS to the Commission.

extension (Ie, Jr, Sr, III);

b. Specific residential address;
c. Date of Birth;
d Nationality;
e. Tax Identification number; and
I Perrentigi of ownership. If applicable.

2.11 "Senior Managing Officio!" refers to the natural person who exercises executive
control over the dally or regular affairs of the corporation through a senior
management position, such as a chief executive officer (CEO), chief financial officer
(CFO), managing or executive director, or president

Such Information, however, shall not be uploaded to the Commission's publldy accessible
electronic database. Said information shall nonetheless, be made accessible or available In a
timely manner to competent authorities for law enforcement and other lawful purposes.

2.12. inornate Effective Control" nten to any situation In which ownershlp/control
Is exercised through actual or a chain of ownership or by means other than direct
control This may be achieved through, but not limited to. any of the following
situations:

SAlIION 4. MeatiAcatlou of Beneficial Owner. Beneficial ownership shall be determined as
follows:

a)

L

direct or Indirect ownership of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
voting shares or capital of a corporation or otherwise has or shares voting
power, which Includes the power to vote, or to direct the voting of. such
security: and/or Investment returns or power, which Includes the power to
dispose of, or to direct, the disposition of such security;

b)

the ability to elect a majority of the board of directors, or any stmiiar body,
of a legal person or arrangement: or

C)

any situation In which:

(I)

a person has the ability In fact to exert a dominant Influence over the
management or policies of a legal person or arrangement: or

(II)

a majority of the members of the board of directors of such legal
person or arrangement, or any equivalent body, are accustomed or
under an obligation, whether formal or Informal to act In accordance
with a given person's directions. Instructions or wishes la conducting
the affairs of the legal person or arrangement

2-13. "Voting right", as used In Section 4(1) and Category A under Section 2.1, refers to
the right of the members of a Non-Stock Corporation to vote which may be limited,

broadened, or denied In the Articles of Incorporation or the By-Laws.

Hgetoia

The Identity of the natural penon(t) who ultimaafy has controlling ownership
Interest In the corporation.

For purposes of determining beneficial ownership, any natural person directly or
indirectly, or through a chain of ownership, owning at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the voting shares or capital of the corporation, or at least twenty-five
percent (25%) of the voting rights therein, as may be applicable, shall be
considered as a beneficial owner.
la the event that the entity owning at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
reporting corporation is an estate, trust or partnership, the natural person owning
or controlling the estate, trust or partnership shall be disclosed as beneficial

owner.
H

The Identity of the natural persons (If any) exercising control of the corporation
through other means.

Bl

The Identity of the natural persons composing the Board of Dtrectors/Trustees or any
similar body and/or the senior managing official of the reporting corporation.

This Is only In exceptional circumstances where no natural person can be Identified
as ultimately owning or controlling or exercising ultimate effective control over the
corporation through controlling ownership Interest, controlling voting rights, or
through other means. The reporting corporation must be able tn show that It has
exhausted all other means of identifying the beneficial owner. This is subject to
verification and stria monitoringby the Commission.

reatcofi

954

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION 5. Detennlnatloa of Natural Person Who Ultimately Owns the Corporation
Through Indirect Ownership. In determining the natural person(s) who ultimately owns the
corporation, the percentage of ownership shall be computed using the methodology applied In
the 'Grandfather Rule*. The natural peraon(s) who ultimately owns at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the voting shares or capital of the repor.lni corporation through ownership of (hares
tn a corporate stockholder or through multiple layers jf corporate stockholders shah be
considered as a Beneficial Owner. To arrive at the actual percentage of beneficial ownership In
the reporting corporation, both the direct and Indirect shareholdings In the corporation shall be
considered.
To guide reporting corporations In determining indirect ownership applying the method used to
the Grandfather Rule, an example Is attached to this Circular as Annex “A."

1

SECTION 9. Validating Information - The Commission may, at any reasonable time, verify the

limited to Information that may be obtained from other sources such as the books and records of
other corporate entities and data gathered by law enforcement and other government agencies
and/or the Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC) in the exercise of their respective functions.

SECTION 10. Modifications In the GIS. For ourooses of Incorporating the modifications as
provided for and adopted In this Circular, the Beneficial Ownership Declaration Page and the
Attestation Page In the GIS shall be In the form as appearing In the corresponding pages In
Annex *B* (GIS for Stock Corporations) and Annex 'C (GIS for Non-Stock Corporations)
x

n'vo BaM-

SECTION IL Penalties.

L

In the event that another corporation and not a natural person ultimately owns at least twentyfive percent (25%) of the voting shares or capital of the reporting corporation computed In
accordance with the methodology used In the Grandfather Rule, the members of the Board of
Dlrector/Trustees or any simitar body and/or senior managing official of such corporatfoo may
be considered as beneficial ownerfs) of the reporting corporation.
It Is to be emphasized herein that this will be subject to strict monitoring and verification by the

Commission. Any clear Indication that this was resorted to despite evidence showing that the
corporation has beneficial owner(s) with controlling ownership Interest or through other means
as defined herein shall be considered as a prlma fade evidence of a violation of this Circular and
the making of a false statement In the GIS.

SECTION 7. Updating of Beneficial Ownership Information. - The SEC shall be timely
apprised of relevant changes In the submitted beneficial ownership Information as they arise. An
updated GIS shall be submitted to the SEC within seven (7) working days after such change
occurred or became effective.
For corporations with multiple layers of corporate stockholders, an updated GIS shall be
submitted within the same seven-day period. In the event that the corporation with such multiple
layers falls to doso. It shall submit the updated GIS within thirty (30) workingdays from the time
such change occurred or became effective with an explanation for the failure to submit the same
within the prescribed period.

SECTION 8. Obligation of Dlrectors/Trustees and Officers. The Dlrectors/Trustees and
Officers of the reporting corporation shall exercise the due diligence required In ensuring that the
requirement to disclose Its beneficial owner In the GIS Is complied with. This due diligence
requirement Is deemed compiled with If reasonable measures are undertaken to obtain and hold
updated information on the beneficial owner(s) of the corporation as defined herein and to
ensure that such information Is timely disclosed in the GIS. Such reasonable measures Include
the adoption of written procedures for obtaining, updating and recording beneficial ownership
Information and In timely disclosing the same In the GIS submitted to the Commission by the
Corporate Secretary. Board and Senior Management oversight In ensuring that such procedures
are observed shall likewise be requ Ired as part of the due diligence measures.

FtoelolS

955

beneficial ownership Information provided la the GIS through an on-site Inspection of the books
and records of the corporation and/or through other means available which may include but not

a

SECTION 6. Members of the Board of Dlrectors/Trustees or Any Stellar Body and/or
Senior Managing Official as Beneficial Owner/s tn Exceptional Cases. In exceptional cases
where no natural person Is Identifiable who ultimately owns or exerts control over the
corporation, the reporting corporation having exhausted all other means of Identification and
provided there are no grounds for suspicion, may consider the natural persons composing the
Board of Directors/Trustees or any similar body and/or the senior managing official of the
reporting corporation to be the beneficial owner(s).

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

Failure to Disclose. If after due notice and hearing, the Commission finds that the
reporting corporation has committed a violation of this Circular by tailing to
disclose. without any lawful cause, Its Beneficial Owner In accordance with the
provisions thereof, the reporting corporation shall be penalized as follows:
For Stock Corporations with ratalntd tamings of Its than PhpS0O.OOO.0D:
Phpl0.000.00
a. For the first violation

—

b. For the second violation
c For the third violation
d For the fourth and subsequent violations

-

>

Php20,000.00
Php50.000.00
PhplOO,000.00

•

Ar Non-Stock Corporations with fund balanct of Its than PhpiOMOOM:
a. For the first violation
Php5.000.00
h For the second violation
Phpl0.000.00
c For the third violation
Php20,000.00
d. For the fourth and subsequent violations
PhpSO,000.00
For Stock Corporations with retained earnings or Non-Stock Corporations with
fond balance of Php500.000.00 or more but less than PhpS.OOO,000.00, the
penalties shall be twice the amount of the penalties Imposed for those with
retained earnings or fond balance of less than Php500.000.00.

For Stock Corporations with retained earnings or Non-Stock Corporations with
fond balance of Php5.000.000.00 or more but less than PhplO,000,000.00, ths
penalties shall be thrice the amount Imposed for those with retained earnings or
fond balance of less than PhpSOO,000.00.
For Stock Corporations with retained earnings or Non-Stock Corporations with
fond balance of Phpl 0,000,000.00 or more, the penalties shall be tour times the
penalties Imposed for those with retained earnings or fond balance of less than
PhpSOO,000.00.

The failure to submit the GIS with the required beneficial ownership Information
shall be prlma facie proof of such violation.

rem eof a

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

H.

Liability of Dtredors/Trustees and/or Officers of the Cerporatioo. If the
Commission, after due notice »nd hearing, finds that the dlrectors/trustees and/or
officers of the reporting corporanr-t ..Ithout any lawful cause, failed to exercise
the due diligence required in ensuring vtmphance with the requirement to
disclose beneficial ownership Information In accordance with Section 9 hereof
resulting in no beneficial ownerfs) as defined herein being timely disclosed In the
CIS or In the nonsuhmlsslon of the CIS containing such Information within the
prescribed period, the following penalties shall be Imposed upon such directors,
trustees and/or officers:

a.
b.
c.
d

For the first violation.
For the second violation.—

Forthethlrd violation
For the fourth and subsequent violations.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

SECTION 16. EfJectivtty. This Memorandum Circular shall take effect Immediately after Its
publication In two (2) national newspapers of general circulation and Its posting In the
Commission's website.
Fasay Qty, Philippines. 26My 201».

FOR THE COMMISSION:

PhpS.000.00
Phpl0.000.00
Php20.000.00
PhpSO.OOO 00

The absence of written procedures and policies for obtaining, updating and
recording beneficial ownership Information and for the timely disclosure thereof
to the Commission, as provided In Section 9 hereof, or the lack of Board or senior
management oversight to ensure compliance with such policies and procedures,
shall be prtma fade proof of the failure to exercise the due diligence required.
Every submission of the G1S without the required beneficial ownership
Information or every Instance of non-submlssion or late submission of such CIS.
arising from the failure to exercise the due diligence required, shall be considered
as a prima facie violation of the duty to exercise due diligence by said
directors/trustees and/or officers.
UL

957

The foregoing penalties are without prejudice to the Imposition of other
applicable penalties as provided for under the RCC. SRC and other roles and
regulations of the Commission.

SECTION 12. Submission of CIS In Electroaic Format The submission of the CIS In electronic
format pursuant to SEC Memorandum Circular No. 6, Series of 2006 Is hereby suspended until
further notice.

SECTION 13. Submission of the GIS with the Required Beneficial Ownership lefamution.
The GIS Form as provided for In this Circular shall be used by corporations whose GIS are due for
submission beginnlng 31 July 2019.
SECTION 14. Aroendment/RepeaL All rules, regulations, orders, circulars and Issuances of the
Commission that are Inconsistent with this Memorandum Circular are hereby amended and/or
repealed accordingly.
SECTION IS. Separability Clause. If any portion or provision of this Circular Is declared
unconstitutional or Invalid the other portions or provisions hereof, which are not affected
thereby shall continue In foil force and effect

ng*Iof a

958

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

4JKL1'

—

4i~sii^iHRTiirmiiiimr

fHMlU'T

,

,

GINCIAJL INFORMATION SHIFT (G«)

awxt

PORTUIYTAR
STOCK OMFORATTON
CKNOUL IKSTTCUCnOfCSi

for usra cowradon tub qb should ar sotmoto wttkji tkhty (M] calendar days from tm dati or the annual
sroaotOLoru- wtrnnc do not uavt amt rrtaa rank wtutl ‘na’ i* the vuormatxm rujuirid is not ArruCAiu; to the
CORFORAnON OR 'NORr IF THE IMFOAMADON IS ROM DUSTYNF 1» Till ANNUAL STOC KJ '.OLDIRS' MUTING IS NR1D ON A DAD OT1IEX THAN
THAT STATU) IN HOC BY LAWS THIQS SHALL IK SHlHrTTKO WHMIR THIRTY (30) CALFNPAR DAYS AFTER TKV HJCWN Of THt OiVCTOVS,
TRUSTVTS ANP OFIKEXS OF THl CUMFORATWH AT THE ANNUAL MEMBERS’ MEETING
1 V NO MtJTlM; B HELD.TNI COarOMAnON SHALL SUBMIT THE CIS NOT LATTA THAN IANUAAT JOOf THE FOLLOWING Y«AA HOW1VIA. SHOULD
AN ANNUAL Stoat KOUXW M»IT)XC St HELD TXltl»rm. A Xfwcn SMALL KI Unxrmu/TlLTD.

A THU GO SHALL M MCOMFLrtHaD IN tWCUSH ANU CENTI) HP AND SWORN TO FY nil C0HFOJIAT1 SCOUT AMY Of TTU CO VOJUDOK
tmt sac should m DMn r Armon) Of alley ant Oiangei in the sutHrmo inioamatxm as thiy amis*, km cmancis m/shlting from
ACTIONS THAT A ROSS OITWONTMt ANNUAL METONGi THE COnROMDON SHALL SUIkOT AVLNDSD GO CONTAINING Tilt NFW INFORMATION
TtXUTMLX WTTM A COVTA UTTER SKAED THE COWRATE SLWTAMY Of THE COM/OHArXJN THE AMEN OLD US AND LOVM UTTTR SMAIL RS
suvMrrruj within savin pi oats after mkn ckangt ocxlked ur mcame tnim*i
SDBMTT FOUR (4) <0TH3 Of THE CB TO TNI MCDV1NC SECTION AT DU SEC MAIN QDKXOR TO SEX SATYLLTTE 0FDO3 OR E^TIMSlON OFTICB
AU. CORWS SHALL UNnORMlYRT ON Al OR UTYTR SOU) FARE* TNE FACLSOfAU CODES SKA IA USS 0*1LYONESIOS
A ONLY Tia GO ACCOaarUSMXD M ACCVRDAMCI WTTM TMESS IXSTRUCnONS SMALL
CONROOICD AS HAVING KIN DUD.
THIS OS MAT K USD AS kVlOtNCI ALAIN ST TXl CDWAADON AND TH RTSFONSUU WRJDCTORS/OFIICMS FOR ANT VKILATXJN Of DOT1HC
LAW\ MULLS ANO M1CULATXJNS
CDRFORATt MAMCl

DATtRSQfHBiDi

KmBS/TRADt NAMtl
FISCAL YRAR MR
OE

NVMRCJki

MTt or ANNUL MttnNO rn VY-LAM

rurutai m um maw
MMBNfTRR

ACTUAL OAT1 Of ANNUL *RSHMGi

voatM*u«M*

UHrxi 11RBHKal wRU ANIMIL

14»« wm.

ccaartm ws—n । r akh

rmon i, mmiaM fosom 1»™ uw ^Rcui mm mcoufany l
FUSON 1kNrvcrty mi 20H W COMFANY 1 awnputH m Mm
VI aHC4a HQ aHC2 ISHa tOOHa lOOHa 2SH • 17S*«

VI a V4 a HO a HC7 > 2SH a 1 OOH a 100H a SOH •10JOH

*
VlaHC4aHGaHa«3SHal00Hal00Ha2SH> LUM
TOTAL

2&MH

ham or orrawAL AKNTXNia rttJKmaaC FARTMfc

•t IfYMNl* AftaM aHMBN

VVMMI RNKUJALIMI 1/VKNlll! RUMILI MUMUBh

MHJRtV CLUHRUHMi

MIIMJMFANY AJTHLATKMO

ma 4 LMHW COMPANY 1 waRMN Mot*
FUSON I
VS a HC4 1*C3 1HO •$2* a 1«M a 1DOH a 25M •IMR*
VS a V4 a HO HO •S2H a I00H a 100* >«H •IW* •
VS a %C4 a HQ a HCA •SM a 1OOH a 1MH a 2SM •UMM
WTAl «t**-

*

MMUU»aW

WiliWrlAMdKNd

V3iV4aHOiHa«:0H«100Hi100Ha2SH« Lin*

V3aHC4aHOaUCT-10Hal00Hal00Ha30H- rOOH*
•lOHalOOHa 100Ha2SH« LMM

. hmm

surroTAi loom

mscm > amttr um» 12* rf comfany i

_

AOMtSS

AOO^

•FOSON 3 Indimxly m» OH o/ COMFANY I cMNuaad mld>w
V) a HC4 a HO a HC4

LUmARKALUA*

I2TM

«r V UMNQmONAL MtttT IF NetMARV

«a.a*KNMa«M

960

» '

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

961

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET
STOCK COKPO RATTON
msasipwnt legibly

COKPOKATI NAMS:
CAPTTAL mtUCTUM

AtrTIMNMnDCAPTTALTTOCX
TYTTWBUM1’

mNOKNOP

IMAMS

AMOUNT (PW)
(Na.* Nara* X Pw/tMaAVaMa)

PAA/STATXD TAM*

TOTAL P

TOTAL

imncmko capttal

FILIPINO

B0.M
STOCKOMM

NIMMaOV
TYPT 99 KLAMS*

MUMU OF
MACD

MAUStMTW

PAM/TTATTB
YALM

AMOUNT (PW)

% OP

rrwurw

PVMJC"

*

1

TOTAL

FNIIICB

NQOT

rmpcatwvt
MAnOFUAXTY)

STOCK

TOTAL P

TOTAL
iiwmof

TTTBOPKUMB*

MMNDIOr

IMAMS

MAAXStMTMK pAa/rrATto
VALM
NAMM OP TW

AMOUNT (PXP)

«0F
OWW3KP

PVMAC**

AarrMU»«fF«rNpC>rAl7i

TOTAL

TOTAL

P
TOTAL
TOTAL MSOUWD P

PASHJP CAPITAL
MX OF
FILIPINO

STOOL

TTMOPKIim*

NDLMM

wuMnor

BUMS

PAR/TTATlDVALOi

TOTAL

TOTAL

PORBION
(MMCATBNY

STOOL

MnoNAum

WMMK

TYPBOFBIAKXS *

HUMMKOF

MAMS

PAN/FT ATTO ¥ALM

TOTAL
TOTAL PAIOUP

TOTAL
P

NOTK USE ADOmOKAL SHEET IF NECESSARY

OL5TOOltt.»1Tj

AMOUNT (PNP)

WOP
0WM*M»

AMOUNT (F*F)

HOP
rmwiNF

P

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET

STOCK COAKMATION

STOCK CORPORATION
PL£A1E PRINT LEGIBLY
COarOKATl MANS:

CORPORATE NAME:

KATTORAUTY

INO

•OAXO CtNDO

rnxx
HOUMI

IwO- OP FTOaOTOLOCB WTD1 IM <M KOU X.

TOTAL NUMSia OP STTXXHOtMSlt

DtRKCTORS / OFPICIBS

NAM/cuuttxT ssaoanui.aoous

963

. i SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

962

omaM

me
COMM.

TAS »<MTTNCAT1OI(

mmaaa

1

TOTAL Asm BAMD ON LATBTT AUMTtO rWANOAL STATIMNTS.

STDCXN0WCB3 INFOAMATKM

1

xxaus su tsatrvto
JUM. NATJONAUTT ANO emtWTT

X

KSStMXriAL ADoasss

X

TTPS

NUMKA

AMOUNT
PV)

AMOUNT
WOP
OWMSSMP

PAID
(R>F)

tax iDtxnncAno'f
NUMMN

1

4

TOTAL

1

1

A

TOTAL

1

7-

1

TOTAL

<
•

ia

1

TOTAL

1
it

TOTAL

tl
A

il
TOTAL

U

7.

u.
TOTAL
PMTNUCTKK
MX OCUAM. RH RQR WMIE. V KM
RMKMAD OOUAFL
V f<M OAMMK V KM 1,0 MOL T KM PCCPOCXNT QPtSCTXM.
RM NCR COHAH *VT-r r AN PCCMPCRATOR. VF MOT.
RM KTOCXMCUMA COUAM, >VT Yf A STOCKXXIMR tf F NOT.
RM CFRCn COUAX PCCATT PAA DOAXA POmONF AM OmCtX, PNOM VP UP MCUJOPO TX POPmOH OP W TMAMMM,
MCKTART. OOMPUANCe omen ANMM AMOCMTW PtMCM
KM DlCUnvf OCMFTTt t. POCATT VF ICManOP TX CObMtMMTKM OCMFTTU. ’A'KM AUCWT COAfTTR. W KM NOMI ANTII

AMDflfCnONOOPMrnrt AOCmCHALLYMMnTXrAFTgAPlAXHFCHMWXMAMDirFbNIOn

oajn«(»AFiF)

Par 4

TOTAL ANOUWT OP sutsama CAMTAL

aoow

TOTAL A MOUNT OF PA1O- UP CAPITAL
IMSTJUJCTlON. SPECIFY THS T0P20 STOCKHOLDERS ANDINDICATE Tilt REST AS 0T1KJ'S

0.00

964

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

• SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15

I '

Appendix G

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET

STOCK CURFOKA DOM

STOCK CUAPOAADOM

FLXASX KOTT LSOOLY
COMOAATtMAMK
I
A* ^**^^*»
TvT®A I
WWS Or
FTvQlMUUwXIl
*******
**

1

——

COVOHAT1 KAMO

m nr
o^r ^w MOM
w v* w IM
isA^roMi^r wm
w fTYTYimiBll

•

।

MOh

T*>AA *DTW IAMB OK LAVUT 1—ITU Ml

STOOOMXXlCrS OrOHMATHM

rtnaimmiamb on utw avwttd n.

shams suasoan

ITOOOIOUMBHWTDKMADOH

NAMLMTKMAUnAWaaQWrT
MSWDfTlM ASMSli

SHAMS SUKS0UWD

MAMA HAD OMALTTY AMO OIAAXMT
miovmAtADOdm

AMOUHTFAM)

rm

n»«i

AMOUKT

TAX

tMWTVCAnOH

TTP*

WtMK>

AMOWT
____

Ma,

AMOWTFAA

OWM**
MO

TAX tDWTWKAHQH
WUMM*

U

t’V)

*

JoFal
TOTAL

M

•
TOTAL

TOTAL

if.

li

TOTAL

TOTAL

u

U

TOTAL

TOTAL

u

R
TOTAL

TOTAL

u
K
TOTAL

ii

TOTAL
t
-MLALI
W<MAAim|

TOTAL

TOTAL AMOOWT Of SUWCVOWCAFITAL

.^T-

—

it

1*
TOTAL

TOTAL AMOUNT Of FAM> W CAMTAL

TOTAL ANOOTT Of fUWOOMD CAfTTAL
000%
TOTAL AMOUNT 00 FAW-UT CAMTAL

UGTKOCDO* SFKJFT D1E TT» 20 STDCJO 1 OLDOU A M 0 1 M OKA TT DU RAST AS CTTXntS

iwtwctkma snarr rneTOF m stoowoujos AxomoicAwnie west a* otxixs
<■»«*«?

aUTOCXMikt)

CtUrKXfrJMt)

—.

966

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

967

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET
STOCK CORPORATION

Corporate Secretary of
I,
—
deciare under penalty of perjury that all matters set forth In this CIS have been made In good faith, duly
verified by me and to the best of my knowledge and belief are true and correct.

I hereby attest that all the Information In this GIS are being submitted In compliance with the rules aod
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) the collection, processing, storage and sharing
of said Information being necessary to carry out the functions of public authority for the performance of the
constltutkNiahy and statutorily mandated functions of the SEC os a regulatory agency.
I further attest that 1 have beto authorised by the Board of Directors /Trustees to file this GTS with the SEC
I understand that the Commission may place the corporation under delinquent status for failure to submit
the reportorial requirements three (3) times, consecutively or Intermittently, within a period of five (5)
yean (SectAm 177. M Ha 11232).

Dose this

day of

, 20

tn

.

(Signature over printed name)

by affiant who
on
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO before me in
personally appeared before me and exhibited to me his/her competent evidence of Identity consisting of
on
.
issued at

NOTARY PUBLIC

[

OVTOCX (»2019)

c«.tToaqv2ei9)

<

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

968

MNKFTOA1. OWNERSHIP DCOjUIATION
tetstroctfeoa;

1.
2.

1

4.
5.

Identify th* Beneficial Owner/* al the cnqxiratioo at described In the Categories of BenefldJ Ownership la team A
tn I below. Utt down as nur\y as you can Identify. You in*y uw an additional sheet If necessary.
Fill In the required Information on the benefldal owner In Iha Ar kb provided fat.
In the "Category of BeneAda) Ownership" column, Indicate the teaerfs) cumtsptmdlag thereto, la the event that
the person Mentitled as benr A dal owner falls under several categories. Indicate all the letters correspond^ to
such categories
If the category is under letter *1", Indicate the position beM (Lew Mractor/Tnsstee, President Chief Executhu
Officer. Chief Open ting Officer, Chief Finandal Officer, etc).
Do not leave any Item blank. Write *N/A* If the Information required Is not apptecable or "NONE" If noa-exlstenl

"Bewefklal Owp«* refers to toy natural personfs) who id ornately own(») or controlfs) or exrrctseft) uktawce eCectfoe
control over the corporation. This dr Anation coven the natural person(s) who actualy own or control the corporation as
destfagulshed from the legal owners. Such beneficial ownership may be determined on the basts of the following

SaniMtat

qmhmx

B
C

Natural person(s) owning, directly or Indirectly or through a chain of ownership, at least tweaty-ftve percent
(25%) of the voting rights, voting shares or capital of the reporting corporation.
Natural person(s) who exercise cootroi over the reporting corporation. afoot or together with others. through any
contract. understanding, relationship, intermediary or tiered entity
Natural person(s) having the ability io elect a majority of the board at dlrvctors/tnatoex, or any similar body, of

D

Natural penon(s) having the ability to exert a dominant Influence over the management or poMdes of the

A

the corporation.

corporation

I

Natural person(s) whose dlrvctions. Irtstrucrions^r wishes In conducting the affairs of the corporation are oarried

F

out by majority of the members of the board of directors of such corporation who are accustomed or under an
obligation tn act in accordance with such person's directions. Instructions or wishes.
Natural person(a) acting as stewards of the properties of corporations, where such properties are under the cart
or administration of aald natural penon(s).
Natural person(s) who actually own or control the reporting corporation through oondnee shareholderi or

G
N

t

nominee directors acting for or on behalf of such natural persons.
Natural person(s) ultimately owning or controlling or exercising ultimate effective control over the corporation
through ocher means not faWng under any of the foregoing categories.
Natural penon(s) ex «rating control through positions held within a corporation (Le, responsible for strategic
decisions that fundamenUDy affvtx the business practices or general direction of the corporation st»ch as the
members of the board of directors or trustees or timiar body within the corporation, or exercising executive
coutrol over the daJy or regolar affairs of the corpora bon through a senior mangement position). This category It
only applicable In exceptional cases where no natural person is identifiable wbo uJttnutriy owns oc exerts concrof
ow the corporation, the reporting corporation having exhausted aD reasonable meaas of Mentiftcation and
provided there are no trouruis far suspicion.

COMMlTtMAMI
(Surna»< Given

Nome Mlddte
Name Kstrmloofbe,
k.Sr.lU)

WFK
ttSffitNTUL
ADMIBI

NATteMAUTY

•mb rMpupetemtJbr^fe^fogM toeSKMm

' For Stodt Corporartfoet.

’For NomStadr CotporaafoM.

’For Stock Corparsetiona.

MTIOO

TAX

NO.

HOF

TVP10F
BmnoAL

OWNDtSMJF1/ OWNDt*
HOF VOTING

BNUfTS’

Direct (0) or
toArwl(l)

CATteGOCYOF
teDtmOAL

CWNOtSNCF

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

'*

969

970

“ SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Appendix G

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET
NON STOCK CDRPO*ATION

|
““

FUASMUtniXClBLY aaaBwoowaMoawooooaoaaM^aw.

_

Corp orate Maur
A. It the Corporation a covered pence under the Anti Manry La

(AMLA). at amended [Rcpk Ada. ?!«)/♦164/ 101*7/ 10J4S)
^•aeo thedt the app roprtote box:

underlie Act

ry

„

j

t.

xhrh
h OChborr BaiAtag UaJts
LJc QuashBunta

1'p

1q !

Qd ThurEadDes

0* Hon- Stock Sevtapi and loan AaaocMtoaa
0 t PrwTMfcope

n>. fonifD Euhaf* Deaton

J
i
jl
h
I'

b. MotwyOuaoen

0 I RrmSunce Afeatt
0 > Dectronk Money laouen

0 k. Ratnot] tnamvnoos wbkh U tator Speaai Law? an tvMea co

Bansho Scran) ng Miybws' (VST) aapervWon aad/or rrpitoilm.

i

II
FH

whaling their nibadurtet and <TWlatt»

4

1

2] x loaunoca Cornparoee

"Jb Inaxancc Aprotl
0 c buuraan Brokm

< amag aa a tomton at** of MetokM peraoar
0b. *o»f aa (er arranging tor aacchcT perwa to act re) a
drcctor or corporate aocmary oda coenpaay. a partaar
of a pattamhtp. or a Mater paaMoa la rvtooaa ca

0< fVcftMKxwl flawurw

0 a Reamnettr Broken
0 L IhdAngCotapantoe

other htndical ptrwa

HoMu^QwpeaySyUeau
Jh hr aaad CotprMtt

c proridMg > ra0a»nd Mho. hMfcua* addrau or
MxaauaadattaA cormpaadeaee or adotoaOaOBtfra
addn tor a ooopeny. a paetjwrddpoeaay dher lapd
peraoa ar amapaoK

J I Mutual BeacAtAMoaanea

J > M Ober Fcrvxtt and tatKMniupenrtoad aad/or rapdatfd tv the
tnamner Cooub carton (IQ

< Sccvnon Deaton
b Srrurtua Broken

Q
c Stewraet Maunu
0
d browit Hrwn
D • brotemeot Agena and CooMdum

aaniara Aanhcider tor aMthrr pm

7.

u< aaenagtog of cUat ouwy. arrurtun or other rarer

t Tiding Advlann

& Motoad hmA er Open-rod la

—

^■ad^uatat of beak anatom or aacwitoea accavacs

g| Coupaaree

O J CnaiatonTnwr fundi ar Irwmead other MaAar oUkka
h Trutdcr CMfiutn and ocher uOe r tnouat

0 1 Other eDUunadiDlaisirrtag or othrvwxw deaLcg to cwroacy,
mandmi or ftaaactoi denraoea baaed there ca
0» balaiMalManiwrfKteMMa.divi.nMfeeMKis
A Baoctoe admin Mteflag or athorwMe daabtg to od Subedtutao

aad other tinder monetary tnuTvetaau or property auperwbed
•d/ae rrgutotad by the SeoxMee and Picture ConMatoeca

htnona who provide any of Iha Moeriagaarvtaac

aipaaUatou of ti earthedaa tier Ao trwba*
openttoo er aw nap— iat of rorapoatoo

1

operation ar
o» orcreators
amapMaewtg and

matpearto of tortAcai pevaaai

aad aaAag buabaeaa

eMXtoa

*□ Moao ci the above
Drocnbo
mture of
huflr.ea

Carpaeietoo campiied with the rerpdreueau an Ouuaer Doe hilpari

M.w-S.iwriwn.on

aoMroaount)

Ol- MM-STOCK tvJOin

r*>

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

GENERAL INFORMATION SHEET
MOK -STOCK CO4ir0«ATK>ff

|

CDiro«ATT NAME.

973

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 15
Appendix G

—

, Corporate Secretary of
L
dedare under penalty of perjury that all matters set forth In this GIS have been made Io good faith, duty
verified by me and to the best of my knowledge and belief are true and correct.

L WTT»COMFAMY AmUATYOXS

PAMNT CUMPAXY

SKR1CNO.

I hereby attest that all the Information In this GIS are being submitted In compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC] the collection, processing, storage and sharing
of said Information being nvcessary to carry out the functions of public authority for the performance of the
constitutionally and statutorily mandated functions of the SEC as a regulatory agency.

Aooesss

AmUAfl

AbMW

I further attest that I have been authorized by the Board of DIrectors/Trustees to file this GIS with the SEG

z ikv otmerr or covohart
i

U

BOMOS/COMNOiaALFAm

ZJ

loam/ carorrv advams

by

;

DATS or SOARD SBOUHMM

AMOOKT («■ FV)

ruxosn* axotudi covoMno*
zt mxxj
cwparvUMw)

I understand that the Commission may place the corporation under delinquent status for failure to submit
the reportoria! requirements three (3) times, consecutively or Intermittently, within a period of five (5)
years (Section 1 77. M No. 1 1232 ).
Done this

day of

20

in

.

ia covcwMsxTmASveraius

xs

emtras

x wvBTUDfroeco^unrwwiMACTTVTTusinrbtttTS

bAtt OF MSMaCRS"

aawDARY ruvesas (fuasi seta nr.)

RATVKAYlOff

st

(Signature over printed Dime)

u
u
X4

by affiant who
on
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO before me In
perso nally a p peared before me and exhiblt ed to me his/her co mpe tent e video ct of Identity co ns Istlng of
,
on
Issued at

XS
4. FUNO BAiANCt fb( FV) t

I

1. Kcokoart dcMt/UdtfHAtM^/AdTMOajnr/AdouorTAnoN OriaA(iOvtiu*MD<T Adb«dr.““
XI MAMtOFAGOKY;
twrrnmmuu
KNUTMAl

PvAi t»4A» Or

aMOM0»

OOCATWM

(antnxM

MLMt
tS«CAT>OI

TW*<M

AMMRV

«• poaxnaxt w mi
WU/AMAM
kwmtmiwt

5J OATT tSSUTDi
5J

NOTARY PUBLIC

DATTSTAanD
OefUATfOMS;

xtutal annual courrernorde
xvcTtxs/Txumts duwwc ttti hucidofc

TOTAL*!Of

♦. TOTALMANTOWtH

RANK A Fill

COXrUMtXT

MCAtrXAtdnrV)

EMFLOVtU

MOTt USS ADOFTIOHAL SMWT IF KK2SSAAY

CBaOMTDOtMOiq

Page*

amoH-SToaqvioi?)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

974

Appendix H

"1, !

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 25

Series of 2020
BOffHQAL OWNERSHIP DECLARATION
tMtroctfocs:

SgeufMggww

itett/y tor Bttwfldd Owwt/i of tor corporwioc m described In (be Categories of BewAdd OwwnMp to I—m A
to I below. Un down u nany you can ktendb You may aw in addtaooaj tbeet If rwrwwy.
FBI In toe required IMomutton on toe beneficial owner la toe fields provided foe.
Io the "Category of BenrildaJ Ownership* columa Indicate the ferteff ») corrtspondtogi thereto, la the event that the
person identified m beneRclai owner Wb under several categories. indkate an the tetters corretpoadtng to such

L

X
1

Exchongp

Ccmeyteggton
••
•• •• •

MEMORANDUM OMCULAR NO.

CDtegorW*

If the category b under fetter T. indicate the post Ooe beM (la. DirKtor/Tnotao. Preideal Chief [ncWtes OAcor.
Chief Ope nt 0 ng Officer. Chief RnaMlaJ Officer. etc.J
Do not here any item blink Write *N/A* If the taformattoe refIred is not sjphraWi or ’NONC* If aon-c—ant

4.

SL

25

Series of 2020

TO

i

SUBJECT:

**aM*dal Owner* refer* cd asy aaoni penoa(«) who uMauerty owa(t) or caeteoi(«) er rxerrteeft) id—aee etaahe
coocrot owe the corporatiom Thh dcflnatfoa cover, the nacani per>oe(i) who actwAy owa or coacrol the cerpenriea as
drsUaguttbcd fr«a the legal owaen. Such brwctoteJ ownership may be dfir retoe< oa toe baite of the Mow^

ALL CONCERNED
Guidelines in the Filins, Investigation and Resolution of
Coenplaints for Violation of the Right to Inspect and/or
Reproduce Corporate Records

fi—g
A
B
C

D

WHEREAS, Section 73 of Republic Act No. 11232, otherwise known as the Revised
Corporation Code of the Philippines ('RCC], provides that corporate records, refardlew of the form
In which they are stored, shall be open to Inspection by any director, trustee, stockholder or mamber
of the corporation In person or by a representative at reasonable hours on business days, and a
demand in writing may be made by such director, trustee or stockholder at their expense, for copies
of such records or excerpts from said records.

NefinJ persDCfe) owning, di retiy or iadinredy or thro^b a toaia of ciw nettop at teat tw—y fhi paraat
(2 S%) of (he voting rtgho. *oting chare or ap«aJ of the reporting torporoticn.
HatxnJ pcrwoji) who exmite control over the repotting cwporatioa tiooe or together with othan. threap aa^
contract understa nding, rtlMSonihip tacertnadlary or tiered entity.
Natural perwnfs) bating the ability to elect a majorgy of the board of dkrctDcxAntsteeK or a^y abater body, of

toe corporator*.
Nacarai peraonfi) hating the aMUty to erm a dominate iafiumce over the maaegeairte or pohries of toe
corporation.

C
F

C

R
I

WHEREAS, the same Section also states that any officer or agent of the corporation who shall
refuse to allow the inspection and/or reproduction of records In accordance with the RCC shall be
Mable to such director, trustee, stockholder or member for damages, and in addition, shall be guilty
of on offense whkh shall be punishable under Section 161 of the RCC: provided, that If such refusal
is made pursuant to a resolution or order of the board of directors or trustees, the liability shall be
Imposed upon the directors or trustees who voted for such refusal: provided further, that It shall be
a defense that the person demanding to examine and copy excerpts from the corporation’s records
and minutes has Improperly used any Information secured through any prior examination of the
records or minutes of such corporation or of any other corporation, or was not acting In good faith
or for a legitimate purpose in making the demand to examine or reproduce corporate records, or is
a competitor, director, officer, controlling stockholder or otherwise represents the Interests of a
competitor.

Natan) porsoo(i) whose dlractiotM. tmtroatonLor wishes io conducting toe again of toe corpoeedoa are anted
out by majority of the artobem of toe board of directors of such corporator) who are acanaoaeed or under an
cbUgation » act In accordance with such pence's directions, instruction, or wishes.
Nanin) penoo(s) acting as stewards of toe properties of corporations, where such properties are under too ore
or administration of said natural person (»).
Natural persons) who actually own or control the reporting corporation through nomhw toirib niters er
oomJoee dtrectun acting for or on behalf of such natural peraoen.
Narwal persoofs) ultimately owning or controlling or cmretting ultimate effectors coecroi ewer too oorperatioa
through other tncaas not telling enter any of the foregoing categories.
Natural persoo(i) uerdtiag concroi through poattfora held within a corporation (La. respemtote for atratogk
decision, (hat fuoda mentally affect the buttness prarUm or general direction of iter cvrporatioo such as the
of toe board of directors or cnatves or slmlar body wttoln the corporation.' or exertisiag eaecvtfve
control over the dally or regular affairs of toe oorporanon through a senior mange swnt potitton) This cetagoey is
only applkabte In orrpOonal esses where no natund peraoa Is identlftebte who aitinmtriy own, or exerts cowteuf
mrtr toe corporation, toe reporting corporation having tshsusted all rwaoriahte means of tdewoAcattoo and
provided there are no grounds for susptdoas

C0MFSJTBKAM1
(hnat, CMi

MD^MMAteNMia

9WK
anM>mu

IteMD Ijiii—iiD(La»

AOOttH

unauim

te.fr. W)

MTeee
Barre

TAX

woe

(nraaBnar*/
BamRcmm
MA

TVFIOF

owra*

WOFVOT1NC

asewn*

WHEREAS, the same Section further provides that. If the corporation denies or does not act
on a demand for Inspection and/or reproduction, the aggrieved party may report such to the
Commission, and, within five (5) days from receipt of such report, the Commission shall conduct a
summary Investigation and Issue an order directing the inspection or reproduction of the requested

oer«ct(>)«r

CATicomroF
MNVKML
out— nrw

records.
WHEREAS, the same Section further provides that the Inspecting or reproducing party shall
remain bound by confidentiality rules under prevailing laws, such as the rules on trades secrets or
processes under Republic Act No 8293. otherwise known as the •Intellectual Property Code of the
Philippines', as amended. Republic Act No. 10173. otherwise known as the 'Data Privacy Act of
2012“, Republic Aa Na 8799. otherwise known as The Securities Regulation Code', and the Rules
of Court.

WHEREAS, the same Section also provides that any stockholder who shall abuse the rights
granted under the aforesaid section shall be penalited under Section 1S8 of the RCC without
prejudice to the provisions of Republic Act No. 8293. otherwise known as the 'Intellectual Property

ffite ^baat/bngi .BgwtoeWfllm

Code of the Philippines', as amended, and Republic Act No. 10171 otherwise known as the 'Data
Privacy Act of 20 12*.

' Fer Stott CasporexiMa.

'ter Neodtodi CerparatMM.
’ForhectCoipareneaa.

f

NOW THEREFORE, the Commission hereby promulgates the guidelines In enforcing the right
to Inspect and/or reproduce corporate records and the procedure for the conduct of Investigation

for violation of the same.

Published:

Manila Bulettin, September 11, 2020
Manila Standard, September 11 , 2020
975

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

976

l-

'. SEC

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 25
Appendix H

SECTION 1. Who may file a Verified Complaint; Filing fee. • An aggrieved party may file a report. In the
form of a Verified Complaint, with the Company Registration and Monitoring Department ("CRMD"),
or any of the Extension Offices of the Securities and Exchange Commission ^Commission"), if a
corporation, or any of Its officers or agents, denies or does not act on a demand for Inspection and/or
reproduction of corporate records. For the purpose of docketing, a filing fee of Ten Thousand One
Hundred Thirty Pesos (P10.130.00). inclusive of Legal Research Fee (LRF) and Documentary Stamp
Tax (DST), shall be paid

SECTION 2. Grounds - The following shall constitute a violation of the right to inspect and/or
reproduce corporate records:

v.

The form al the demand, whether written or verbal: Provided, that, if the demand was
in writing a dear photocopy of the written demand letter shall be attached to the
Verified Complaint

vt

The specific corporate records to be Inspected, as stated In the demand;

vil.

The manner aad circumstances by which the demand was made by the complainant
and

viM.

The relevant circumstances after the demand was made;

a. Outright refusal to allow the director, trustee, stockholder, or member of the corporation to
inspect any of the corporate records in person, or by a representative;

c. The statement that the complainant acted In good faith or fora legitimate purpose bi making
the demand to examine or reproduce corporate records;

b. Failure to take, within a reasonable amount of time, the necessary steps that would allow the
director, trustee, stockholder, or member of the corporation to Inspect any of the corporate
records In person, or by a representative;

d. Name and signature of the complainant and his/her position In the corporate structure of
the subject corporation: Provided, that. If the complainant Is a duly authorized
representative, his/her proof of authority shall be attached to the Verified Complaint:
Provided, further, that the signature of the complainant shall serve as a certification of the
truthfulness of the allegations In the Verified Complaint;

c Failure to give the director, trustee, stockholder, or member a reasonable amount of time to
Inspect any of the corporate records In person, or by a representative:

d. Outright refusal to allow the director, trustee, stockholder, or member of the corporation to
reproduce any of the corporate records In person, or by a representative, at his/her own
expense;
e. Failure to take, within a reasonable amount of time, the necessary steps that would allow the
director, trustee, stockholder, or member of the corporation to reproduce any of the
corporate records In person. or by a representative, at his/her own expense; or

f. Failure to give the director, trustee, stockholder, or member a reasonable amount of time to
reproduce any of the corporate records In person, or by a representative, at his/her own
expense.
SECTION 3. Contents of the Verified Complaint The Verified Complaint shall contain the following;

e. An affidavit duly signed by the complainant, which shall allege the following attestations:
L

The allegations In the Verified Complaint are true and correct based on bls or her
personal knowledge, or based on authentic documents;

11

The Verified Complaint Is not filed to harass, cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly
Increase the cost of regulation and/or litigation; and

UL

The factual allegations therein have evidentiary support or, if specifically Identified,
will likewisehave evidentiary support after reasonable opportunity for discovery;

t A CartlAcaCloa Against Forum Shopping duly signed by the complainant, wherein he/she shall
certify under oath:

L

That he/she has not theretofore commenced any action or filed any dalm Involving
the same Issues In any court, tribunal or quasi-judldal agency and, to the best of
his/her knowledge, no such other action or dalm Is pending therein;

U.

If there Is such other pending action or dalm, a complete statement of the present
status thereof; and

m

If he/she should thereafter learn that the same or similar action or dalm has been
filed or Is pending, he/she shaU report that fact within five (5) calendar days
therefrom to the Company Registration aad Monitoring Department, or the
appropriate Extension Office, of the Commission;

a Corporate Name, SEC Registration Number, and complete mailing address of the subject
corporation;

b. The relevant facts and circumstances pertaining to the violation of the right to Inspect and/or
reproduce corporate records, which shall Include:
L

The date and time of demand;

U.

A statement that at the time the demand to Inspect and/or reproduce the corporate
records was made, the complainant is a director, trustee, stockholder, member, or an
authorized representative of a director, trustee, stockholder, or member, of the
subject corporation; Provided, that pieces of evidence that will support such tact shall
be attached to the Verified Comphint;

UL

The complete name and mailing address of the custodian of the corporate records
and/or corporate secretary to whom the demand was made and/or addressed, and

the custodian's position In the corporate structure of the subject corporation;
tv.

The complete name and mailing address of the directors, trustees and/or officers
deemed by the complainant to be liable;

g Photocopy of the Official Receipt or other proof of payment of the filing fee;

h. The supporting documents and/or evidence, if any. to support the allegations or arguments;
and

L Such other matters the complainant deems necessary to Indude.
A sample of the Verified Complaint Is attached below as ANNEX "A*.

The Complainant shaU file three (3) original (properly marked) copies of the Verified Complaint with
Its supporting documents, and an additional copy per Respondent Hence. If there are five (5)

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

978

Respondents. the Complainant shall file three (3) original copies at the Verified Complaint
with it,
supporting documents. and Fire (S) additional copies.

SECTION 4. Outright Dismissal of Verified Complaint -After an Initial rmnlnMipn rdAf
In the Verified Complaint and such evidence that may be attached to It. the Director of the
CRMD or
the appropriate Extension Office, or his/her duly authorized representative. may dismiss
outright

the Verified Complaint based on any of the following grounds:

a. The Verified Complaint Is not compliant with the requirements set forth In Section 3
of these
rules;

b. The CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office has no juriedictioo over the subject
matter of
the Verified Complaint;

c

•

d. An affidavit duly signed by the respondent or the duly authorized representative, which shall
allege the following attestations:

L

The allegations In the Verified Answer are true and correct based on his or her
personal knowledge, or based on authentic documents;

IL

The Verified Answer Is not filed to harass, cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly
Increase the cost of regulation and/or litigation: and

HL

d. The CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office finds Insufficient evidence as
would
reasonably tend to establish prime fade the truth of the factual iBepttooi coutataad
thereta.
on the basis of the documents, affidavits and other evidence attached to the
Verified
Complaint
SECTION 5. Summons. - Upon the filing of the Verified Complaint, the payment of the filing foes,
and
the determination by the Director of the CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office, or
his/her duly
authorized representative, of Its authority to act over the Verified Complaint and of the sufficiency In
substance of the Verified Complaint, the CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office shall Issue a
Summons within Five (5) calendar days from the flilng of the Verified Complaint The Summons shag
be directed to the respondent or the person alleged to have violated the complainant's right to
Inspect and/or reproduce, and shall contain;

a. The name of the appropriate Extension Office, or the CRMD, and the names of the pwties to
the action;

h. A direction that the respondent filo with the Commission, and serve tn the coaplriaaic. Ms
Verified Answer within Ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the Summons;
c. A notice that, unless the respondent files and serves a Verified Answer, the
con^ilainaot wifi
take Judgment by default and may be granted the relief applied for;

d. The signature of the Director of the CRMD or the appropriate Extensioe Office, or
his/her
duly authorized representative; and
a. A photocopy of the Verified Complaint and the supporting documents

and/or evidence, Hany.

SECTION 6. Verified Answer. Within Ten (10) calendar days from the receipt of the Summoss*, the
respondent shall file three (3) original copies of his Verified Answer, and serve a copy thereof to the
Complainant If there are several Respondents, and they decide to file their separata Verified
Answers, each Co-Respondent must also be furnished a copy of
their respective Verified Answers.
The Verified Answer containing the following

The facts or circumstance relevant and necessary to explain why the respondent should not
be held liable for the alleged violation of the complainant's right to Inspect
and/or reproduce
the corporate records;

b. The legal grounds on which the Verified Answer is baaed;

979

c Name and signature of the respondent, and his/her position tn the corporate structure of the
subject corporation. If any: Provided, that, If the affiant Is a duly authorized representative of
the respondent, his/her proof of authority shall be attached to the Verified Answer: Provided,
farther, that the signature of the respondent or the duly authorized representative shall serve
as a certification of the truthfulness of the allegations In the Verified Answer,

PendlngactlonorcompUfotlnvolvlngthesamesulNectmatterortssaeslaaoycmirt.tribund

or agency; or

fi.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 25
Appendix H

The factual allegations therein have evidentiary support or. If specifically Identified,
will likewise have evidentiary support after reasonable opportunity for discovery:

a. Proof of service to the Complainant and Co-Respondents, If applicable

t The supporting documents and/or evidence. If any, to support the dahns or arguments; and
g Such other matters the respondent deems necessary to Include.

If the Respondent falls to answer the Verified Complaint within the period fixed In these rules, the
CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office may. mon propria, proceed to render a judgment granting
such relief, or imposing the sanction/s. as the Complaint and/or the evidence presented may warrant
The Director of the Operating Department may require the Complainant to submit additional
evidence ex port*.

SECTION 7. Clorfficotory Conference. - Before the rendition of a Final Order, the CRMD or the
appropriate Extension Office, In Its discretion, may conduct a darificatory conference or hearing for
the purpose of ascertaining facts, Issues and other matters necessary and relevant to the resolution
of the proceedings, and further evaminarlnn or submission of additional documents thereto, not later
than Thirty (30) days after the last Verified Answer Is filed.

SECTION 8. Amicable Settlement; Effect of Withdrawal of Complaint - Before the Issuance of a Final
Order, the complainant and respondent may arrive at an amicable settlement or resolution, which
shall be In writing In English or Filipino language, signed by them and accompanied by a Jurat or
acknowledgement before a notary public. The execution of the amicable settlement has the effect of
withdrawing the verified complaint

The withdrawal of a verified complaint does not automatically result in the outright dismissal of the
Investigation on the violation of the right to Inspect and/or reproduce corporate records, nor
discharge the Respondent/s from the possible Imposition of any administrative sanction or penalty
when there Is merit to the charges, or where there Is documentary evidence which would tend to
establish a prime facie case warranting the continuation of the proceedings.

SECTION 9. Final Order. Within Thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the darificatory conference
or hearing, or the receipt of the last affidavits, documents, or papers requested or ordered to be
submitted during the conference or hearing, or the expiration of the period for filing the same, the
CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office shall issue a Final Order, containing the appropriate order,
sanction, grant of relief or denial thereof or such other conditions or terms to be Imposed, and a
demand for payment of the penalties, If applicable; Provided, that administrative sanctions shall be
imposed after due notice and hearing
kpUll

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

980

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.
25
Appendix H

981

SECTION 10. Verified Status Account (VSA). If the Final Order Indudes a directive to the respondent

A sample of the Verified Status Account Is attached below as ANNEX "B*.

period, both parties shall file a joint Verified Status Account fVSA^ or their respective VSAs, within
Fifteen (IS) days from the date of compliance, or from the last day of the period within which to
comply.

th' rcndldon ofa Reso’uaon. *e CRMD or the
appropriate Extension Office In Its discretion may conduct a darificatory
conference or hearing for
“d other
"levant *e
of the proceedings, and further examination or submission of additional
documents thereto.

to allow the complainant to Inspect and/or reproduce any of the corporate records within a specified

S reXrfution

If an Appeal or Motion for Reconsideration hasbeen made and Is denied, both parties shaft file a joint
VSA or their respective VSAs, within fifteen (IS) days from the finality of the Final Order and/or the
Decision or Resolution on the Appeal or Motion for Reconsideration.

(30)
from the "“‘P1of
^Cn^^.jRt^>,UaOrni'
from** expiration of the period within which to

Unless contradicted and overcome by evidence. It shall be presumed that the respondent complied
with the Final Order If the respondent filed a VSA while the complainant failed to file a VSA within
the period stated In this section.

a A concise statement of the facts, findings and conclusions;

Unless contradicted and overcome by evidence. It shall be presumed that the respondent did not
comply with the Final Order If

a The complainant filed a VSA while the respondent failed to file a VSA within the period stated
In the Immediately preceding paragraphs; or

b. Both the complainant and the respondent failed to file a joint VSA or their respective VSAs,
within the period stated in the Immediately preceding paragraphs.
The CRMD or the appropriate Extension Office may Issue a Show Cause Order, which shall Include a
directive to the respondent to show good cause as to why the Commission should not Impose
unctions or penalties for falling to comply with the Final Order.

SECTION 11. Contents of the VSA - The Verified Status Account shall be filed In three (3) original
copies, and shall Include the following:

a. The name of the appropriate Extension Office, or the CRMD, the names of the parties to the
action, and the SEC Case Number

b. Corporate name and SEC registration number of the subject corporation;

c The facts, circumstances and justification why the directive was not complied with;
d. Name and signature of the complainant and/or the respondent Provided, that the signatures
of the complainant and/or respondent shall serve as a certification of the truthfulness of the
statements and/or allegations In the VSA

e. An affidavit duly signed by the complainant and/or the respondent, which shall allege the
following attestations:
L

The statements and/or allegations in the VSA are true and correct based on his or her
personal knowledge, or based on authentic documents;

IL

The VSA Is not filed to harass, cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly Increase the
cost of regulation and/or litigation; and

111

The factual allegations therein have evidentiary support or, if specifically Identified,
will likewise have evidentiary support after reasonable opportunity for discovery;

f. The supporting documents and/or evidence, If any, tn support the allegations or arguments;
and

joint VSA or the last VSA or
file the VSA the CRMD or the appropriate
Extension
P
Office shall Issue a Resolution which shall contain the following:

b. The reasons and the law on which ft Is based;

c The names of the persons responsible or liable, If applicable;

d. The appropriate order, sanction, grant of relief or denial thereof or such other conditions or
terms to be Imposed, and a demand for payment of the penalties. If
applicable; Provided, that
administrative sanctions shall be Imposed alter due notice and hearing
a. Name and Signature of the Director of the CRMD. or the appropriate Extension Office, or the
duly authorized representative
SECTION 14. Administrative Sanctions After due notice and hearing, the Commission may Impose
any or all of the sanctions under Section 158 of the Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines,
taking Into consideration the extent of participation, nature, effects, frequency and seriousness of the
violation of the right to Inspect and reproduce corporate records.

SECTION 15, Appeals The 2016 SEC Rules, or the amendments thereto, on motions for
reconsideration, appeals and execution proceedings shall apply.
SECTION 16. Confidentiality. The Inspecting or reproducing party shall remain bound by
confidentiality rules under prevailing laws, such as the rules on trades secrets or processes under
Republic Act No. 8293, otherwise known as the 'Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines', as
amended. Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the 'Data Privacy Act of 2012', Republic Act
No. 8799, otherwise known as The Securities Regulation Code', and the Rules of Court

SECTION 17. Procedurefor the Imposition of Sanctionsfor the Abuse of Right to Inspect and Reproduce
Corporate Records - The procedure for Investigations, and administrative actions or proceedings,
including the rules on decisions, final orders, resolutions, motions for reconsideration, execution and
appeals, of the 2016 Rules of Procedure of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("2016 SEC
Rules'), or the amendments thereto, shall apply In the Imposition of administrative sanctions on the
abuse of the right to Inspect and/or reproduce corporate records.

SECTION 18. Rale of the Commission In the Prosecution. - Unless otherwise provided by law or the
Rules of Court the Commission may assist tn the prosecution of the violation of the right to Inspect
•nd/reproduce corporate records upon the order of the Commission Eh Banc. The task of assisting
•n the prosecution of the said violation. Including the preparation of the necessary criminal complaint
•rid filing with the Department of Justice, may be designated to the Enforcement and Investor
Protection Department (EIPD), the Company Registration and Monitoring Department (CRMD),
•■d/or the appropriate Extension Office.

SECTION 19. Exclusion from the Alternative Dispute Resolution System - The provisions of Republic

g. Such other matters the complainant and/or the respondent deem necessary to Indude

*« No. 9285, otherwise known as the 'Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004', Its Implementing
"Jet and regulations, and the arbitration agreements provided In the articles of Incorporation or by-

P**ani

^•uru

982

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 25

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

laws ot corporations shall not apply to the ruaohrtlon or settleaMmt of disputes or ooMnnenies
arising from violations of the right to Inspect amd/or reproduce corporate record*.

983

Appendix H

ANNEX 'A' -Faceted 2
L

SECTION 20. QhctMQ’. •These rules shall take effect itnroedlateiy after tts piMirarirm In the Official
Gazette or In at least Two (2) newspapers of (neral circulation la the Philippines.

VERIFIED COMPLAINT

SUMICT CORPORATION
Corporate Nun*
SIC Haprtratlon Number

Matta* Address
Done this 20 day of August 2020, Paaay City, Philippines
R.

RSUVAXT FACTS AND ORCUMSTANOl
,

L

Date and Time of Demand:

n.

At the time the demand to (Aspect and or reproduce the corporate records was made, the
underlined complainant k a (Moose thodt the appropriate box and HO-la the details. If
applicable):
( ) Director

[ ] Trustee:

( ) Stockholder:

( ] Member or

[ ) Duly authorised repraeenaslve of lOvnnfotr nomeoftAe ArierWI
who Is a director, trustee. stockholder uA/ar member of the subject
corporation at the time the demand to Inspect and or reproduce the
corporate records was made.
The compleu name of the custodian of the corporate records to whom the demand was made
with ths posMoo of
and mailing address at

BL

Is

at

hr.

The demand was made tn farmee Aerhen form.

v.

The corporate ntarAJt to be inspected and/reproduced, as stated la the doreend. ie/are:

st

In making the demand, the undersigned

utt.

After the demand was made,

arm factual statements
L

A
UL

The complainant acted In good faith or for a legitimate purpose In making
examine or reproduce corporate records;

Had

.

fSbanure osar rrforerf newel
COMplalBMt

(ComffttmalllasaMnB)

Heitwit

the demand to

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO.
25
Appendix H

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

984

ANNEX "B*

* r.u

ANNEX 'A* -Pa«e 2 of 2

Republic of the Philippines
Department of Finance

VERIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION AGAINST FORUM SHOPPING

L

rcomniete name nf romohlnanU

</ legal age,

fcutwmehinl

985

Securities and Exchange Commission

. end a ruMam of

on oath, ftatr

L That I. as the complainant have caused this Verified Complaint to be prepared; that I reed
and understood Its contents which are true and correct based oe ray own pereoad
knowledge and/or based on authentic documents;
2. That the Verified Complaint Is not filed to harass cause unnecesaary (May, or needlessly
Increase the cost of regulation and/or litigation.
1 That the factual allegations therein have evidentiary support or. If specifically identiAed.
will likewise have evidentiary support after reasonable opportunity for discovery:
4. That I have not commenced any action or filed any dalm Involving the same Issues tn any
court tribunal or quasi-judicial agency and. to the best of his/her knowledge. no such other
action or claim Is pending therein; and
S. That If I should thereafter learn that the same or similar action or dalm has been fUed or Is
pending I shall report that fact within five (5) calendar days therefrom to the Company
Registration and Monitoring Department, or the appropriate Ertenrton Office, of the
Commission.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I havehereunto set my hand this

day of

, 20

,

lalteBntttraA

SEC CRMD Can No. xx-xxxx
For Violation of Right to Inspection and/or
Reproduction of Corporate Records

CompJolnrwK
vi.

. ING (SEC Registration
No.
, Corporate

xxxxxxxxxX And Mr.

Secretary,

Rcpondantx
X

X

VERIFIED STATUS ACCOUNT
Complainant MA

Mowing to wtc

Ament

SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this

day of.

20.

, unto this Honorable Department meet respecthiDy ailagas (be

2 Thea after the receipt of the Honorable Oepeiuaein'sFinal Order.

2 Respondents have not compiled with the order of the Honorable Deportmoot to allow du
taspectloo aod/or reproduction of the subject corporate records.

NOTARY PUSUC

CnmpItWiwit
VERIFICATION

I

—(Crwrien n— nf rnmnislnwf) . of legal age. (mwiBilp] , and a resident of
on oath, state:

1. That t, as the Complainant, have caoeed this VerlAod Statue Account to be prepared; that 1 read and
understood Its contents which era tree and correct based on my own personal knowledge and/or
based on authentic documents;
2 The Verified Answer Is not filed to harass, cause unoecessary delay, or needlessly Increese the cost of
regulation and/or litigation; and
1 That the factual allegations (herein have evidentiary support or, if specifically Identified, will likewise
have evidentiary support after reesonabio opportunity for discovery;

IN WITHESS WHEREOF. I have hereunto set my hind this

20

day of

Affiant

SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this

day of

NOTARY PUBUC

,20

>

SEC MEMORANDUM

Appendix I
SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 27

Series of 2020

Suhane*

V

CommlMfon

SEC Mamorandum Circular No.
Sadao of 2020

27

All Coocamod

TO:

SUBJECT: GUCEUHES FOR THE CONVERSION OF CORPORATIONS
EITHER TO ONE PERSON CORPORATION OR TO
ORDINARY STOCK CORPORATION

In ordar to operationalize Title XIII, Chapter III of Republic Act No. 11232.
or the Revised Corporation Code of the PhSippines (RCC), which alowe the
conversion from an Ordinary Stock Corporation (OSC) to a One Person
Corporation (OPC), as well a* the conversion from an OPC to an OSC, the
Commission resolved to issue the folowing guidelines:

PARTI
ORDINARY STOCK CORPORATION
TO ONE PERSON CORPORATION
Section 1. If a natural person of legal age. a trust, or en estate Csingle
stockholder') has acquired aS of the outstanding capital stocks of an OSC. with
the oomaopoodlng Certificate Authorizing Registration/ tax clearance having
been Issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the OSC may apply for Na
conversion Into an OPC. by submitting the following documentary
requirements, which shall be processed as en Amendment of the Artidee of
Incorporation:
(1) Covar sheet:
(2) AppNcaUon for Conversion of an Ordinary Stock Corporation to
a One Person Corporation, signed by the single stockholder
who has acquired al of the outstanding shares of the capital
stock of an ordinary stock corporation and countersigned by the
corporation's corporate secretary In the form prescribed by Iha

Commission':
Copy of on AppScaSen tor Convardon of an Ordnery Stock Corporator Mo a Ona Farson
'CorporvODn
1» hereto atadwd as Anna* *A*.
Put* Shed
Manto BukOn. October 10. 2020
Manto Standard, October 16. 2020

986

CIRCULAR NO. 27

Appendix I

(3)

987

OfWal or certified true copy of the document/s effecting the

transfer/s of full title / ownership of shares (/.e.:
deeds at
assignment, or any legal document
transferring the shares to
the single stockholder) and, if applicable, a
certified true copy of
proof of authority to act on behalf of tha tnjst/estate;
(4) Certificate Authorizing Registration I tax clearance from
the BIR-

(5) Notarized Secretary’s Certificate of No Intra-Corporate Dispute;
(6) Articles of Incorporation of an OPC, filed In accordance with
the
SEC Guidelines on the Establishment of a One Person
Corporation or such other Guidelines that the Commission may
hereafter Issue, In the form prescribed by the Commission,
which shall comply with and/or contain the following:

a) Must be dJy prepared, signed and acknowledged or
authenticated by the single stockholder and by the
corporation's treasurer,
b) Provislon/articie indicating the name/s and address/es
of the original incorporator/s of the OSC;
c) Provisions/artides on the number of directors, their
names and addresses, as well as their subscription and
payment details shall be modified to reflect the name,
address, subscription, and payment details of the
single stockholder In the form prescribed by the
Commission;
d) ProvisJon/article on nominee and alternate nominee,
their names, nationalities, residence addresses, and
the extent, coverage, and limitations of their authorities.
e) Other detais particular to an OPC shal likewise be
indicated in accordance with Memorandum Circular
No. 07, Series of 2019 or the SEC Guidelines on the

Establishment of a One Person Corporation, and/or
such other guidelines that the Commission may
hereafter issue.
The following shall likewise be added as a new Article In the
Articles of Incorporation of the One Person Corporation 'Upon Issuance by the Securities and Exchange
Commission of the Certificate of Filing of Amended Articles
of Incorporation, reflecting Its conversion Into a One
Person Corporation, the attached Articles of Incorporation
of the Ordinary Stock Corporation shall be deemed

superseded’

A copy of the latest Articles of Incorporation of the OSC shal be
attached to the Articles of Incorporation of the OPC;
(7) Letter of acceptance of appointment by Nominee and Alternate
Nominee;
(8) Self-appointed Treasurer's Bond, If applicable;
(9) Name reservation;

loti

988

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 27
Appendix I

(10) Monitoring clearance from other relevant department of the SEC
or from the Compliance Monitoring Division (CMD) of the
Company Registration and Monitoring Department (CRMD),
whichever Is applicable;
(11) Endorsement clearance from appropriate government
agencies, if applicable;
(12) Undertaking to Change Corporate Name duly executed under
oath by the single stockholder or the sole remaining director. If
not yet Included In the Articles of Incorporation, and;
(13) Undertaking to Assume All Liabilities of the Ordinary Stock
Corporation, duly executed under oath by the single stockholder
of the OPC. If not yet Included In the Articles of Incorporation.

PARTS

969

ONE PERSON CORPORATION
TO ORDINARY STOCK CORPORATION
Section 7.

When the shares in an OPC ceases to be held solely by a single
stockholder, the OPC may be converted Into an OSC after due notice to the
Commission of such fact/s and of such circumstance/s leading to the
conversion, and after compliance with all the requirements for a stock

corporation, as may be determined by the Commission, after an evaluation of
the folowing documentary requirements:

Section 2. Upon issuance of the Certificate of Filing of Amended Articles of
Incorporation by the SEC reflecting the conversion to OPC. the Articles of
Incorporation and By-laws of the OSC shall be deemed superseded. The date
of Issuance of the Certificate of Filing of Amended Artkies of Incorporation shal
be deemed as the date of approval of the conversion.
Section X The Certificate of Filing of Amended Articles of Incorporation shal
beer and retain the corporation's original SEC Registration Number.
Meanwhile, the name of the corporation shall have an "OPC* suffix In
order to reflect Ite nature as a One Person Corporation.

Section 4. The One Person Corporation converted from an Ordinary Stock
Corporation shall succeed the latter and be legaly responsible for al (he letter's
outstanding liabilities as of the date of approval of the conversion.
Sections. The provisions of Title XIII. Chapter III of the Revised Corporation
Code shal apply primarily to One Person Corporations, whle other provisions
of the Code apply suppletorly.
Sections. The amount of fees for (1) Amendment of Articles of
Incorporation, (2) Name Reservation, and (3) Legal Research under the
Consolidated Schedule of Fees and Charges2 shall be the applicable fees for
an application fMed In accordance with Part I (Ordinary Stock Corporation to
One Person Corporation) of this gukioknea.

(1) Coversheet;
(2) Notice of Conversion of a One Person Corporation into an
Ordinary Stock Corporation, signed by all holders of shares of
the outstanding capital stock, countersigned by the corporate
secretary In the form prescribed by the Commission3;
(3) Original or certified true copy of the document/s effecting the
transfers of fid title / ownership of shares (l.e.: subscription
contracts, deeds of assignment, or any legal document
declaring the legal heirs of the single stockholder)-,
(4) Certificate Authorizing Registration /tax clearance from the BIR;
(5) Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws of an OSC filed in
accordance with the requirements provided under Section 14 of
the RCC, which shall comply with and/or contain the following:
a) Duly prepared, signed and acknowledged or
authenticated by the stockholders who voted for their
adoption, and by the corporation's treasurer;
b) Provision/articie indicating the name and address of the
original Incorporator of the OPC;
c) Provisions / articles reflecting the number of directors,
their names and addresses, as well as their
subscription and payment details, and;
d) Other details particular to an OSC shal likewise be
indicated In accordance with the provisions of the RCC
and guidelines that the Commission has issued and/or

may hereafter Issue.
The following shal likewise be added as a new Article In the
Articles of Incorporation of the Ordinary Stock Corporation 'Upon Issuance by the Securities and Exchange
Commission of the Certificate of FHing of Amended Articles
of Incorporation and of Bylaws of this corporation,
reflecting Its conversion Into an Ordhwy Stock

* SEC Memorandum CkoMar No. 3, series of 2017.
J of?

Copy of a NoSce of Comwrion of • One Pereon CopcraBon Ho an Ontoery Stock
’Corporation
1« hereto attached as AnnexV.

4 off

990

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 27
Appendix I

Corporation, the attached Articles of Incorporation of the
One Person Corporation shall be deemed superseded.'

991

Sartion 12. The Certificate of Fling of Amended Articles of Incorporation
8nd

m

A copy of the latest Articles of Incorporation of the OPC shal be
attached to the Articles of Incorporation of the OSC.

Further, the corporation shall not have the ’OPC* suffix as part

(6) Name reservation;
(7) Monitoring clearance from other relevant department of the SEC
or from the CMD of the CRMD, whichever is applicable;
(8) Endorsement clearance from appropriate government
agencies, if applicable;
(9) Undertaking to Change Corporate Name duly executed under
oath by the authorized representative or director of the OSC. If
not yet included in the Articles of Incorporation, and;
(10) Undertaking to Assume Ail Liabilties of the One Person
Corporation, diiy executed under oath by al the stockholders
of the OSC, If not yet included In the Articles of Incorporation.

and

cofPoration’s original SEC Registration

corporate name.

of its

Section 13. The Ordinary Stock Corporation converted from a One Person
Corporation shall succeed the latter and be legally responsible for all the
letter's
outstanding liabilities as of the date of conversion.

Section 14. The amount of fees for (1) Amendment of Articles of
Incorporation. (2) Registration of Bylaws, (3) Name Reservation, and (4)
Legal
Research, under the Consolidated Schedule of Fees and Charges shall be the
applicable fees for an application filed in accordance with Part II (One Person
Corporation to Ordinary Stock Corporation) of this guidelines.

Section 8. Folowing the transfer/s of shares in an OPC wherein there
becomes at least two (2) stockholders in the OPC, a Notice of Conversion of
One Person Corporation Into an Ordinary Stock Corporation shall be tiled with
the Commission within sixty (60) days from such transfer/s of shares. The
period for filing the Notice shall be observed even though the conversion w* be
applied for, or wilt take place, afterwards.

For the purpose of submitting the notice required under the
immediately preceding section, the date of transfer of shares shal be deemed
to be the date that the corresponding Certificate Authorizing Registration/ tax
clearance Is issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
Section 9.

Section 10. If the Notice of Conversion is filed with the Commission beyond
sixty (60) days from the transfer of shares, the One Person Corporation may
stiU be approved for conversion into an Ordinary Stock Corporation subject to
prior payment of penalty if found liable for violation of Section 132, in relation to
Section 158* of the Revised Corporation Code.
Section 11. Upon Issuance by the SEC of the Certificate of Fling of Amended
Articles of Incorporation and of Bylaws reflecting the conversion to an OSC, the
Articles of Incorporation of the OPC shall be deemed superseded. The date of
Issuance of the Certificate of Filing of Amended Articles of Incorporation and of
Bylaws shal be deemed as the date of approval of the conversion.

* Section 151. AdmMtnrhe Sanctons. - If. sfbr due no<k» and hearing. the ComnMon

finds that any provldon ol this Code, rules or regUattona, or any of the Commission's orders
has been violated. the Commission may Impose any or ail of the blowing sanctions, taking Into
conakferadon tha extant of participation. nature, eflects. frequency and seriousness of Ite
violation:
(a) Impoelllon of a fine ranging from Five thousand pesos (P5.000.00) to Two n*on
pesos (P2.000.000.00). and not mors tian One thousand paaoa (Pt ,000.00) tor each day of
continuing violator but In no case to exceed Two million pesos (P2.000,000.00);
(b) Issuance of a permanent cease end desist order
(c) SrMpenalon or revocation of tie certificate of incorporation; and
(d) Oieeoiuton of the corporation and forfeiture of its assets under the oondtoons In Tile

PARTM

PROVISIONS COMMON
TO BOTH KINDS OF CONVERSION
Section 15. In the Articles of Incorporation of the converted corporation, the
signatory/ies thereto must dearly state that they voluntarily agreed to convert
the Ordinary Stock Corporation into a One Person Corporation, or the One
Person Corporation into an Ordinary Stock Corporation, as the case may be, In
the folowing or similar manner -

•KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS.

The undersigned stockholder/s, of legal age, voluntarily agreed to
convert a stock corporation under the laws of the Republic of the
PhUppInes and certify the foliowing".

Section 18. By reason of the nature of these corporations the conversion from
an OSC to OPC shall be deemed as optional. On the other hand, the conversion
from an OPC to OSC shall be deemed as mandatory, unless when windlng-up
and dissolution Is appropriate.

Section 17. Processing of applications for conversion of corporations shall

commence only upon receipt by the CRMD, or by any of the SEC Extension

Offices nationwide, of the complete documentary requirements enumerated In
this guidelines Including the proof of payment of the applicable fees. This shell
be done manually by the Commission unti further notice.

XIV of this Code.

SofT

loti

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 27
Appendix I

Section IS. In case an opposition or dispute arises from the convertiona
discussed in these guidelines, the aggrieved party may file before the CRMD a
verified Petition for Cancellation of the certificate thus Issued, on the ground of
fraud in the procurement thereof In accordance with the applicable laws and
other rules or Issuances by the Commission.

Section IS. This Memorandum Circular shal amend aS issuances, orders,
rules, and regulations of the Commission that may be Inconsistent with It
Section 20. This Memorandum Circular shal take effect immediately alter Its
publication In a newspaper of genera) circulation.

Done this

2$1L

of

August 2020

Pasay City. PhSppines.

993

APPLICATION FOR CONVERSION
(Ordinary Stock Corporation to One Person Corporation)
STOCKHOLDER). the sole remaining stockholder of [NAME OF
naMMAa^civiX^B^
COLORATION] an ordinary stock
hereby
from

corporation,
request
the Securities and Exchange Commission the conversion of
the said corporation Into a One
rerson CorporauotL

[NAME OF ORDINARY STOCK CORPORATION], an ordinary stock
corporation duly
registered and existing under [SEC REGISTRATION NUMBER],
has a total of [NUMBER OF
OUTSTANDING SHARES) Issued and outstanding shares as of [DATE OF
SIGNING), all of
which havebeen lawfully acquiredby me on the saiddate from the
stockholders enumerated
In the following paragraph.

Tlwlitt

^

stockholders of the Ordinary Stock Coqxjrrton before the

shares are as follows:

Names

Stockholders

of Number of Shares Date of Transfer
Subscribed

transfer/s of

Submitted Proof of
Transfer

Signed this (DATE OF SIGNING] at [PLACE OF SIGNING].

Sole Remaining Stockholder
TIN-

I [NAME OF CORPORATE SECRETARY], [NATIONALITY], of legal age, residing at
[RESIDENCE ADDRESS], the duly appointed and incumbent Corporate Secretary of [NAME
OF ORDINARY STOCK CORPORATION], hereby certify to the Securities and Exchange
Commission that the Information provided tn the Application for Conversion above are true
and correct based on my personal knowledge and on the records of [NAME OP ORDINARY
STOCK CORPORATION] as of [ DATE OF SIGNING)
Signed this [DATE OF SIGNING) at [PLACE OF SIGNING).

Corporate Secretary
TIN-

TofT

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

994

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 27
Appendix 1

NOTICE
(One Person Corporation to Ordinary Stock Corporation)
We, the undersigned holders of the outstanding capital stock of [NAME
OF ONE PERSON CORPORATION], hereby notify the Securities and Exchange
Commission of our intention to convert the One Person Corporation into an
Ordinary Stock Corporation.

[NAME OF ONE PERSON CORPORATION], a one person corporation
duly registered and existing under [SEC REGIsl RATION NUMBER], has a total
of [NUMBER OF OUTSTANDING SHARES] issued and outstanding shares as of
[DATE OF SIGNING], which lawfully ceased to be held solely by [NAME OF
SINGLE STOCKHOLDER] as a single stockholder.
The list of stockholders of the One Person Corporation as of the date of
signing of this Notice of Conversion are as follows:
Names

Stockholders

of Number
Shares
Subscribed

of Date of Transfer

Submitted Proof

of Transfer

Signed this [DATE OF SIGNING] at [PLACE OF SIGNING).

Stockholder

T1N-

Stockholder
T1N-

Stockholder
TIN-

995

I [NAME OF CORPORATE SECRETARY),
[NATIONALITY], of legal age,
residing at [RESIDENCE ADDRESS], the duly appointed
and incumbent
Corporate Secretary of [NAME OF ONE PERSON
CORPORATION], hereby
certify to the Securities and Exchange
Commission that the information
provided in the Notice above are true and correct based
on my persona)
knowledge and on the records of [NAME OF ONE PERSON
CORPORATION] as
of [DATE OF SIGNING).

Signed this [DATE OF SIGNING] at [PLACE OF SIGNING).

Corporate Secretary
TIN-

Appendix J

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 8
Appendix J

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 8
Series of 2013

GAMnes on Ccmptanca wbh Pw Mpfoforflgn GmenNp Aequrtmerte
h«oA*d h (he Cbrattueon wxl/ar Baatkng Law by CorponOora Engaged ti
NadonflRtBd end evDyMMaansaitd AdMDcs

rage 2*2

)>»

Republic of the Philippines
Department of Finance

I:*

MAY 22 200 ) Lp

Securttiee and Exchange Commlesion
SEC BuMng. EDSA, Greenhas, Mand*uyong

...

I.

Corporations rovend by specif laws' whkh provide spedfc dttnnship roqutvnmts shal comply
•4th the provisions of said lew.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 8
Series of 2013

SUBJECT

Section 3. All Corporote Secretaries cf covered corporations are directed to monitor and obeerve
compience *4th the provisions on ownership requtrements provided In the Constitution, the FIA, Rs IRR.
other epplcabie laws, Mes and regulations and with the provisions of this Qrcuiar.

AU CORPORATIONS ENGAGED IN NATIONALIZED OR PARTLY
NATIONALIZED ACTIVITIES

TO

:

Section ZAlcorcred corporations shal. at al times, observe the constitutional or statutory
cwmershlp requirement For purposes of determining compliance therewith, the required percentage of
FWpino
shal he applied to BOTH (a) the total number of outstanding shares of stock entitled to
vote in the election <X directors; AND (b) the total number of outsorting shares of stock, whether or not
entitled to vote In the election of directors.

The Corporate Secretary cannot delegate the responsMty of complying writ the proviNone of this
OrcaAar vAhuR the express aXhority from the Board of Directors or Trustees, as the case may be.

GUIDELINES ON COMPLIANCE WITH THE FlLIPlNO-FORElGfl
OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS PRESCRIBED IN THE CONSTITUTION
AND/OR EXISTING LAWS BY CORPORATIONS ENGAGED IN
NATIONALIZED AND PARTLY NATIONALIZED ACTIVITIES

WHEREAS, the Constitution, the Foreign Investments Act of 1991, (W) as emended, and ether
existing laws mandate that a certain percentage of ownership tn corporations engaged in iderrirted areas of
activities and enterprises be reserved to Phippine Nationals;
WHEREAS, Section 15 of the Corporation Code of the PhKppines provides that a corporation which
Incorpondon a
wffl engage in business or activity reserved for Abpino dtizens shall indude In Its Artides of
RHpino dtizens to
provision stating that no transfer of stock or Interest which shall reduce the ownership of
aiowed;
be
laws,
shal
existing
by
provided
as
less than the required percentage of the capital stock

Section 4. This Qrcutar shal take effect immedieteV after Rs publication In two (2) nation*
newspapers cf general dreuiation, provided: that afi existing covered corporations which are non-compHent
wRh Section 2 hereof shal be given a period of one (1) year from the effectNRy of this Orcuier within which
to comply wth said ownership requirement The Commission may extend the period of complence but only
in meritorious and exceptional cases, and upon proper petition.

FaAxe to comply wth this Orcutar shal subject the Jurkicai entity, any person, end the corporate

officers rwsponJfcle, to sanctions provided in Section 14 of the Foreign Investments Act of 1991, as
-a- -a

Signed this 20th day of May 2013, MandAuyong Qty, Phffppines.

WHEREAS, Section 17 of the Corporation Code provides that the Securities & Exchange Commission
of ownership of
may reject or disapprove artides of incorporation or amendnents thereto t the percentage
wth as required by
the capital stock to be owned by dtizens of the Philippines has not been compied
existing laws or the Constitution;

By Authority of the Commission En Banc

WHEREAS, Section 14 of the FIA empowers the Commission to Impose admWstrafhe sanctions
provided therein for vtaiadon of the FIA and Its impiemeniing rules and regulations

ESTfA J. H61905A
Chairperson

’capRaTin
WHEREAS, the Supreme Court in «e*s of Gambao v. T^a < X1 ruled that the town
to vte* in the election
Section 11, Artide XU of the 1987 Constitution refers only to shares of stock ertried
of directors;
ownership
WHEREAS, Section 1 (b) of the IRR of FIA dearly requires the existence of M beneffdai
and held by PhMppine
of tte stocks and appropriate voting rights In determining whether stocks are owned
nationals;

WHEREAS, Il is essential to ensure that Ml beneffdai ownership and effective
appropriate voting rights He with Philippine nationals;

control

the

RegcAadon
WHEREAS, Section 143 of the Corporation Code and Sections 5 and 72 of the Securities
w« enable It to
Code (*SRC*) empower the Commission to promulgate guidelines, rules and regulations that
implement the provisions and purpose of the laws R Implements;

on
NOW, THEREFORE, the Commission hereby issues and promulgates the foeowing gtedcAnes
corporations
compliance w<h the ownership requirements In the Constitution ancVor existing laws by
engaged in nationalized or partly nationattzed activities:
Section 1. This Orcuiar shaH apply to all corporations C*covered corporations') engaged In Identified
areas of activities or enterprises spedfleaty reserved, whoty or portly, to Philippine Nationals by the
Constitution, the RA and other existing laws, amendments thereto and IR
otherwise be provided therein.
1

G.R. No. 176S79, October 9, 2012.

AJbliltwd:
RtU. Drily Inodrw, Mr
Burineee Mlrnr, toy 22,

996

onw or nc rre—Rai actfuty
For example, RA 9474, ato known as the Lendrig Company Regutobw Act of 2007, RA Rssb, Ano
known as Rnendng Company Act of L99B and P.D. 129, atoo known as the The Investment Houses Law.

’

Appendix K

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17
Appendix K

'

999

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17
Series of 2019

d. Foreign corporations which have established representative offices In the
Philippines;

e Regional or Area Headquarters of multinational companies; and

t

Operating Regional Headquarters of multinational companies.

gBCTTON 3, DEFINITION OF TERMS

31 Cooewtssioa means the Securities and Exchange Commission.

SBC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. JZ Series M2019
REVISED GUIDEUNIS ON SECURITIES DEPOSIT OF BRANCH OFFICES
OF FOREIGN CORPORATIONS

SECTION 1. POLICY STATEMENT

Pursuant to Section 143 of the Reviled Corporation Code of the Philippines, the
Commission resolved to adopt this set of guidelines to provide reasonable assurance that
branch offices of foreign corporations duly licensed to do business la the Philippines
shall be able to settie their obligations Incurred within the Philippines, and to ensure their
compliance with Investment requirements.

SECTION 2. COVERAGE AND SCHEDULE OP POSTING
This Circular shall apply to all branch offices of foreign rorp orations duly licensed to
do business In the Philippines that are mandated to deposit securities with the
Commission In accordance with the following schedule:
a Within 60 days after the Issuance of its SEC license, securities with an actual
market value of at least PS00D00D0;

b. Additional securities shall be deposited within six months after the ead of the
fiscal year indicated In the Financial Statements (FS) In the following situations:
L

If the licensee's gross Income within the Philippines for that fiscal year
exceeds Pl0,000,000 00, additional securities with an actual market value
equivalent to two percent (2%) of the Increase In said gross income; and

U

If the actual market value of the securities deposit or financial Instruments
has decreased by st least ten percent (10%) from the time It was
deposited, additional securities with an actual market value that would
cover the decrease.

Thereafter, the Commission shall Issue a Certificate of deposit of additional
securities.

The following corporations are not required tn post securities deposit:
a. Foreign banking corporation including offshore

bankiiM units;

b. Foreign Insurance corporation;

32 Gross Income as contemplated under Section 143 of the Revised Corporation
Code and consistent with the definition of "Revenue" under Paragraph 7 of
Philippine Accounting Standard (PAS) 18, shall mean the *fln>g Inflow of
economic benefits during th* period arising In the course of th* ordinary activities
of on entity when thou Inflows result In Increases In equity, other than Increases
relating to contributions from equity participants'. No deductions shall be
allowed from the gross amount of Income or revenue, except those direct cost
and expense Items that may ba allowed by the Commission.
33 Foreign Corporation refers to licensee-foreign corporation (Philippine
Branch) as defined under Section 140 of the Revised Corporation Code of the

Philippines.
SECTION 4. ITEMS DEDUCTIBLE FROM THE GROSS INCOME COMPUTATION OF
CERTAIN TYPES OF BRANCH OFFICES

43 Sales Hatano, ABowaaces and Discounts
A contra revenue account that reports (1) merchandise returned by a
customer, and (2) the allowances granted tn a customer because the seller
shipped Improper or defective merchandise. These will reduce the seller's
accounts receivable and are subtracted from sales (along with sales discounts)
to arrive at net sales.

42 Direct Casts and Exp eases iacarrad with Foreign EntitiesandBihMd
Parties

The following direct costs and expenses Incurred with foreign entitles and
related parties are allowable deductions from Gross Income:

a. Cost of sales Incurred with foreign suppliers;
b. Direct costs of servlets attributable to related party transactions ostsMe
the Philippines;
c. Direct cost incurred attributable to foreign non-related party supplier;

d. Depreciation and amortttadon of tangible and Intangible assets used
directly for Its manufacturing operations can be deducted from Cross
Income provided the following co nditions are met
These expenses form part of the foreign corporation’s direct
L
costs or cost of sales;

2

c. Foreign non-stock corporations including foreign religious corporations;

lUSei:

n, acts

*<la Smtal, Ryjat O, 2OS

998

1000

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17
Appendix K

IL

These expenses retatr to assets that were imported or porchaaed

ML

These expenses retaxa to assets that had been paid In Ml bribe
foreign corporation; and

hr.

These expenses rotate to asaets that are not subject to any
mortgage. lien, or encumbrance.

S2J A branch office' Audited Specialor Annas! Income Statsmeat
•bowing separately the amounts of direct cost and expenres actually
Incurred in the Philippines and direct cost Incurred for the entire

from foreign vendors;

Philippine operations;

5-22 A notarised certincatMi of the company on tbs extent of fcs operation
I* the Philippines; and

a Other foreign related direct out and expense itaaus.
43 Docsassotary Rcquireaeats

The deductions under Sub-Section 42 above shall be allowed subject to the
submission of branch office' Audited Special or Annual Income Statement
showing separately the amounts of direct cost and expenses actually Incurred
with foreign entitles and foreign related parties.

SECTION 6. TYPES OF ACCEPTABLE SSCURITTB

44 Other RegulrosnoaCs
4.4.1 The solvency ratio of the foreign corporatioo-Phlllpplne Branch should
Indicate that It has sufficient assets to cover Its obligations which Indado
accrued expenses and payables arising Bum cost of sales or services entered
Into with Philippine residents and Government of the Republic of the
Philippines. Therefore. If the branch of licensee foreign company Is not sohreM
and not In sound financial condition, the Commission shah not alow the
deductions of the items under Sub-Section 42 above; and

4.42 The Property and Equipment should consist of large, permanent and aoatnoble Items. The buildings, equipment and facilities that make up these
assets may bo deemod as Immovable property, as they are attached to the
ground.

5.1 In the case of branch offices of forW^ airline companies, a modlftod formats la
the computation of their security deposits shall be adopted given their crass
border operattons, as follows:
Revenue Allocated to Philippine

Total Direct Operating Cost A

Operations

Expenses Incurred In the Philippines
Direct Operating Cost Incurred for
the Entire Philippine Operations

“

The following securities or any cxnblnation olthese kmdx of earnrttlaa are arrepMdetf
deposit to the Commission under Section 143 of the Revised Corporation Code
6.1 Government Debt lusLauaeats - Bonds or any Evidence of

•’

Indebtedness of
the Government of the Philippines, Its political subdivisions and
Instrumentalities, or of government-owned or controlled corporations and
entitles; and

62 Equity Instnuneats
1. Shares of stock In 'registered enterprises' under the Omnibus Investment
Code of 1987 (Executive Order No. 226);

2. Shares of stock In domestic corporations registered in the stock exchange;

SECT!ON 9. MOCHFUD FORMULA PM BRANCH OfFKXS OP FOREIGN AMUN
COMPANIB

Amount of Security Deposit

,.

“Ivtncy ratio of the branch office of foreign airline company
Indicate that It has suffidrat assets to cover Its obligations which
tadude accrued expenses and payables arising from cost of sales or
services entered Into with Philippine residents and Government of the
Republic of the Philippines Therefore, If the branch office of forelp
airline company Is not solvent and not In sound financial condition, ths
Commission shall not allow the adoption of a modified formula under Sub¬
Section 5.1 above.

3. Shares of stock In domestic insurance corporations under the supervision
and regulation of the Office of the Insurance CommMonen and
4. Shares of stock in backs licensed by the BangkoSetnra! ng Pilipinas (BSP).
Cash, money market placement time deposits and bank guaranty or standby letter of
credit and similar Instruments other than those tailing to the foregoing enumeration shall
not be acceptable as securities deposit

SECTION 7. PROCEDURES IN THE ACCEPTANCE Of DEPOSIT

Rate Derived Above x Cross Rsvemee
In Philippine Operations

The following procedures shall be observed in the nMunMinn and acceptance of
Securities deposit:

Revenue Allocated to PhUlpptoa
Operations x 254

52 la order to adopt the foregoing formula, the branch office should submit the

a A written application to deposit securities mandated by lew shall be filed with the
Commission, signed under oath by the resident agent or a duly authorised
representative of the Ikensee- foreign corporation;

1

b. A monitoring fee equivalent to one- tenth of one percent (1/10 of IM) of amount of
securities deposit but not lower than Ten Thousand Pesos (P10.0O0.00) but not
exceeding Fifty Thousand Pesos (PSO,000.00) per yoar shall be charged by the
3

1001

1002

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

Commission upon filing of said application to cow payment of space in the vault
within the Commission's secured premises at the Financial Management
Department- Treasury Division;
c The Commission shall determine whether or not the securities deposited are
acceptable, and Its actual market value Is at least P500.000.00;
d. The securities submitted to the Commission shall be Indorsed In blank;

a The Commission shall Issue a Certificate of Acceptance of Deposit containing an
inventory of such securities; and

I The branch office shall ensure that securities accepted remain unimpaired during
the period that the foreign corporation engages/ transacts business In the
Philippines.
SCHON B. SUBSTITUTION OP SECURITIES
Upon proper application, the Commission may allow the licensee-foreign corporation to
substitute other securities for those already on deposit as long as the licensee is solvent
Upon compliance with the requirements on the acceptance of deposits, the Cotntntasioo
shall Issue a Certificate of Substitution of Securities Deposit

SCHON 9. RELEAS OF SECURITIES
Upon proper application by the foreign corporation, the Commission may release part of
the securities deposited by the licensee under the following circumstances:

9.1 If there Is more than 10% decrease in grass income of the
Ucsasae-foroi^i
corporatio o;

9.2 If the actual market value of the total securities deposit has Increased by more
than 10% of the actual market value of the securities at the time they ware
deposited.

SEC MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 17
Appendix K
SECTIONIt RKH1RN OP SECtntTHCS
Whenever a foreign corporation decides to withdraw from business In the Philippines,
the Commission may return the securities deposited by such foreign corporation, subject
to the following conditions:

ILIA written application must be made therefore and signed under oath by Its
resident agent or by a duly authorized representative upon payment of a fee;
and

1L2 It has ceased to do business tn the Philippines by submitting a resolution of the
Board of Directors of the foreign corporation to effect that they desire to
withdraw the license to do business In the Philippines and that said company
has no liabilities to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, to the
public or private corporations. Philippine residents and or citizens.

71m Commission shall thereafter issue a Certificate of Return of Deposit
SECTION 12. FINES AND PENALHES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE
121 Failure to post the required amount of security deposit within the prescribed
period shall subject a foreign corporation to a dally penalty of equivalent to
1/100 of 1% of the amount of security deposit which should have been
additionally posted until the requirement Is folly complied.

12.2 A license granted to a foreign corporation shall be suspended or revoked for
failure to post securities deposit deepKa notice and hearing.

123 The fines and surcharges for late deposit of securities shall be as follows:

Initial Secsrities Deposit

Deposit

1- Violation

The Commission shall issue a Certificateof Partial Release of Securities.
However, the current balance of the security deposit should be maintained In
the
following circumstances:
93 If gross income Is equal to allowable deductions under Section ♦; or

9.4 If the gross Income after allowabJe dadoctions under Section 4 would result to a
negative amount

SCHON1«. INTERESTS OR DIVIDENDS

During the period of time that the securities are on deposit with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, the branch office of the licensed foreign corporation
(Philippine
Branch) shall be entitled to collect the Interest or dividends on the
said securities.

Additional Securities

2-Vtoiatioo

Bask fine of P10.000.00; Basic fine of P7.000.00;
and surcharge of F500 00 and surcharge of P500.00
per month of delay
per month of delay
Bask fine of P10.000.00; Basic fine of P7.000.0O; and
and surcharge of
surcharge of
Pl,000.00 per month of
Pl.000.00 per month of

delay
delay
Bask fine of P10.0OO0O; Basic fine of P7,000.00; and
and surcharge of
surcharge of
Pl,SOO.00 per month of
P1.S00.00 per month of
delay
delay
A fraction of a month shall be considered as one month for purposes of
computation of the surcharge.

3- Violation

12.4 The above-mentioned penalties shall be without prejudice to the filing of
criminal charges against the persons responsible for the violation, as
provided for in Section 170 of the Revised Corporation Code of the
Philippines, which states that;

•Section 170. Other Violations of the Code; Separate
- Violations ofany of the other provisions of

I tahilky

1003

1004

THE REVISED CORPORATION CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES

this Code or its amendments not otherwise spedflcally
penalised therein shall be punished by a fine of not Jess
than Ten thousand pesos (PIO,000.00) but not more
than One million pesos (Pl.OOO,000.00). If the
violation is committed by a corporation, the same may,
after notice and bearing, be dissolved In appropriate
proceedings before the Commission: Provided, that
such dissolution shall not predude the Institution of
appropriate action against the director, trustee or
officer of the corporation responsible for said
violation: Provided, further, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to repeal the other causes
for dissolution of a corporation provided In this Code.

Liability for any of the foregoing offenses shall be
separate from any other administrative. dvil or
criminal liability under this Code and other laws.

SCHON 13. REPEALING CLAUSE
This Circular supersedes the Memorandum Circular Na 2 Series of 2012 "Guidelines oa
Securities Deposit of Branch Offices of Foreign Corporations'. All other related rules
and/or regulations of the Commission, whkh are not consistent herewith are hereby
repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 14. BFFBCTTVHY CLAUSE
This Circular shall take effeci fifteen (15) deye tpon pthUcetinn.

Signed this 31day of July 2019, Pasay Qty, Philippines.

