J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS
AND CASES
THIRD EDITION

2021

IGNATIUS MICHAEL D. INGLES

p
s

4-

I

..

Published & Distributed by

REX Book Store
856 Nlcanor Reyes, Sr. St.
Tel. Nos.: 8736-0567/8733-6746
2161-65 Freedom Bldg., C.M. Recto Avenue
Tel. Nos.: 8522-4521/8522-4107
Manila, Philippines
www.rex.com.ph

I

$

- • ?-Fal

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

1

J9JC9B0M

This third edition includes Supreme Court decisions and relevant
BIR issuances up to September 2020. It also incorporates the TRAIN
amendments into the main text of the book, finally putting to rest all
the questions I've happily received for the past two years of "Kasama
na po ba yung TRAIN?" I'm pleased to say, "Yes! Kasama na\" It also
adds suggested answers to Bar Exam questions from 2017 to 2019.
I've also added some Quick Hits Notes on Percentage Tax, Excise Tax,
and Documentary Stamp Tax for lagniappe.

Updating the book in the middle of the pandemic has been a
weird and surreal experience. Hopefully, by the time this book comes
out, we've flattened the curve, saved as many lives as we could've,
and learned a thing or two about effective leadership in turbulent
times.
Pasig City
September 2020

iii

J9JC9B0M

iv

J9JC9B0M

ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR
THE THIRD EDITION
Tax Made Less Taxing: Threepeat would not have been possible
without the help and support of the following:

•

My tax support group, Attys. Adan Delamide, Alex
Ner, T.J. Rocamora, Paolo Santos, Camille Lim-Go, and
Gia Geraldez-Abarquez, who are ever so kind to reply to
my messages on Facebook or WhatsApp;

•

Dean Lily K. Gruba and Atty. Michael Snoops Montero, my
tax idols and frequent ka-kwento about basketball and
volleyball;

•

Everyone who used the Second Edition and the TRAIN
Supplement, for the continued patronage that has made
this book a viable business option for my publisher;

•

Rex Book Store, Inc., for the belief and the Investment in
a young lawyer;

•

My students in the Ateneo Law School, for constantly
pushing me to be better—and for asking really hard
questions and reading the originals;

•

The Law Firm of Ingles, Laurel, and Calderon, for the
Invaluable support and flexibility;

•

My minions, Fabio, Elton, Sassy, and Elfie, and particularly
Elvis and Pierre, whom we miss dearly;

•

My parents and my brother, for the unconditional love and
support;

•

My wife and my son, who are just the absolute best people
In the world—one of the silver linings of the pandemic has
been being stuck at home with them; and

•

God.

f

Ad majorem Dei gloriam.

v

J9JC9B0M

Vi

J9JC9B0M

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
For those who like to keep count, this second edition includes
Supreme Court decisions and relevant BIR issuances up to June
2017, adds suggested answers to Bar Exam questions from 2014
to 2016, incorporates updates from new laws like R.A. 10653,
corrects annoying typographical errors (which I apologize for), and
revamps the chapter on Tariffs and Customs with the new Customs
Modernization and Tariffs Act (R.A. 10863).
Makati City
November 2017

vil

J9JC9B0M

I

viii

J9JC9B0M

ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR
THE SECOND EDITION
Tax Made Less Taxing: Episode Two (as I'd like to call it.) would
not have been possible without the help and support of the following:

•

Attys. Michael Snoops Montero, Adan Delamide, Raymond
Roque, Alex Ner, T.J. Rocamora, Paolo Santos, Camille Lim,
and Gia Geraldez-Abarquez, who were all kind enough to
entertain my tax and customs questions while making this
book;

•

The Ateneo de Manila University and Ateneo School of Law
for selecting me as the recipient of the Nippon Foundation
Professorial Chair for 2016-2017—this updated edition is
the result of the generous grant;

•

Everyone, especially the students, who bought and used
the first edition—this second edition would literally not be
possible if the first edition had not sold and had turned out
to be a magnificent dud;

•

Rex Book Store, Inc. which gave this reviewer a home;

•

Mang Nats of the Ateneo School of Law Rex Book Store
branch;

•

Folks on Facebook and on Twitter, who kept me pleasantly
distracted with words of affirmation and funny gifs',

•

The Law Firm of Ingles, Laurel, and Calderon, for giving
me the valuable resources of time and flexibility (not to
mention access to an online legal database);

•

My minions, who now include Sassy the rescued pitbull;

•

My parents and my brother, for their love and encouragement;

•

My wife, for her unending patience and support and the
amazing dakgalbi that she can whip up at a moment's
notice; and

•

God.

Ad majorem Dei gloriam.
ix

f

r.

I

J9JC9B0M

X

J9JC9B0M

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
This work was and is the child of necessity. When I was a law
student in the Ateneo de Manila College of Law studying taxation law,
the biggest challenge I faced was finding study materials that had
everything. By everything, I mean the codal provisions, relevant BIR
issuances, and Supreme Court doctrines. As a student who absolutely
detested studying in a desk with gazillions of paper strewn in front
of him, I knew I had to compile everything into one study material,
lest a) coffee shop baristas shoo me away for making a total mess on
their small tables and b) I go crazy come exam time.
What you are holding right now is the "new and improved"
version of the notes I made and used as a student, a bar candidate,
and a tax practitioner. As "Tax Made Less Taxing" is the combined
work of a nerdy student, a nervous bar candidate, and a newbie
practitioner, I believe it will likewise be helpful for the law students,
the bar candidates, and the tax practitioners. "Tax Made Less Taxing"
will appeal to law students who need examples to thresh out mindboggling tax concepts. It will appeal to bar candidates who need a
comprehensive reviewer with on-point doctrines and enumerations.
And it will (hopefully) appeal to tax practitioners as an adequate
research material.

But as the name suggests, this work Is a reviewer. It is not
a treatise on taxation; it will not include groundbreaking analysis
of tax concepts and problems. It will also not include documentary
stamp and percentages taxes (which are excluded in the Bar Exams).
I suggest readers supplement their curiosity and interest with other
textbooks. I likewise suggest readers — specifically, the law students
who are studying tax for the first time — to read the original texts
of the Supreme Court cases. As I have repeatedly told my students,
there is no substitute for reading the "originals"; the pain that comes
with pouring over the words of the Court often leads to a deeper
understanding and easier memorization. More importantly, it leads
to critical analysis, which, in turn, leads to creative thinking and
Innovation.

The goal of this book Is to make tax easier to digest. People find
it difficult to understand tax and that is completely understandable.
Tax is not the most exciting of subjects, and paying tax is neither
exciting. Hence, I have endeavored to break down the codal provisions
Xi

J9JC9B0M

and concepts without sacrificing the essence of the law and to include
fun examples to lighten the mood.
Anyway, enough of this babble, get those highlighters out and
start reading. Do not be scared of tax; try it out. Hopefully, after a
few readings, tax will be less taxing for you. Who knows? It might
even be fun.
Pasig City and Boston, Massachusetts
November 2014

xil

I

J9JC9B0M

ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR THE FIRST EDITION
This book would not have been possible were it not for the help
and guidance of the following:
•

Atty. Michael Snoops Montero, my tax professor who made
tax less taxing for everyone (OBF1);

•

Atty. Serafin U. Salvador, Jr., my boss, the Jedi Master of
tax;

•

Dean Lily K. Gruba, who I worked with for the Ateneo Bar
Operations for Tax;

•

My officemates from Salvador and Associates, who
continue to teach me the ropes and are repositories of tax
knowledge;

•

My friends, blockmates, and batchmates in Ateneo Law
School, who encouraged me to make the reviewers in
the first place (the encouragement increased as exams
neared) and whose kind words of affirmation I still look
back upon today;

•

Elvis, Fabio, Pierre, and Elton, my minions, who make me
happy;

•

My parents, for showing me anything is possible since
1984;

•

My wife, whose wonderful name Is overshadowed only by
her beauty, support, love, and patience; and

•

Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior, for I am able to do
all things through Him who strengthens me (Philippians
4:13).

Ad majorem Del gloriam.

xlii

J9JC9B0M

1

xiv

J9JC9B0M

DEDICATION
For my loving parents, my lovely wife, my lovable son.

For Elvis and Pierre.

XV

J9JC9B0M

xvi

J9JC9B0M

CONTENTS
General Principles of Taxation
A.

B.

C.
D.
E.

F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.

Definition
Nature and Characteristics of Taxation and Taxes...
Attributes of a Sound Taxation System
Tax as Distinguished from Other Exactions
Impact and Incidence of Taxation (Direct and
Indirect Taxes)
Inherent Limitations on the Power of Taxation
Constitutional Limitations on the Power of Taxation
Double Taxation
Forms of Escape from Taxation
Exemption from Taxation
Other Doctrines

1
1
3
4

7
8
11
21
23
26
29

Income Tax

Income Tax Systems
B. Income, In General
C. General Principles of Income Taxation
D. Situs of Taxation
E. Income Tax on Individuals
F. Partnerships
G. Corporations
H. Estates and Trusts
I. Taxable Income
.
J. Gross Income
.
K. Deductions
Capital Gains and Losses (Sale or Exchange
of Property)
........................................
M. Determination of Gain or Loss from Sale or
Transfer of Property
N. Fringe Benefits Tax
O. Withholding Tax
Returns and Payments of Tax
P.
A.

32
33
35
36
46
80
84
125
131
132
157
206

217
227
236
253

Estate Tax

A.
B.

Principles and Definition
Rates and Value

271
271
xvii

J9JC9B0M

I

C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

I.

J.

Gross Estate
Computation for the Net Estate
Net State Computation of Married Persons
Gross Estate
Exemption from Estate Tax
Estate Tax Returns.......................................
Payment of Tax
Miscellaneous Provisions

272
283
296
298
300
302
304

Donor's Tax

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

H.
I.
J.

K.
L.
M.

In General
Gross Gifts
Transfer for Insufficient Consideration
Cancellation of Indebtedness
Value of the Gifts
Deductions from Gross Gifts
Resident or Citizen Donors
Deductions from the Gross Gifts by Husband
and Wife
Deductions for a Nonresident, Not Citizen Donor
Other Deductions
Exemptions Under Special Laws
Tax Rates Payable by Donor
Donor's Tax Return
Donor's Tax Credit

307
309
311
312
312
313

316
317
317
318
319
320

Value-Added Tax

A. In General
B. Normal VAT Transactions (12%)
C. Zero-rated/Effectively Zero-rated Transactions

D. Exempt Transactions
E. Input VAT
F. Transitional and Presumptive Input Tax Credits
.
and Withholding VAT
G. VAT Refunds or Tax Credits
H. VAT on Real Properties
I. Administrative Provisions

323
329
342
350
362

369
372
380
384

Quick Hits Notes

A.
B.

Percentage Tax and Excise Tax
Documentary Stamp Tax

393
396

Government's Remedies

398
411

A. Powers of the BIR
B. Tax Assessment...
xviii

J9JC9B0M

C.
D.
E.

Imposition of Penalties
Criminal Action and Other Penalties
Power of Collection

426
437
456

Taxpayer's Remedies

A.
B.

481
496

Protesting an Assessment
Claiming a Refund

Court of Tax Appeals
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

A.
B.

Jurisdiction of the CTA
Procedure in Civil and Criminal Cases

509
518

Local Government Taxation
A. Principles, Definitions, and Limitations
B. Taxing Powers of LGUs
C. Situs of Local Taxes
D. Collection of Local Taxes
E. Retirement of Business
F. Remedies for Collection of Local Taxes
G. Exemption from Local Tax
H. Prescriptive Periods and Taxpayer's Remedies
in Local Taxation

526
539
557
562
564
565
572
575

Real Property Taxation
A. General Principles and Definitions
B. Real Property and Machinery
C. Appraisal and Assessment
D. Imposition of Real Property Tax and Special Levies
E. Exemption from Real Property Tax
F. Collection of RPT and LGL) Remedies for Collection,
..............................................
G. Taxpayer's Remedies
H. Disposition and Allotment of Local Taxes

584
587
590
601
605
614
621
627

Tariff and Customs Code of 1978,
As Amended by the Customs Modernization
and Tariff Act (R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)
A. Tariff and Duties
B. Requirements of Importation
C. Accrual and Payment of Tax and Duties
D. Unlawful Importation or Exportation ....
E. Remedies

xix

634
645
652
672
680

J9JC9B0M

1

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION
A.

Definition

•

Taxation is an enforced proportional contribution, imposed by the
State in its sovereign capacity, to support the government.

•

Three elements of taxation:

1.

It is an enforced proportional contribution from persons and
properties.

2.

It is imposed by the State by virtue of its sovereignty.

3.

It is levied for the support of the government. (PCGG v.
Cojuangco, G.R. No. 147062, December 14, 2001)

Moreover, a tax is a pecuniary burden.

XYZ Corporation manufactures glass panels and is almost at the point
of insolvency. It has no more cash and all it has are unsold glass
panels. It received an assessment from the BIR for deficiency Income
taxes. It wants to pay but due to lack of cash, it seeks permission to
pay in kind with glass panels. Can it do so? (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Of course not. Tax is generally a pecuniary
burden. You can't pay with glass panels.

B.

Nature and Characteristics of Taxation and Taxes

The power of taxation is inherent to the State (along with the
power of eminent domain and police power); hence, the right of
the State to impose taxes exists apart from the Constitution.

o

The State Is free to select the subjects of taxation, and the
Court has repeatedly held that inequalities which result from
a singling out of one particular class for taxation or exemption
Infringe no constitutional limitation. (Lutz v. Araneta, G.R.
No. L-7859, December 22, 1955)

o

As the State has the power to determine the subjects of
taxation, it Is also free to select those who will be exempt
from taxation. (Gomez v. Palomar, G.R. No. L-23645, October
29, 1968)

1

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

2

Lifeblood theory: Taxes are the lifeblood of the State, through
which the government and its agencies continue to operate and
with which the State effects its functions for the welfare of its
constituents. (Commissioner of Internal Revenue [CIR] v. Court
of Tax Appeals, G.R. No. 106611, July 21, 1994)
O

Taxes are what we pay for a civilized society. Without taxes,
the State would be paralyzed. (CIR v. Algue, G.R. No.
L-28896, February 17, 1988)

Hence, because of the lifeblood theory...
O

Injunction generally does not lie against the collection of taxes
(CIR v. Cebu Portland Cement Company, G.R. No. L-29059,
December 15, 1987);

O

The State is not estopped from collecting taxes by the
mistakes or errors of its agents (Philippine Guaranty Co., Inc.
v. CIR, G.R. No. L-22074, April 30, 1965);

■

O

The no-estoppel rule is not absolute. Hence, when the
taxpayer only raises the defense of prescription only on
appeal and the State does not question the timeliness
of the defense, the State can be bound by the acts of
its agents. (China Banking Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No.
172509, February 4, 2015, where it also took the BIR
more than 12 years to collect the tax,)

Laws exempting subjects from taxation are strictly construed
against the taxpayer.

However, even with the lifeblood theory, the power of taxation
must still be exercised reasonably and in accordance with the law
and prescribed procedure. (CIR v. Algue, G.R. L-28896, February
17, 1988)
O

Moreover, while the State has the power to make a reasonable
classification for taxation purposes, it must not be prompted
by a spirit of hostility, or at the very least discrimination
that has no reasonable basis. (Reyes v. Almanzor, G.R. Nos.
L-49839-46, April 26, 1991)

O

The power of taxation is sometimes also called the power
to destroy. Therefore, it should be exercised with caution to
minimize injury to the proprietary rights of a taxpayer. It must
be exercised fairly, equally and uniformly, lest the tax collector
kill the "hen that lays the golden egg." (Philippine Health
Care Providers, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 167330, September 18,
2009)

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

•

3

Taxes are not political in nature and as such are continued in
force during the period of enemy occupation. Such tax laws are
deemed to be the laws of the occupied territory and not of the
occupying enemy.
O

Hence, tax laws were considered effective during the Japanese
occupation. (Hiiado v. CIR, G.R. No. L-9408, October 31,
1956)

Briefly explain the following doctrines: lifeblood doctrine; necessity
theory; benefits received principle; and, doctrine of symbiotic
relationship. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The lifeblood doctrine states that taxes are the
lifeblood of the state; without taxes, the government will not operate.
The necessity theory states that the government cannot continue to
operate without taxes to pay for expenses; hence, it can compel its
citizens to pay up. The benefits received principle states that taxes
are what we pay for a civilized society—we pay, the government
protects. The symbiotic relationship doctrine states that taxpayers
and the government have reciprocal obligations: the taxpayer to pay
taxes and the government to provide protection and benefits.

c.

Attributes of a Sound Taxation System

The attributes of a sound taxation system are:
o

Fiscal adequacy

•

O

o

The sources of revenue should be adequate to meet
government expenditures and their variations. (Chavez
v. Ongpin, G.R. No. 76778, June 6, 1990)

Administrative Feasibility
•

The tax system should be capable of being effectively
administered and enforced with the least inconvenience
to the taxpayer.

•

However, even If the imposition is burdensome to the
taxpayer, the tax imposition Is not necessarily invalid
unless some aspect of it is shown to violate any law or
the Constitution. (Diaz v. Secretary of Finance, G.R. No.
193007, July 19, 2011, where the VAT on toll way fees
was questioned as burdensome)

Theoretical Justice
The tax system should be fair to the average taxpayer
and based upon the ability to pay.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

4

Explain the principles of a sound tax system. (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: A sound tax system is FAT. There are three
principles of a sound tax system. First is fiscal adequacy, meaning
the sources of revenue must be adequate to cover government
expenditures. Second is administrative feasibility, meaning the
system should at least be capable of being effectively administered.
Third is theoretical justice; it should be fair and be based on a
taxpayer's ability to pay.

Tax as Distinguished from Other Exactions

D.

It is important to differentiate taxes from other exactions,
especially when it comes to problems and issues on double
taxation, tax exemptions, the jurisdiction of the Court of Tax
Appeals, and taxpayer remedies such as refund claims.

o

Simply, if an exaction is not a tax, then the defense of a
taxpayer of double taxation will necessarily fail.

o

In the same manner, a tax-exempt individual or corporation
Is generally only exempt from paying taxes; hence, if the
exaction is not a tax, then the individual or corporation must
still pay the exaction.

As against llcense/regulatory fees

Source
Purpose
Object
As to the
amount

___________ TAX________

______ LICENSE FEE_______

Taxing power_________
Raise revenue________
Persons, property and
privilege______________
No limit

Police power of the State
Regulation____________ _____
Right to exercise a
privilege____________________
Only necessary to carry
out regulation

If generating revenue is the primary purpose and regulation is
merely Incidental, the imposition is a tax; but if regulation is the
primary purpose, the fact that revenue is incidentally obtained
does not make it a tax.

o

For example, the Universal Charge imposed through the
Electric Power Industry Reform Act (EPIRA) was held to be a
regulatory fee as it was imposed to ensure the viability of the
Philippines' electric power industry. (Gerochi v. Department
of Energy, G.R. No. 159796, July 17, 2007)

o

Fees for the construction of special projects such as cell sites
were held as regulatory fees because the main purpose of
the ordinance imposing such fees was to regulate certain

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

5

construction activities like telecommunication towers and
telephone lines. (Smart Communications v. Municipality of
Malvar, Batangas, G.R. No. 204429, February 18, 2014,
reiterated in Cagayan de Oro v. Cagayan Electric Power and
Light Co., G.R. No. 224825, October 17, 2018)

The power of taxation can be used as an implement of police
power (i.e., it can also be used to regulate certain industries such
as the sugar industry or power industry); however, if the purpose
is primarily revenue, or if revenue is at least one of the real and
substantial purposes, then the exaction is properly called a tax.
(Planters Products, Inc. v. Fertiphi! Corporation, G.R. No. 166066,
March 14, 2008)
O

The Socialized Housing Tax (SHT) imposed by Quezon City
is an example of a tax that is used to implement the state's
police power. (Ferrer v. City Mayor Bautista, G.R. No. 210551,
June 30, 2015, where the SC upheld the validity of the SHT
which it found to serve the regulatory purpose of removing
slum areas in QC)

To be considered a license fee, the imposition must relate to
an occupation or activity that so engages the public interest in
health, morals, safety, and development as to require regulation
for the protection and promotion of such public Interest.
o

The fee imposed by a city on liquor vendors for the privilege
of selling liquor is a license fee. It is not a tax; hence, the
liquor vendors cannot state that they are subject to double
taxation. (Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinas v. City
of Manila, G.R. No. L-16619, June 29, 1963)

o

Building fees are not taxes or impositions upon property, but
regulatory fees imposed by a city for the activity of building
or repairing a structure. Hence, a foundation which is exempt
from taxes cannot claim that It is exempt from the payment
of building fees, as these are not taxes in the first place.
(Angeles University Foundation v. City of Angeles, G.R. No.
189999, June 27, 2012)

The Imposition must also bear a reasonable relation to the
probable expenses of regulation, taking into account not only the
costs of direct regulation but also its incidental consequences as
well.

o

A charge of a fixed sum which bears no relation at all to the
cost of inspection and regulation may well be considered a
tax. (Progressive Development Corporation v. Quezon City,
G.R. No. L-36081, April 24, 1989)

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

6

•

O

Hence, exacting a certain amount of money as employee's fees
from aliens who have already been cleared for employment
has no justification as a regulatory measure and is actually a
tax under the guise of regulation. (Villegas v. Hiu Chiong Tsai
Po Ho, G.R. No. L-29646, November 10, 1978)

o

Fees imposed on a per liter basis on fuel entering the Clark
Special Economic Zone were held to be regulatory fees
because there was a reasonable relation between the high
volume of fuel brought into the zone and the greater extent
of supervision and inspection needed to monitor the fuel.
(Chevron Philippines, Inc. v. Bases Conversion Development
Authority, G.R. No. 173863, September 15, 2010)

Exactions which are collected by agencies other than the Bureau
of Internal Revenue can still be considered taxes if the law
specifically states that these exactions are taxes. (Agusan Wood
Industries v. DENR, G.R. No. 234531, July 10, 2019, where the
taxpayer filed a refund claim for forest charges with the collecting
agency DENR, which the SC stated was the wrong agency to file
with as the forest charges were in fact taxes,)

As against special assessments
TAX

SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

Imposed on

Persons, properties,
etc.

Only on land

Why imposed

Regardless
of public
improvement

Public improvement
benefits the land and
increases its value

Purpose

Support of
government

Contribution to cost of
public improvement

When imposed

Regular exaction

Exceptional as to time
and locality

Basis

Necessity

Benefits obtained

Under the Local Government Code, local government units may
impose a special levy on lands specially benefited by public works
projects or improvements funded by the local government unit.

The purpose of special levies/assessments is to finance the
improvement of particular properties, with the benefits of the
improvement accruing or inuring to the owners thereof who, after
all, pay the assessment. (Republic of the Philippines v. BacolodMurcia Milling Co., G.R. No. L-19824, July 9, 1966)

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

7

As against toll fees
TAX

TOLL FEES

Imposed by

State

Private persons______________

Purpose

Raise revenues

Reimbursement of costs and
expenses incurred in the
construction of toll
ways, and to assure
reasonable margin of income

Basis

State's sovereign
power

Attribute of ownership

Fees paid by the public to toll way operators for the use of toll
ways are not taxes. These are exactions which end up as earnings
of toll way operators, not the government. (Diaz v. Secretary of
Finance, G.R. No. 193007, July 19, 2011)

E.

Impact and Incidence of Taxation (Direct and Indirect
Taxes)
Impact of taxation: point where the tax is originally Imposed
or the one on whom the tax is formally assessed (the statutory
taxpayer in most cases)
Incidence of taxation: point on whom the tax burden finally rests

It is essential to know where the impact of taxation lies because
it generally determines:

o

The proper party to claim a refund of erroneously imposed
indirect taxes, and

o

Whether the indirect taxes can be passed on to an exempt
buyer.

Based on the possibility of shifting the incidence of taxation,
taxes may be classified into direct and indirect taxes. (CIR v.
PLOT, G.R. No. 140230, December 15, 2005)
o

Direct taxes are those that are exacted from the very person
who should pay them.

•

They are impositions for which a taxpayer Is directly liable
on the transaction or business he is engaged in.

•

Example: income tax, transfer taxes (estate tax and
donor's tax), residence tax (cedula)

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

8

Indirect taxes are those that are demanded in the first
instance from or are paid by one person, with the expectation
and intention that he can shift the burden to someone else.

O

•

Indirect taxes are taxes wherein the liability for the
payment of the tax falls on one person but the burden
thereof can be shifted or passed on to another person,
such as when the tax is imposed upon goods before
reaching the consumer who ultimately pays for it.

•

When the seller passes on the tax to his buyer, he, in
effect, shifts the tax burden, not the liability to pay it,
to the purchaser as part of the price of goods sold or
services rendered.

•

Hence, the tax-exempt status of a buyer will not affect
the liability of a seller for the indirect tax as the seller is
the taxpayer statutorily liable for the payment of the tax.

■

Example: VAT, percentage taxes

F.

Inherent Limitations on the Power of Taxation

•

While the power of taxation is inherent to a State, such power is
still subject to limitations. If no limitations were imposed on the
power, then the State would be dangerous, rampant in wielding
such power. Let's begin with the inherent limitations on the power
of taxation.

1.

Taxes must be exacted for a PUBLIC PURPOSE.

•

Money raised by taxation can be spent only for public purposes
and not for the advantage of private individuals. (Pascua! v.
Secretary of Public Works, G.R. No. L-10405, December 29,
1960)

•

Public purpose may legally exist even if the motive which impelled
the legislature to impose the tax was to favor one industry over
another. (Tio v. Videogram Regulatory Board, G.R. No. 75697,
June 19,1987, where the favored industry was the video industry)

2.

The power to tax is INHERENTLY LEGISTLATIVE in nature.
General rule: The power to tax is purely legislative and cannot
be delegated to other branches of the government. (Pepsi-Cola
Bottling Company v. Municipality of Tanauan, G.R. No. L-31156,
February 27, 1976)

o

EXCEPT:
•

Delegation to local governments (as local governments
are granted the autonomous authority to create their own
sources of revenue and levy taxes)

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

9

Delegation to the President (such as the grant to the
President to impose tariff rates within the bounds
sanctioned by the Customs and Tariffs Modernization Act)

Delegation to administrative authorities (such as the
authority to fix rates within limits specified by the law)
3.

GOVERNMENT entities, agencies,
generally exempt from taxation.

and

instrumentalities

are

There is no point in national and local government taxing each
other, unless a sound and compelling policy requires such transfer
of public funds from one government pocket to another.
o

4.

Note, however, that while government instrumentalities are
exempt from real property taxes, government-owned or
controlled corporations are not exempt from real property
taxes. {Manila International Airport Authority [MIAA] v. City
of Paranaque, G.R. No. 15560, July 20, 2006, where the
MIAA was considered a government instrumentality and thus
exempt from the payment of real property taxes imposed by
Paranaque)

INTERNATIONAL COMITY

Tax treaties are entered into to minimize the harshness of
international double taxation.
O

Laws and Issuances must ensure that the reliefs granted
under tax treaties are accorded to the parties entitled thereto.

The obligation to comply with a tax treaty must take precedence
over an administrative issuance. An administrative issuance such
as a Revenue Memorandum Order (RMO) should not operate to
divest entitlement to a relief granted by a tax treaty.
O

The denial of a relief based on a tax treaty due to the failure
of a taxpayer to comply with a RMO would Impair the value
of the tax treaty and the State's duty to comply in good faith
with the tax treaty. {Deutsche Bank AG Manila v. CIR, G.R.
No. 188550, August 19, 2013, where the SC held that the
non-compliance of the taxpayer of a period prescribed by the
RMO should not divest it of its relief based on the RP-Germany
Tax Treaty; reiterated in CBK Power Company Limited v. CIR,
G.R. No. 193383, January 14, 2015)

However, tax exemptions based on International agreements
are still subject to the rule "laws granting taxing exemption are
construed strictly against the taxpayer." {Sea-Land Services, Inc.
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 122605, April 30, 2001, where the
Court held that the transport of household goods of US military

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

10

personnel was not included in the tax exemptions granted by the
RP-US Military Bases Agreement)

•

An Exchange of Notes is considered an executive agreement
binding on states. Hence, an Exchange of Notes between the
Philippines and Japan which states that the Philippine Government
will assume taxes initially to be paid by Japanese firms should
be respected. (Mitsubishi Corporation-Manila Branch v. CIR, G.R.
No. 175772, June 5, 2017)

5.

Taxes are limited to the State's TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION

•

The power to tax is limited to the territorial jurisdiction of the
State.

o

EXCEPT where privity of relationship exists between the State
and the taxpayer. In these cases, the State can exercise its
taxing powers over the taxpayer even outside its territory
(such as the taxation of resident citizens for income from
sources worldwide).

•

As the State can exercise its power to tax within its territorial
jurisdiction, it can tax sales within foreign military zones as these
military zones are not considered foreign territory. (Reagan v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-26379, December 27, 1969)

•

The State can tax a transaction if substantial elements of the
contract are situated in the Philippines. (Manila Electric Company
v. Yatco, G.R. No. 45697, November 1, 1939)

•

In CIR v. Marubeni (G.R. No. 137377, December 18, 2001),
involved were turnkey contracts relating to the installation of
a wharf complex and an ammonia storage complex in Leyte.
Marubeni Corporation was a resident foreign corporation. The
Supreme Court held that the turnkey contracts were actually
divisible contracts which each had different stages, with each
stage having a different tax implication.

o

For the stages involving the design, engineering, and
procurement of equipment and supplies, these were all
considered outside the hands of the Philippine taxing authority
as these were all done in Japan.

o

For the stages involving the actual installation and
construction, these were all considered within the jurisdiction
of the Philippine taxing authority as the construction and
installation of works were done within the Philippines.

o

The implication here is that if you can argue that the contract
is divisible, you can also argue that some stages of the
contract were not sourced here in the Philippines, and thus
beyond the taxing jurisdiction of the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

O

11

This would be huge, considering that if the contract were
considered indivisible, then everything would be considered
situated here in the Philippines and thus the whole contract
would be fully taxed.

Jennifer is the only daughter of Janina who was a resident in Los
Angeles, California, U.S.A. Janina died in the U.S. leaving to Jennifer
one million shares of Sun Life (Philippines), Inc., a corporation
organized and existing under the laws of the Republic of the
Philippines. Said shares were held in trust for Janina by the Corporate
Secretary of Sun Life and the latter can vote the shares and receive
dividends for Janina. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of the U.S.
taxed the shares on the ground that Janina was domiciled in the U.S.
at the time of her death.

a)

Can the CIR of the Philippines also tax the same shares? Explain.

b)

Explain the concept of double taxation. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a) Yes, the CIR can also tax the shares. Generally, the state has the
power to tax subjects within its territorial jurisdiction. An example of
this power is how the Tax Code states that a decedent's gross estate
subject to estate tax includes properties located in the Philippines,
whether the decedent is a citizen, a resident alien, or a non-resident
alien. Properties In the Philippines include shares in corporations
organized here, such as Sun Life (Philippines), Inc. Hence, the CIR
can tax these shares.
b) There are two kinds of double taxation. The first Is double
taxation in the broad sense or indirect double taxation; this occurs
when a pecuniary burden is imposed on the same subject matter by
two different taxing authorities. The problem above Is an example
of indirect double taxation, as the tax is imposed by two different
taxing authorities (the US and the Philippines).

The second Is double taxation in the strict sense or direct double
taxation; this occurs when the same property Is taxed twice by
the same taxing authority for the same purpose within the same
jurisdiction during the same taxing period, with the two taxes of the
same kind of character. This is prohibited.

G.

Constitutional Limitations on the Power of Taxation

The State's power of taxation is also limited by the Constitution.
Let's go through the limitations one by one.

1.

Due Process

Article III, Section 1. No person shall be deprived of life,
liberty, or property without due process of law, nor shall any
person be denied the equal protection of the laws.

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

12

•

Tax laws and their enforcement must comply with substantive
and procedural due process.
O

0

Substantive: the law must be reasonable and must be for a
public purpose

Procedural: there must be no arbitrariness in the assessment
and collection; the prescribed rules must be followed before
assessment and collection

2.

Equal Protection of Laws

•

There is valid discrimination when the classification:
0

Rests on substantial distinctions;

o

Is germane to the purpose of the law;

o

Not limited to existing conditions only; and

0

Applies equally to all members of the same class.

•

Equal protection guarantee does not require territorial uniformity
of laws. As long as there are actual and material differences
between territories, there is no violation of the constitutional
clause. (Tiu v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 127410, January 20,
1999, where the Court said that there are substantial differences
between businesses located within a fenced-in area of special
economic zone and those located without)

•

Tax exemptions have never violated the equal protection clause,
as the Legislature has the inherent power not only to select the
subjects of taxation but to grant exemptions. (CIR v. Lingayen
Gulf Electric Power Co., Inc., G.R. No. L-23771, August 4, 1988)
The municipality of San Isidro passed an ordinance imposing a tax on
Installation managers. At that time, there was only one installation
manager in the municipality; thus, only he would be liable for the
tax. Is this constitutional? (2013 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Yes, it is constitutional. It complies with the
requisites of equal protection. It is not limited to existing conditions
only, as future Installation managers will be subject to the tax. (Shell
v. Vano, G.R. No. L-6093, February 24, 1954)
Heeding the pronouncement of the President that the worsening
traffic condition in the metropolis was a sign of economic progress,
the Congress enacted Republic Act No. 10701 (RA 10701), also
known as An Act Imposing a Transport Tax on the Purchase of
Private Vehicles.

Under RA 10701, buyers of private vehicles are required to pay a
transport tax equivalent to 5% of the total purchase price per vehicle

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

13

purchased. RA 10701 provides that the Land Transportation Office
(LTO) shall not accept for registration any new vehicles without proof
of payment of the 5°/o transport tax. RA 10701 further provides that
existing owners of private vehicles shall be required to pay a tax
equivalent to 5% of the current fair market value of every vehicle
registered with the LTO. However, RA 10701 exempts owners of
public utility vehicles and the Government from the coverage of the
5°/o transport tax.
A group of private vehicle owners sue on the ground that the law is
unconstitutional for contravening the Equal Protection Clause of the
Constitution.
Rule on the constitutionality and validity of RA 10701. (2017 Bar
Exam)
Suggested answer: This is constitutional. It complies with the
requisites of equal protection. There is a substantial distinction
between private vehicles vs. public utility vehicles and government
vehicles. Further, taxing private vehicles and not PUVs is germane
to the purpose of the law to alleviate traffic because it'll incentivize
the use of PUVs which can carry more people per vehicle compared
to private vehicles.

3.

Religious Freedom
Article III, Section S. No law shall be made respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.
The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship,
without discrimination or preference, shall forever be allowed. No
religious test shall be required for the exercise of civil or political
rights.

The constitutional guaranty of the free exercise and enjoyment
of religious profession and worship carries with It the right to
disseminate religious information.
o

Any restraints of such right can only be justified like other
restraints of freedom of expression on the grounds that there
is a clear and present danger of any substantive evil which
the State has the right to prevent.

o

Hence, a tax imposed on the distribution and sale of bibles
and other religious literature is invalid. (American Bible
Society v. City of Manila, G.R. No. L-9637, April 30, 1957)

Note, however, that under Section 30, National Internal Revenue
Code of the Philippines (NIRC), income of religious organizations
from activities conducted for profit or from any of their property
(regardless of disposition of such income) Is subject to income
tax.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

14

Non-impairment of Contracts

4.

Article III, Section 10. No law impairing the obligation of contracts
shall be passed.
The tax exemptions protected by the non-impairment clause are
contractual tax exemptions, not those granted by franchises or
licenses.

•

•

o

A license conferring a tax exemption can be revoked at
any time since it does not confer an absolute right, even if
these were granted as inducements to invest in the country.
(Republic v. Caguioa, G.R. No. 168584, October 15, 2007)

o

A franchise is likewise subject to amendment, alteration,
or repeal by Congress when the public interest so requires;
hence, any exemption based on a franchise is not protected
by the non-impairment clause. (Cagayan Electric Power and
Light Co., Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-60126, September 25,
1985)

Contractual tax exemptions are:
o

Those entered into by the taxing authority,

o

Lawfully entered into them under enabling laws,

o

Wherein the government acts in its private capacity and
sheds its cloak of authority and immunity. (Manila Electric
Co. v. Province of Laguna, G.R. No. 131359, May 5, 1999)

Examples of contractual tax exemptions which are protected by
the non-impairment clause:

•

o 1 Government bonds or debentures

o

5.

Perfected mining concession granted by the Spanish
Government. (Casanovas v. Hord, G.R. No. 3473, March 22,
1907)

Prohibition Against Imprisonment for Non-payment of Poll Tax
Article III, Section 20. No person shall be imprisoned for debt or
non-payment of a poll tax.

•

In the Philippines, poll tax refers to the cedula or residence tax.
o

The Constitutional protection only applies to poll taxes;
hence, people can still be imprisoned for non-payment of

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

15

other kinds of taxes where the law so expressly provides (like
for tax evasion cases).
6.

Uniformity and Equality of Taxation and Progressive System of
Taxation
Article VI, Section 28. (1) The rule of taxation shall be uniform and
equitable. The Congress shall evolve a progressive system of taxation.

Equality and uniformity in taxation means that all taxable articles
or kinds of property of the same class shall be taxed at the same
rate. (City of Baguio v. de Leon, G.R. No. L-24756, October 31,
1968)

o

Uniformity does not call for perfect uniformity or perfect
equality; reasonable classifications do not violate the
uniformity and equality of taxation. (Sison v. Ancheta, G.R.
No. L-59431, July 25, 1984)

o

The Constitution is also not violated when a certain tax is not
imposed in other jurisdictions, for the Constitution does not
require that taxes for the same purpose should be Imposed in
different territorial subdivisions at the same time. (Villanueva
v. City of Iloilo, G.R. No. L-26521, December 28, 1968)

o

Congress is free to determine the subjects of taxation; hence,
the tax is still valid when some classes are subject to tax while
some are not subject to tax. (Eastern Theatrical v. Alfonso,
G.R. L-1104, May 31, 1949)

•

However, the classification must still be valid and
reasonable, according to the rules on equal protection.
If the classification is unreasonable, then the rule on
uniformity will be violated. (Pepsi-Cola Bottling v. City of
Butuan, G.R. No. L-22814, August 28, 1968)

•

A BIR Issuance which unwittingly imposes different tax
rates to the same class of products violates the rule on
uniformity. (CIR v. Fortune Tobacco Corporation, G.R.
No. 180006, September 28, 2011)

Note: a classification freeze provision which imposes a different
tax base depending on the date of Introduction of a product in
the market has been held to be valid because it simplified tax
administration and eliminated potential abuse and corruption in
tax collection. (British American Tobacco v. Camacho, G.R. No.
163583, April 15, 2009)

J9JC9B0M

16

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Taxation is progressive when its rate goes up depending on the
resources of the person affected.

•

o

7.

VAT is admittedly regressive, because it is imposed on
persons regardless of income. However, it is still valid as
the Constitution's mandate is simply to evolve a progressive
system of taxation. In any case, the VAT system minimizes
the regressive effects by providing zero-rated transactions.
(Abakada Guro Party List v. Ermita, G.R. No. 168056,
September 1, 2005)

Delegated Authority to the President to Impose Tariff Rates
Article VI, Section 28. (2) The Congress may, by law, authorize the
President to fix within specified limits, and subject to such limitations
and restrictions as it may impose, tariff rates, import and export
quotas, tonnage and wharfage dues, and other duties or imposts
within the framework of the national development program of the
Government.

Prohibition Against Taxation of Real Property of Charitable
Institutions, Churches, Parsonages or Convents, Mosques and
Non-profit Cemeteries

8.

Article VI, Section 28. (3) Charitable institutions, churches and
parsonages or convents appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit
cemeteries, and all lands, buildings, and improvements, actually,
directly, and exclusively used for religious, charitable, or educational
purposes shall be exempt from taxation.

•

The exemption only applies to real property tax. (Lladoc v. CIR,
G.R. No. L-19201, June 16, 1965)

•

"Actual, direct and exclusive use of the property" is the direct
and immediate and actual application of the property itself to the
purposes for which the institution is organized. (Lung Center v.
Quezon City, G.R. No. 144104, June 29, 2004)
o

"Exclusive" is defined as possessed and enjoyed to the
exclusion of others; debarred from participation or enjoyment;
and "exclusively" is defined "in a manner to exclude; as
enjoying a privilege exclusively." If real property is used for
one or more commercial purposes, it is not exclusively used
for the exempted purposes but is subject to taxation. (Lung
Center v. Quezon City, G.R. No. 144104, June 29, 2004)

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

O

17

It is not the use of the income from the real property that is
determinative of whether the property is used for tax-exempt
purposes; it is the actual use of the property.
•

Hence, when portions of a hospital and portions of the
land are leased to private entities, those portions are
no longer exempt from real property taxes as the actual
use of the property is no longer for charitable purposes.
(Lung Center v. Quezon City, G.R. No. 144104, June 29,
2004)

Before the 1973 and 1987 Constitutions, the phrase did not
include "actual" and "direct"; the mere qualification was for
"exclusive" use. Hence, cases stated that the exemption extends
to facilities which are incidental to and reasonably necessary for
the accomplishment of said purposes. (Herrera v. Quezon City
Board of Assessment Appeals, G.R. No. L-15270, September 30,
1961)
O

Hence, a hospital, a school devoted to the hospital, and garage
necessary for the school were considered exempt from real
property tax. (Herrera v. Quezon City Board of Assessment
Appeals, G.R. No. L-15270, September 30, 1961)

o

A lodging house for people who participate in religious
activities and a vegetable garden used by a priest, both of
which were adjacent to a church were held to be incidental
and necessary for religious purposes and were considered
exempt from real property tax. (Bishop of Nueva Segovia v.
Provincial Board of Ilocos Norte, G.R. No. L-27588, December
31, 1927)

o

The use by the Director of a school of a floor for residential
purposes was held as incidental to educational purposes.
(Abra Valley College, Inc. v. Aquino, G.R. No. L-39086, June
15, 1988)
•

However, the lease of a floor of a school to a marketing
company was not Incidental to educational purposes and,
thus, not exempt from real property tax. (Abra Valley
College, Inc. v. Aquino, G.R. No. L-39086, June 15, 1988)

•

Note, however, that the Herrera, Nueva Segovia, and
Abra cases were not decided under the more restrictive
wording of the 1973 and 1987 Constitutions. Abra
v. Hernando (G.R. No. L-49336, August 31, 1981)
clarified that there must now be proof of actual and
direct use of the land, buildings, and Improvements
for religious, charitable, or educational purposes. This
was reiterated by Justice Callejo in the Lung Center
case.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

18

Prohibition Against Taxation of Non-stock, Non-profit Educational
Institutions

9.

Article XIV, Section 4. (3) All revenues and assets of non-stock,
non-profit educational institutions used actually, directly, and
exclusively for educational purposes shall be exempt from taxes and
duties. Upon the dissolution or cessation of the corporate existence
of such institutions, their assets shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law.

Proprietary educational institutions, including those cooperatively
owned, may likewise be entitled to such exemptions, subject to the
limitations provided by lav/, including restrictions on dividends and
provisions for reinvestment.

The constitutional provision covers non-stock, non-profit (NSNP)
educational institutions and exempts them from income tax,
real property tax, donor's tax, and customs duties because the
provision speaks of "all revenues and assets."
Revenues consist of the amounts earned from the conduct of
business operations.
O

•

Assets are tangible and intangible properties of the taxpayer.

o
•

Revenue is the component of the tax base in income tax,
VAT, and local business tax. (CIR v. DLSU, G.R. No. 196596,
November 9, 2016)

The fair market value (FMV) of real property is the tax base
for real property tax. (CIR v. DLSU)

The revenues and the assets must be used actually, directly, and
exclusively for educational purposes.
0

The test to determine exemption is the use of both the
revenues and assets.

0

Hence, when the revenues are actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes, the NSNP
educational institution shall be exempt from income tax,
VAT, and local business tax. The revenues do not need to
come from educational activities, as long as it is used for
educational purposes. (La Sallian Educational Innovators
Foundation v. CIR, G.R. No. 202792, February 27, 2019)

O

And when the assets are actually, directly, and exclusively used
for educational purposes, the NSNP educational institution
shall be exempt from real property tax. (CIR v. DLSU, where
the Court said that if a university leases a portion of a school
building to a bookstore or canteen, the leased portion is no

J9JC9B0M

19

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

longer used for educational purposes and thus subject to real
property tax, even if it caters to students. I don't agree and
would argue that a bookstore and canteen are reasonably
covered under a school's "educational purpose.")

O

Income from cafeterias, canteens and bookstores are also
exempt if they are owned and operated by the educational
institution and are located within the school premises.
(Revenue Memorandum Circular [RMC] 76-2003)

Distinguish from tax treatment of:
(10%

under Section

O

Proprietary educational
27[B], NIRC)

O

Government educational institutions (Exempt under Section
30, NIRC)

institutions

San Juan University is a nonstock, non-profit educational institution.
It owns a piece of land in Caloocan City on which its three 2-storey
school buildings stood. Two of the buildings are devoted to classrooms,
laboratories, a canteen, a bookstore and administrative offices. The
third building Is reserved as dormitory for student athletes who are
granted scholarships for a given academic year.

In 2017, San Juan University earned income from tuition fees and
from leasing a portion of its premises to various concessionaires of
food, books, and school supplies.
a) Can the City Treasurer of Caloocan City collect real property
taxes on the land and building of San Juan University? Explain your
answer.

b) Is the income earned by San Juan University for the year 2017
subject to income tax? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

i
■

b)

The City Treasurer may not collect real property taxes for the
non-leased out portions. The Constitution states that all assets of
nonstock, non-profit educational institutions actually, directly,
and exclusively used for educational purposes are exempt from
all taxes. In this case, San Juan University is a nonstock,
non-profit educational institution. Its land and two buildings
are actually, directly, and exclusively used for educational
purposes. However, the portions leased out to concessionaries
may be subject to real property taxes, as the lease constitutes
commercial use and thus are no longer actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes.
It depends. If the Income is factually proven to be actually,
directly, and exclusively used for educational purposes, it will
be exempt, as the Constitution states that all revenues of non-

!

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

20

stock, non-profit educational institutions actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes are exempt from all
taxes. However, if SJU is not able to prove such, then the income
will be subject to income tax.
10. Majority Vote of Congress for Grants of Tax Exemptions

Article VI, Section 28. (4) No law granting any tax exemption shall
be passed without the concurrence of a majority of all the Members
of the Congress.

•

Hence, an exemption granted by a Presidential Proclamation and
not by law is invalid. (John Hay Peoples Alternative Coalition v.
Lim, G.R. No. 119775, October 24, 2003)

•

This includes the grant of tax amnesties.
o

A tax amnesty, being a general pardon or intentional
overlooking by the State of its authority to impose penalties on
persons otherwise guilty of evasion or violation of a revenue
or tax law, partakes of an absolute forgiveness or waiver by
the Government of its right to collect what otherwise would
be due it, and in this sense, prejudicial thereto, particularly
to give tax evaders, who wish to relent and are willing to
reform a chance to do so and thereby become a part of the
new society with a clean slate. (Republic v. Intermediate
Appellate Court, G.R. No. L-69344, April 26, 1991)

11. Prohibition on Use of Tax Levied for Special Purpose
Article VI, Section 29. (3) All money collected on any tax levied
for a special purpose shall be treated as a special fund and paid out
for such purpose only. If the purpose for which a special fund was
created has been fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, shall be
transferred to the general funds of the Government.

12. Tax Bills Should
Representatives

Originate

Exclusively

in

the

House

Article VI, Section 24. All appropriation, revenue or tariff bills, bills
authorizing increase of the public debt, bills of local application, and
private bills shall originate exclusively in the House of Representatives,
but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments.

of

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

21

13. President's Veto Power on Appropriation, Revenue, and Tariff Bills

Article VI, Section 27. (2) The President shall have the power to
veto any particular item or items in an appropriation, revenue, or
tariff bill, but the veto shall not affect the item or items to which he
does not object.

The President has the power to "item-veto" when it comes to
appropriation, revenue, or tariff bills.

14. Judicial Power to Review Legality of Tax

Article VIII, Section S. The Supreme Court shall have the following
powers:

xxx
(2) Review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal or
certiorari, as the law or the Rules of Court may provide, final
judgments and orders of lower courts in:

xxx
(b) All cases involving the legality of any tax, Impost,
assessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in relation thereto.

15. Grant of Power to the Local Government Units to Create Its Own
Sources of Revenue

Article X, Section 5. Each local government unit shall have the power
to create its own sources of revenues and to levy taxes, fees and
charges subject to such guidelines and limitations as the Congress
may provide, consistent with the basic policy of local autonomy.
Such taxes, fees, and charges shall accrue exclusively to the local
governments.
Note that the power of local government units Is subject to
limitations as Congress may provide, i.e., the Local Government
Code.

H.

Double Taxation

•

There are two kinds of double taxation:

o

Direct double taxation, and

o

Indirect double taxation.

J9JC9B0M

1

22

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
It is direct double taxation which is prohibited. To constitute direct
double taxation, the following requisites must be present:

o

The same property must be taxed twice;

0

Both taxes must be imposed:
■

On the same property or subject matter,

•

For the same purpose,

■

By the same State, Government, or taxing authority,

Within the same jurisdiction,
During the same taxing period, and
The two taxes are of the same kind or character.
(Villanueva v. City of Iloilo, G.R. No. L-26251, December
28, 1968)

•

Imposition of a penalty and a tax on one taxpayer does not amount
to double taxation. (Republic Bank v. Court of Tax Appeals, G.R.
No. 62554, September 2, 1992)

•

Indirect double taxation simply means that there are two or more
pecuniary impositions on a subject matter. It is not prohibited by
the Constitution.

Mr. Alas sells shoes in Makati through a retail store. He pays the VAT
on his gross sales to the SIR and the municipal license tax based
on the same gross sales to the City of Makati. He comes to you for
advice because he thinks he is being subjected to double taxation.
(2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Sorry, that's not prohibited double taxation, Mr.
Atas. Best you pay, lest in court you'll spend your day. Double taxation
is allowed where one tax is imposed by the national government and
the other by the local government. (Note: Rhyming answers are not
given extra credit in the Bar exam)
Differentiate between double taxation in the strict sense and in a
broad sense and give an example of each. (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Double taxation in the strict sense is direct double
taxation. It means that the same property or subject matter is taxed
twice, for the same purpose, by the same taxing authority, within
the same jurisdiction, during the same tax period, with the two taxes
of the same kind or character. An example would be taxing gross
income twice in the same year. This is prohibited. Double taxation in
the broad sense is indirect double taxation. It means there are two
or more pecuniary impositions on a subject matter. For example, a
business is required to pay income tax to the national government
and local business tax to the local government. This is allowed.

I

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

23

Upon his retirement, Alfredo transferred his savings derived from his
salary as a marketing assistant to a time deposit with AAB Bank. The
bank regularly deducted 20% final withholding tax on the interest
income from the time deposit. Alfredo contends that the 20% final
tax on the interest income constituted double taxation because his
salary had been already subjected to withholding tax. Is Alfredo's
contention correct? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Alfredo's wrong. There's no double taxation
here because two distinct subject matters are actually being taxed—
Alfredo's salary and Alfredo's interest income from his time deposit.
As there is no identity in subject matter, then this does not constitute
direct double taxation.

I.

Forms of Escape from Taxation

Tax avoidance and tax evasion are the common devices wherein
the taxpayer can escape the effects of taxation.

Tax avoidance is legal. It involves saving on taxes using legal
means.
O

Estate planning is a legal manner to minimize taxes. (Delpher
Trades Corporation v. Intermediate Appellate Court, G.R. No.
L-69259, January 26, 1988)

Tax evasion is illegal and can land you in jail. It Involves the use
of forbidden and illegal devices to lessen and minimize tax.
O

It connotes the integration of three factors:
•

The end to be achieved, i.e., payment of less than that
known by the taxpayer to be legally due, or the nonpayment of tax when it is shown that a tax is due,

•

State of mind which is "evil," in "bad faith," "willful," or
"deliberate and not accidental," and

•

Course of action or failure of action that is unlawful. (CIR
v. Estate of Benigno Toda, G.R. No. 147188, September
14, 2004)

Willful blindness doctrine: A taxpayer can no longer raise
the defense that the errors on their tax returns are not their
responsibility or that it is the fault of the accountants they hired.
o

Intent to defraud need not be shown for a conviction of tax
evasion.

o

The only thing that needs to be proven is that the taxpayer
was aware of his obligation to file the tax return but he
nevertheless voluntarily, knowingly, and intentionally failed

J9JC9B0M

24

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

to file the required returns. (People v. Kintanar, C.T.A. E.B.
No. 006, December 3, 2010, affirmed by the Supreme Court
in G.R. No. 196340)
Prior to the VAT law, sales of cars were subject to a sales tax but
the tax applied only to the original or the first sale; the second
and subsequent sales were not subject to tax. Deltoid Motors, Inc.
(Deltoid) hit on the idea of setting up a wholly-owned subsidiary,
Gonmad Motors, Inc. (Gonmad), and of selling its assembled cars
to Gonmad at a low price so it would pay a lower tax on the first
sale. Gonmad would then sell the cars to the public at a higher price
without paying any sales tax on this subsequent sale. Characterize
the arrangement. (2013 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The plan is improper and similar to the case of
Benigno Toda; the veil of corporate fiction can be pierced so that the
two transactions can be collapsed and taxed accordingly.
You are the retained tax counsel of ABC Corp. Your client informed
you that they have been directly approached with a proposal by a
BIR insider (i.e., a middle rank BIR official) on the tax matter they
have referred to you for handling. The BIR insider's proposal is to
settle the matter by significandy reducing the assessment, but he
will get 50% of the savings arising from the reduced assessment.
(2012 Bar Exam)

What tax, criminal and ethical considerations will you take into
account In giving your advice? Explain the relevance of each of these
considerations.
Suggested answer: I will advise my client not to accept the BIR
insider's proposal. Don't do it!!! Even if the assessment is significantly
reduced, this will open my client to the risk of tax evasion and
surcharges. There will be tax evasion as there is an intent to defraud
the government coupled with an act that reduces the tax liability.
Moreover, as a lawyer, I am duty bound to uphold the law — to
allow my client to go “under the table" will be a terrible (yet sadly
common) affront to the Constitution and the laws that I swore to
uphold and protect.

On August 31, 2014, Haelton Corporation (HC), thru its authorized
representative Ms. Pares, sold a 16-storey commercial building
known as Haeltown Building to Mr. Belly for Pl 00 million. Mr. Belly,
in turn, sold the same property on the same day to Bell Gates, Inc.
(BGI) forP200 million. These two (2) transactions were evidenced by
two (2) separate Deeds of Absolute Sale notarized on the same day
by the same notary public.

Investigations by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) showed that:

(1) the Deed of Absolute Sale between Mr. Belly and BGI was
notarized ahead of the sale between HC and Mr. Belly; (2) as early

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

25

as May 17, 2014, HC received P40 million from BGI, and not from Mr.
Belly; (3) the said payment of P40 million was recorded by BGI in its
books as of June 30, 2014 as investment in Haeltown Building; and
(4) the substantial portion of P40 million was withdrawn by Ms. Pares
through the declaration of cash dividends to all its stockholders.
Based on the foregoing, the BIR sent Haeltown Corporation a Notice
of Assessment for deficiency income tax arising from an alleged
simulated sale of the aforesaid commercial building to escape the
higher corporate income tax rate of thirty percent (30%). What is
the liability of Haeltown Corporation, if any? (2014 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Haeltown Corporation is liable for tax evasion
and the penalty shall be imposed on the company officer or employee
responsible for the violation. Tax evasion is the use of illegal means
to evade the payment of taxes. It involves the end to be achieved
(less taxes), an "evil" state of mind, and the unlawful course of
action. This case, similar to the scheme in the Benigno Toda case,
has all three elements of tax evasion. A scheme was employed to
escape the higher corporate income tax rate.

Lucky V Corporation (Lucky) owns a 10-storey building on a 2,000
square meter lot in the City of Makati. It sold the lot and building
to Rainier for P80 million. One month after. Rainier sold the lot and
building to Healthy Smoke Company (HSC) for P200 million. Lucky
filed its annual tax return and declared its gain from the sale of the
lot and building in the amount of P750,000.00.

An investigation conducted by the BIR revealed that two months
prior to the sale of the properties to Rainier, Lucky received P40
million from HSC and not from Rainier. Said amount of P40 million
was debited by HSC and reflected in its trial balance as "other inv.
- Lucky Bldg. “ The month after, another P40 million was reflected In
HSC's trial balance as “other inv. — Lucky Bldg. “ The BIR concluded
that there is tax evasion since the real buyer of the properties of
Lucky is HSC and not Rainier. It issued an assessment for deficiency
income tax in the amount of P79 million against Lucky. Lucky argues
that it resorted to tax avoidance or a tax saving device, which Is
allowed by the NIRC and BIR rules since It paid the correct taxes
based on its sale to Rainier. On the other hand, Rainier and HSC also
paid the prescribed taxes arising from the sale by Rainier to HSC.
Is the BIR correct in assessing taxes on Lucky? Explain. (2016 Bar
Exam)

Suggested answer: The BIR Is correct. The parties here used Illegal
means to pay less taxes than what was actually due. It used a ruse In
order to reflect a simulated transaction—the sale to and from Rainier.
This is tax evasion; there was an end to be achieved (lower taxes), a
state of mind that was fraught with bad faith, and the use of a course
of action to achieve the end. Again, this Is like the Benigno Toda
case, where the Supreme Court collapsed the transactions to reflect
the true transaction and the proper tax liability.

I

J9JC9B0M

26

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

J-

Exemption from Taxation

•

The essence of tax exemption is the immunity or freedom from a
charge or burden to which others are subjected. It is a waiver of
the government s right to collect what would have been otherwise
collectible. (Secretary of Finance v. Lazatin, G.R. No 210588,
November 29, 2016)
o

It is the freedom from the imposition and payment of a
particular tax.
Hence, a Revenue Regulation that requires tax-exempt
entities to pay taxes with the possibility of a subsequent
refund is invalid. The tax-exempt entities shouldn't be
required to pay in the first place. (Secretary of Finance v.

c*airn f°r tax exemption should be strictly construed against
the taxpayer. fLuzon Stevedoring Corp. v. Court of Tax Appeals,
G.R. No. L-30232, July 29, 1988)

*

o

He who claims an exemption must be able to point to some
positive and specific provision of law creating such right; it
cannot be allowed to exist upon a mere vague implication
or inference. (Manila Electric Corporation v. Vera, G.R. No.
L-29987, October 22, 1975)

Hence, if there is nothing in a law that points that the
word exemption" refers to taxes, the implication would
be that the term would be an “exemption" of something
else, such as regulatory or reporting requirements. (PLDT
v. City of Davao, G.R. No. 143867, August 22, 2001)

Once the taxpayer proves he is entitled to the tax
exemption, then the tax exemption must necessarily
^CIR V' Robertson‘ G R- No- 70116, August 12,

•

O

Tax refunds are in the nature of tax exemptions and are
likewise strictly construed against the taxpayer. (Davao Gulf
Lumber Corp. v. C1R, G.R. No. 117359, July 23, 1998)

O

Tax exclusions (removal of otherwise taxable items from the
^ac ° ^axa^,on) are likewise strictly construed against the
taxpayer fSmart Commun/cat/ons, Inc. v. City of Davao, G.R.
No. 155491, September 16, 2008)

Note the following rules on construction:

o

A tax cannot be imposed unless it is supported by the clear
^c5Xp,\ess language of a statute. A tax statute is strictly
construed against the government.

I

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

T7

Hence, it is the burden of the State to first prove that
a taxpayer is in fact covered by a tax statute. (CIR v.
Court of Appeals and Ateneo de Manila University, G.R.
No. 115349, April 18, 1997)

■

•

If an entity is not covered by a tax imposition in the
first place, it is illogical for it to prove its entitlement
to tax exemption before fully enjoying the same.
(Secretary of Finance v. Lazatin, G.R. No. 210588,
November 29, 2016, where the SC invalidated a R.R.
that imposed an administrative requirement on taxexempt entities in order for them to get a refund for
taxes they weren't supposed to pay in the first place)

Moreover, the State is estopped from collecting the
difference between the deficiency tax assessment and
the amount already paid by the taxpayer pursuant to a
tax amnesty. (Republic v. Intermediate Appellate Court,
G.R. No. L-69344, April 26, 1991)

•

•

However, once the tax is found to cover the taxpayer,
a claim of exemption must be strictly construed
against the taxpayer. The burden then shifts to the
taxpayer to prove that he is exempt. (Davao Gulf
Lumber Corp. v. CIR, G.R. No. 117359, July 23,
1998)

The strict construction against tax exemptions also mandates
withholding agents to strictly observe the proper procedure to
withhold tax when obligated to do so. (National Development
Company v. CIR, G.R. No. L-53961, June 30, 1987)
Certain franchises were given tax incentives wherein the
franchises were obligated to pay a special tax rate "In lieu of all
taxes." What does this phrase mean? Does it apply to all taxes?
O

The "in lieu of all taxes" clause only applies to national taxes
and does not apply to local taxes. (Smart Communications,
Inc. v. City of Davao, G.R. No. 155491, September 16, 2008)

For indirect taxes, the tax exemption of the buyer (or whoever
the burden of tax falls to) does not exempt him from the payment
of indirect taxes, because such person is not the one statutorily
liable for the payment of the tax (that's the seller) in the first
place. (Philippine Acetylene Co., Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-19707,
August 17, 1967)

o

EXCEPT:

•

When the buyer (whoever the burden of tax falls to)
is specifically exempted from the payment of "indirect

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

28

taxes." (CIR v. Gotamco & Sons, Inc., G.R. No. L-31092,
February 27, 1987, where the World Health Organization,
the purchaser, was held exempt from indirect taxes as
well)
•

If the buyer is exempt from indirect taxes, who bears
the economic burden of the tax (since it cannot be
passed on to them anymore)?
O

The seller will have to absorb the economic
burden of the tax. (Maceda v. Macaraig, G.R. No.
88291, June 8, 1993)

•

Can the seller claim a refund?
•

If there are international law and public
policy considerations, it seems the seller
can claim for a refund. (CIR v. Pilipinas
Shell Petroleum Corporation, G.R. No.
188497, February 19, 2014, which
involved excise taxes on petroleum
products; see also the Separate Opinion
of Justice Bersamin)

•

For indirect taxes, the proper party to question or seek a refund
is the statutory taxpayer, the person on whom the tax is imposed
by law and who paid the same even if he shifts the burden thereof
to another. (Silkair[Singapore] Ptd. Ltd. v. CIR, G.R. No. 173594,
February 6, 2008)

•

Hence, the buyer is not the proper party to seek a refund as
the buyer is not the statutory taxpayer; he merely absorbs the
burden of the tax. (Silkair [Singapore] Ptd. Ltd. v. CIR, G.R. No.
173594, February 6, 2008)
0

EXCEPT:
■

When the law clearly grants the party to which the
economic burden is shifted an exemption from both direct
and indirect taxes. In these cases, the buyer is deemed a
proper party to seek a refund. (Philippine Airlines, Inc. v.
CIR, G.R. No. 198759, July 1, 2013; compared to Silkair,
PAL was granted a legislative franchise which exempted
it from direct and indirect taxes)

Pursuant to Sec. 11 of the "Host Agreement" between the United
Nations and the Philippine government, it was provided that the
World Health Organization (WHO), “its assets, income and other
properties shall be: a) exempt from all direct and indirect taxes. “
Precision Construction Corporation (PCC) was hired to construct the

J9JC9B0M

29

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

WHO Medical Center in Manila. Upon completion of the building, the
BIR assessed a 12% VAT on the gross receipts of PCC derived from
the construction of the WHO building. The BIR contends that the
12% VAT is not a direct nor an indirect tax on the WHO but a tax
that is primarily due from the contractor and is therefore not covered
by the Host Agreement. The WHO argues that the VAT is deemed an
indirect tax as PCC can shift the tax burden to it. Is the BIR correct?
Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The BIR is w-r-o-n-g. VAT is an indirect tax, as
the liability for the payment of the tax falls on one person, but the
burden thereof can be shifted or passed on to another. In this case,
the liability to pay VAT is with PCC, with the economic burden falling
on the shoulders of WHO. But with WHO explicitly exempt from both
direct and indirect taxes, it should not shoulder the burden of the
VAT.

K.

Other Doctrines

Prospectivity of tax laws
•

Tax laws must be
provision of law.

•

Accordingly, exemption statutes are not retroactive. (Pansacola
v. CIR, G.R. No. 159991, November 16, 2006)

applied

prospectively,

except

by

express

Non-retroactivity of rulings
NIRC, Sec. 246. Non-retroactivity of rulings. — Any revocation,
modification, or reversal of any rules and regulations promulgated In
accordance with the preceding section or any of the rulings or circulars
promulgated by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue shall not be
given retroactive application if the revocation, modification, or reversal
will be prejudicial to the taxpayers except in the following cases:
a) where the taxpayer deliberately misstates or omits material facts
from his return or in any document required of him by the Bureau of
Internal Revenue;

b) where the facts subsequently gathered by the Bureau of Internal
Revenue are materially different from the facts on which the ruling Is
based; or

c)

where the taxpayer acted in bad faith.

Rulings, circulars, rules and regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue should have no retroactive
application if applying them would prejudice the taxpayers. (CIR
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 117982, February 6, 1997)

J9JC9B0M

■

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

30

o

•

However, when the ruling, circular, or rules and regulations
was nullified by a court (and not by the CIR), then the
non-retroactivity rule does not apply. {Philippine Bank of
Communications v. CIR, G.R. No. 112024, January 28, 1999,
wherein the SC declared that a taxpayer cannot rely on a
RMC which extended the period to claim a refund beyond the
period given by law and which was subsequently declared
invalid by the lower courts)

A general interpretative rule issued by the CIR may be relied upon
by taxpayers from the time the rule is issued up to its reversal
by the Commissioner or this Court. {CIR v. San Roque, G.R. No.
187485, February 12, 2013, where a BIR Ruling issued upon
inquiry of the Department of Finance was held to be a general
interpretative rule)

Set-off of taxes
There can be no off-setting of taxes against the claims that the
taxpayer may have against the government.

o

A person cannot refuse to pay a tax on the ground that the
government owes him an amount equal to or greater than
e tax being collected. The collection of a tax cannot await
e results of a lawsuit against the government. (Francia v.
1aoa'?ed‘ate APPellate Court, G.R. No. L-67649, June 28,
1 JOOj

0

Taxes are not in the nature of contracts between the party and
e government; taxes grow out of a duty to the government.
axes ►,positlve acts of the government; the personal
lnc*,v*<^ua* taxpayers is not required for the making
en orcement of taxes. (Republic v. Mambulao Lumber
Company, G.R. No. L-17725, February 28, 1962)

o

^Xpayer cannot take the “lav/ into its own hands," and
cm F°Tpensation because it has a pending refund with the
28,1993jeX Mln'n9 C°rP‘ V’ C1R' G.R. No. 125704, August

Note, however, that when both the claims of the
AiroeLnrri5nt and the taxpayer against each other have
And3t-/ °ecome due, demandable and fully liquidated,
6 amount due the taxpayer has already been
ann
nr i=>\?.P/^ted by law' compensation will follow by operation
1963) (D°mingo v- Garlitos, G.R. No. L-18994, June 29,

As a rule, taxes cannot be subject to compensation because the
government and the taxpayer are not creditors and debtors of

J9JC9B0M

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION

31

each other. However, there are some cases where the court has
allowed the determination of a taxpayer's liability in a case for
refund, thereby allowing the offsetting of taxes. Note that these
are all refund cases where the court allowed the offsetting of
taxes, because it would have been absurd to grant a refund after
finding out that the taxpayer owed the government in the first
place.
O

In these cases, the Court allowed offsetting only because the
determination of the taxpayer's liability is intertwined with
the resolution of the claim for tax refund of erroneously or
illegally collected taxes under Section 229, NIRC.

o

Also, the offsetting will not be allowed if the period to assess
deficiency taxes in the excess of the amount claimed for refund
has already prescribed. (CIR v. Toledo Power Company, G.R.
No. 196415, December 2, 2015)

Taxpayer suit
•

To constitute a taxpayer's suit, the following requisites must be
present:
o

Public funds are disbursed by a political subdivision or
instrumentality, and in doing so, a law is violated or irregularity
committed, and

o

The petitioner Is directly affected by the act. (Anti-Graft
League of the Philippines v. SanJuan, G.R. No. 97787, August
1, 1996)
•

Hence, when the disposition is of alleged public property
(like paintings and silverware of the Marcoses) and not
of public funds, a taxpayer's suit is improper. (Joya v.
Presidential Commission on Good Government, G.R. No.
96541, August 24, 1993)

•

Similarly, when no public funds were disbursed or spent
(such as when Special Elections were not held, and thus,
nothing was spent), a taxpayer's suit is improper. (Lozada
v. COMELEC, G.R. No. L-59068, January 27, 1983)

•

But when what is questioned is a contract entered Into by
a government-owned or -controlled corporation (GOCC)
wherein public funds will be used, then a taxpayer's suit
is proper. (Abaya v. Ebdane, G.R. No. 167919, February
14, 2007)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX
A. Income Tax Systems
•

There are three kinds of income tax systems:
o

Global (unitary) tax system

o

•

Here, all items of gross income, deductions, personal and
additional exemptions are reported in one income tax
return (ITR) and a single tax is imposed on all income
received or earned, regardless of the activities which
produced the income.

•

It is akin to putting all income into one basket and taxing
the entire basket.

Schedular tax system

•

o

Here, different types of activities are subjected to
different types of tax rates. The tax rates depend on the
classification of the taxable income and the activities
which produced the income.

Semi-global, semi-schedular system

■

Certain passive income and capital gains are subject to
final taxes while other income are added to arrive at the
gross income (where deductions are used to arrive at the
taxable income).

■

We follow the semi-global/semi-schedular system in the
Philippines.

■

Schedular can also mean that tax rates will differ based
on the tax base.
•

For instance, global is usually applied to corporations,
as corporations are taxed at a single rate, regardless
of the tax base; while the schedular system is applied
to individuals as they are subjected to different tax
rates based on their tax bracket.

32

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

33

B. Income, In General
Taxable Income

•

The essential difference between capital and income is that capital
is a fund and income is a flow. Capital is wealth, while income is
the service of wealth.
o

Property is a tree, income is the fruit. Labor is a tree, income
is the fruit. Capital is a tree, income is the fruit.

O

Income means profits or gains. (Madrigal v. Rafferty, G.R.
No. L-12287, August 7, 1918)

Income may be defined as the amount of money coming to a
person or corporation within a specified time, whether as payment
for services, interest or profit from investment.

o

A mere advance in the value of property of a person or a
corporation in no sense constitutes the "income" specified in
the law. Such advance constitutes and can be treated merely
as an increase in capital.
•

Hence, cash dividends are taxed as income because they
have been realized/received, while stock dividends are
not taxed as income because they are merely inchoate
as they are mere anticipation of income (they become
income once you sell the shares).

•

Cash dividends are actual receipt of profits; stock
dividends are the receipt of a representation of the
increased value of the assets of a corporation. (Fisher v.
Trinidad, G.R. No. L-17518, October 30, 1922)

For income to be taxable, the following requisites must be met:

o

There must be gain,

o

The gain must be realized or received, and

o

The gain must not be excluded by law or treaty from taxation.
(CIR v. Benedicto, G.R. No. 191999, July 30, 2014, where the
unfreezing of deposits was not considered income because
there was no gain realized and was nothing more than a
return of capital)

When dealing with money or property, the questions you should
ask are:
o

Is this capital or is this income?

o

Has it been realized/received or is it merely inchoate?

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

34

Some helpful principles to determine if money or property can
be considered income:

1.

Realization Principle

Income is recognized when both of the following conditions are
met:

I

J9JC9B0M

0

The earning is complete or virtually complete; and

0

An exchange has taken place.

Claim of Right Doctrine

2.

If the taxpayer receives earnings under a claim of right and
without restriction as to its disposition, such earnings are
considered income.

Economic Benefit Theory

3.

Anything that benefits a person materially or economically in
whatever way is taxable under the law.

o

However, note that under this jurisdiction, mere increase
in the value of property without actual realization (such as
through sale or disposition) is not taxable.

4.

Severance Test Theory

•

Income is recognized when there is separation of something
which is of exchangeable value.
o

Hence, the increase in the value of an asset is not income as
it has not yet been exchanged or transferred for something
else. Once the asset is exchanged, then a severance of the
gain from its original value takes place, resulting into taxable
income.

5.

All-Events Test

•

The accrual of income and expenses is permitted when the
following are met:
o

Fixing of a right to income or liability to pay;

o

The availability of the reasonable accurate determination of
such income or liability.

Mr. Jose Castillo is a resident Filipino Citizen. He purchased a parcel
of land in Makati City in 1970 at a consideration of Pl Million. In
2011, the land, which remained undeveloped and idle, had a fair
market value of P20 Million. Mr. Antonio Ayala, another Filipino

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

35

citizen, is very much interested in the property and he offered to buy
the same for P20 Million. The Assessor of Makati City re-assessed in
2011 the property at PIO Million.

Is Mr. Castillo liable for income tax in 2011 based on the offer to buy
by Mr. Ayala? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: NO! There was no realization of income yet. The
offer is nothing but an offer. There has yet to be an exchange or sale
which produces any profit; hence, no income yet.

C.

General Principles of Income Taxation

Sec. 23.1
General Principles of Income Taxation in the
Philippines. — Except when otherwise provided in this Code:

(A) A citizen of the Philippines residing therein is taxable on all
income derived from sources within and without the Philippines;

(B) A nonresident citizen is taxable only on income derived from
sources within the Philippines;
(C) An individual citizen of the Philippines who is working and
deriving income from abroad as an overseas contract worker is
taxable only on income derived from sources within the Philippines:
Provided, That a seaman who is a citizen of the Philippines and who
receives compensation for services rendered abroad as a member of
the complement of a vessel engaged exclusively in international trade
shall be treated as an overseas contract worker;

(D) An alien individual, whether a resident or not of the Philippines, Is
taxable only on income derived from sources within the Philippines;
(E) A domestic corporation is taxable on all income derived from
sources within and without the Philippines; and
(F) A foreign corporation, whether engaged or not In trade or
business in the Philippines, is taxable only on income derived from
sources within the Philippines.

Who are taxable on income derived from all sources, whether
within or outside the Philippines? (Taxed from sources worldwide!)

1.

Resident citizens.

2.

Domestic corporations.

The other kinds of taxpayers are subject to tax only on income
derived from Philippine sources.

‘Unless otherwise indicated, codals refer to the National Internal Revenue
Code (NIRC), as amended.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

36

Taxable Income

Taxable Income

Inside RP

Outside RP

Resident Citizen

Yes

Yes

Non resident Citizen_______

Yes

No

Overseas Contract Worker

Yes

No

Resident Alien_____________

Yes

No

Nonresident Alien_________

Yes

No

Domestic Corp.____________

Yes

Yes

Foreign Corp.

Yes

No

Citizenship & Residency

Patrick is a successful businessman in the United States and he is a
sole proprietor of a supermarket which has a gross sales of$l 0 million
and an annual income of $3 million. He went to the Philippines on a
visit and, in a party, he saw Atty. Agaton who boasts of being a tax
expert. Patrick asks Atty. Agaton: if he (Patrick) decides to reacquire
his Philippine citizenship under RA 9225, establish residence in this
country, and open a supermarket in Makati City, will the BIR tax him
on the income he earns from his U.S. business? If you were Atty.
Agaton, what advice will you give Patrick? (2016 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: If I were Atty. Agaton, I will tell him not to. If
Patrick reacquires his Philippine citizenship and establishes residence
here, he will be taxed for his income from his US business. The
Tax Code states that resident citizens are taxable for income from
sources worldwide. This will expose Patrick to more tax liability.
Likewise, if I were Atty. Agaton, I wouldn't boast being a tax expert,
••
as pride comes before the fall.

D.

Situs of Taxation

Now that we know that only resident citizens and domestic
corporations are taxed from income sources worldwide, it Is
important to determine whether such income is realized in the
Philippines or abroad. This brings us to Section 42.

Sec. 42. Income from Sources Within the Philippines. —

(A) Gross Income From Sources Within the Philippines. —
The following items of gross income shall be treated as gross income
from sources within the Philippines:
(1) Interests. — Interests derived from sources within the
Philippines, and interests on bonds, notes or other interest-bearing
obligation of residents, corporate or otherwise;

(2) Dividends. — The amount received as dividends:

(a) from a domestic corporation; and

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

(b) from a foreign corporation, unless less than fifty percent
(50%) of the gross income of such foreign corporation for the threeyear period ending with the close of its taxable year preceding the
declaration of such dividends (or for such part of such period as the
corporation has been in existence) was derived from sources within
the Philippines as determined under the provisions of this Section;
but only in an amount which bears the same ration to such dividends
as the gross income of the corporation for such period derived from
sources within the Philippines bears to its gross income from all
sources.

(3) Services. — Compensation for labor or personal services
performed in the Philippines;
(4) Rentals and Royalties. — Rentals and royalties from property
located in the Philippines or from any interest in such property,
including rentals or royalties for -

(a) The use of or the right or privilege to use in the Philippines
any copyright, patent, design or model, plan, secret formula or
process, goodwill, trademark, trade brand or other like property or
right;

(b) The use of, or the right to use in the Philippines any
industrial, commercial or scientific equipment;
(c) The supply of scientific, technical, industrial or commercial
knowledge or information;
(d) The supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary
to, and Is furnished as a means of enabling the application or
enjoyment of, any such property or right as is mentioned in paragraph
(a), any such equipment as is mentioned in paragraph (b) or any
such knowledge or information as is mentioned In paragraph (c);

(e) The supply of services by a nonresident person or his
employee In connection with the use of property or rights belonging
to, or the installation or operation of any brand, machinery or other
apparatus purchased from such nonresident person;
(f) Technical advice, assistance or services rendered In
connection with technical management or administration of any
scientific, industrial or commercial undertaking, venture, project or
scheme; and
(g) The use of or the right to use:

(i)

Motion picture films;

(ii)

Films or video tapes for use in connection with television;

and

(iii) Tapes for use in connection with radio broadcasting.
(5) Sale of Real Property. — Gains, profits and income from the
sale of real property located in the Philippines; and

37

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

38

(6) Sale of Personal Property. — Gains; profits and income from
the sale of personal property, as determined in Subsection (E) of this
Section.

(B) Taxable Income from Sources Within the Philippines. —
(1) General Rule. — From the items of gross income specified in
Subsection (A) of this Section, there shall be deducted the expenses,
losses and other deductions properly allocated thereto and a ratable
part of expenses, interests, losses and other deductions effectively
connected with the business or trade conducted exclusively within
the Philippines which cannot definitely be allocated to some items or
class of gross income: Provided, That such items of deductions shall
be allowed only if fully substantiated by all the information necessary
for its calculation. The remainder, if any, shall be treated in full as
taxable income from sources within the Philippines.
(2) Exception. — No deductions for interest paid or incurred
abroad shall be allowed from the item of gross income specified in
subsection (A) unless indebtedness was actually incurred to provide
funds for use in connection with the conduct or operation of trade or
business In the Philippines.

•

This section Is NOT relevant to domestic corporations and resident
citizens because they are taxed worldwide anyway. This section
comes into play when it comes to problems related to the income
sources of taxpayers who are only taxed for income sourced
within the Philippines.

•

The following are treated as gross income from sources within the
Philippines (Sections 152-165, Revenue Regulations No. [“R.R.“]
2-1940):

1.

2.

Interests — including interests on bonds, notes and other
interest bearing obligations:

a.

The loan was used here in the Philippines, or

b.

The debtor is in the Philippines

Dividends —

a.

from a domestic corporation; and

b.

a foreign corporation, unless less than 50% of the gross
income of the foreign corporation was derived from the
Philippines for the three-year period ending with the
close of its taxable year preceding the declaration of such
dividends (the amount will be based on the same ratio
to dividends as the gross income for such period derived
from sources within Philippines to its gross income from
all sources).

J9JC9B0M

39

INCOME TAX

i.

For example, SugaStans, Inc. a Korean corporation,
derives more than 50% of its gross income in the
Philippines from the sale of BTS merchandise for
the past three years. If it declares dividends to a
nonresident Filipino, the dividend income will be
considered sourced within the Philippines.

3.

Services — compensation for labor or personal services
performed in the Philinninp^.

4.

Rentals and Royalties — from property located
Philippines or from any interest in such property for:

in

the

a.

the use of any copyright, patent, design or model, plan,
secret formula or process, goodwill, trademark, trade
brand or other similar stuff

b.

the use of
equipment

c.

the supply of scientific, technical, industrial or commercial
knowledge or info

d.

the supply of services by a nonresident person in
connection with those of property or rights, or the
installation or operation of any brand, machinery, or
other apparatus purchased from such nonresident person

e.

technical advice, assistance or services rendered in
connection with technical management of any scientific,
industrial or commercial undertaking

f.

the use of motion picture films, films for TV, tapes for
radio broadcast

any

industrial,

commercial

or

scientific

5.

Sale of real property — the gains, profits and income from
sale of real property located in the Philippines.

6.

Sale of personal property — gains, profits and Income from
sale of personal property, determined by subsection (E).

The place of the signing of a contract is NEVER an issue or a
factor for determining the source of income.

Do not forget the "turnkey contract" case of CIR v. Marubeni
(G.R. No. 137377, December 18, 2001), when it comes to situs
problems.

Expenses of a multinational corporation directly related to the
production of Philippine-derived income can be deducted from
gross income in the Philippines without need of apportionment,
but overhead expenses of its parent company belong to a different
category.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

40

These are items that cannot be definitely allocated or
identified with the operations of the Philippine branch. So,
the company can claim as its deductible share a ratable part
of such expenses based upon the ratio of the local branch's
gross income to the total gross income, worldwide, of the
multinational corporation. (CIR v. CTA and Smith KHne &
French Overseas Co., G.R. No. L-54108, January 17, 1984)

0

•

The source of income is the property, activity, or service that
produced the income.

It is the place of activity creating the income which is
controlling, and not the place of business or residence of a
corporation.

O

■

■

Hence, reinsurance premiums ceded to foreign reinsurers
are considered income from Philippine sources. (Howden
& Co., Ltd. V. CIR, G.R. No. L-19392, April 14, 1965)

•

Also, the sale of airline tickets through a general sales
agent in the Philippines is considered income from
Philippine sources, even if the tickets pertain to an airline
company which does not maintain any flights to and
from the Philippines. (CIR v. British Overseas Airways
Corporation [BOAC], G.R. No. L-65773, April 30, 1987,
wherein the Court considered the sale of the tickets as
the source of income, and not the activity of actually
transporting passengers)
When the sale is consummated within the Philippines (as
In the title to the property was transferred in the country),
the situs of the sale is in the Philippines and is therefore
taxable here. (A. Soriano Y Cia v. CIR, G.R. No. L-5896,
August 31, 1955)

___________ Income

Interest Income

Test of Source of Income
Residence of DEBTOR

Dividend Income:

1)

From domestic corporation

Income within

2)

From foreign corporation

Income within, if 50% or more of the
gross income of the foreign company
(for the past 3 years) was derived from
sources within the Philippines
Income without, if less than 50% of the
gross income of the foreign company
(for the past 3 years) was derived from
sources within the Philippines

Service Income

Place of performance

!

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

Rent income

Location of property

Royalty income

Place of use of intangible

Gain on sale of real property

Location of property

Gain on sale of personal property

Place of sale

Gain on sale of domestic shares
of stock

Income within

ABC, a domestic corporation, entered into a software license
agreement with XYZ, a non-resident foreign corporation based in the
U.S. Under the agreement which the parties forged in the U.S., XYZ
granted ABC the right to use a computer system program and to avail
of technical know-how relative to such program. In consideration for
such rights, ABC agreed to pay S°/o of the revenues it receives from
customers who will use and apply the program in the Philippines.
Discuss the tax implication of the transaction. (2010 Bar Exam)

|

Suggested answer: The transaction will subject XYZ Corporation to
income tax liability in the Philippines. The Tax Code states that the
income derived from the use of technical knowledge or know-how
within the Philippines (royalties) is considered income sourced within
the Philippines. Further, the Tax Code imposes a 30°/o Income tax
on a non-resident foreign corporation's gross income from sources
within the Philippines. In this case, the use of the technical know-how
is within the Philippines; the place of the execution of the contract is
irrelevant. Hence, XYZ Corporation will have to pay 30°/o income tax
on its royalty income from ABC.

Triple Star, a domestic corporation, entered Into a Management
Service Contract with Single Star, a non-resident foreign corporation
with no property in the Philippines. Under the contract, Single Star
shall provide managerial services for Triple Star's Hong Kong branch.
All said services shall be performed in Hong Kong.

Is the compensation for the services of Single Star taxable as Income
from sources within the Philippines? Explain. (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, the compensation for services are not taxable
in the Philippines. According to our trusty Tax Code, the test to
determine the situs of taxation for services is where the services are
performed. If the services are performed in the Philippines, then the
income is taxable in the Philippines; if performed abroad, then the
income is not taxable in the Philippines. In this case, the services are
performed in Hong Kong and therefore not taxable In the Philippines.

41

J9JC9B0M

42

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Ms. C, a resident citizen, bought ready-to-wear goods from Ms. B, a
nonresident citizen.
a) If the goods were produced from Ms. B's factory in the Philippines,
is Ms. B's income from the sale to Ms. C taxable in the Philippines?
Explain.

b) If Ms. B is an alien individual and the goods were produced in
her factory in China, is Ms. B's income from the sale of the goods to
Ms. C taxable in the Philippines? Explain. (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
a) Assuming the goods are sold in the Philippines, Ms. B's income
will be fully taxable in the Philippines. As the production and the sale
of the goods are completely in the Philippines, then the situs of the
sale are within the Philippines and thus taxable in the Philippines.

b) Assuming the goods are sold in the Philippines, Ms. B's income
will be partly taxable in the Philippines. Income from the sate of
personal property produced abroad but sold within the Philippines
are treated as derived partly from sources within and partly from
sources outside the Philippines. Hence, Ms. B, a non-resident citizen,
will be taxed partly for the sate to Ms C

Sure Arrival Airways (SAA) is a foreign corporation, organized under
the laws of the Republic of Nigeria. Its commercial airplanes do not
operate within Philippine territory, or service passengers embarking
from Philippine airports. The firm is represented in the Philippines by
Its general agent, Narotel.

SAA sells airplane tickets through Narotel, and these tickets are
serviced by SAA airplanes outside the Philippines. The total sales
of airplane tickets transacted by Narotel for SAA tn 2012 amounted
to PIO,000,000.00. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue (C1R)
assessed SAA deficiency income taxes at the rate of 30u/o on its
taxable Income, finding that SAA's airline ticket sales constituted
income derived from sources within the Philippines.
SAA filed a protest on the ground that the alleged deficiency income
taxes should be considered as income derived exclusively from
sources outside the Philippines since SAA only serviced passengers
outside Philippine territory. It, thus, asserted that the imposition of
such income taxes violated the principle of territoriality in taxation.
Is the theory of SAA tenable? Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The theory of SAA is untenable. The Supreme
Court has previously held that the sale of airline tickets through
a general sales agent in the Philippines is considered income
from Philippine sources, even if an airline company only services
passengers outside Philippine territory.

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

43

XYZ Air, a 100°/o foreign-owned airline company based and registered
in Netherlands, is engaged in the international airline business and
is a member signatory of the International Air Transport Association.
Its commercial airplanes neither operate within the Philippine
territory nor are its service passengers embarking from Philippine
airports. Nevertheless, XYZ Air is able to sell its airplane tickets in the
Philippines through ABC Agency, its general agent in the Philippines.
As XYZ Air's ticket sales, sold through ABC Agency for the year 2013,
amounted to P5,000,000.00, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR)
assessed XYZ Air deficiency income taxes on the ground that the
income from the said sales constituted income derived from sources
within the Philippines.

Aggrieved, XYZ Air filed a protest, arguing that, as a non-resident
foreign corporation, it should only be taxed for income derived
from sources within the Philippines. However, since it only serviced
passengers outside the Philippine territory, the situs of the income
from its ticket sales should be considered outside the Philippines.
Hence, no income tax should be imposed on the same.
Is XYZ Air's protest meritorious? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The protest is not meritorious. The Supreme Court
has previously held that the sale of airline tickets through a general
sales agent in the Philippines is considered income from Philippine
sources, even if an airline company only services passengers outside
Philippine territory. (This is eerily similar to the BOAC case. Cue
Twilight Zone, X-FUes, or Unsolved Mysteries theme, depending on
your age bracket.)

Gross income from sources outside (without) the Philippines
Sec. 42. (C) Gross Income From Sources Without the
Philippines. — The following items of gross income shall be treated
as income from sources without the Philippines:
(1) Interests other than
Philippines as provided in
Section;

those derived from sources within the
paragraph (1) of Subsection (A) of this

(2) Dividends other than
Philippines as provided in
Section;

those derived from sources within the
paragraph (2) of Subsection (A) of this

(3) Compensation for labor or personal services performed without
the Philippines;
(4) Rentals or royalties from property located without the Philippines
or from any interest in such property including rentals or royalties for
the use of or for the privilege of using without the Philippines, patents,
copyrights, secret processes and formulas, goodwill, trademarks,
trade brands, franchises and other like properties; and

(5) Gains, profits and Income from the sale of real property located
without the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

44

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

1.

Interests other than those derived from sources within

2.

Dividends other than those derived from sources within

3.

Compensation for labor or personal services performed outside
the Philippines

4.

Rentals or royalties from property located outside the Philippines
or any interest in such property

5.

Gains, profits, income from sale of real property located outside
the Philippines

Income from sources partly within and partly without the Philippines

Sec. 42. (D) Taxable Income From Sources Without the
Philippines. — From the items of gross income specified in Subsection
(C) of this Section there shall be deducted the expenses, losses, and
other deductions properly apportioned or allocated thereto and a
ratable part of any expense, loss or other deduction which cannot
definitely be allocated to some items or classes of gross income.
The remainder, if any, shall be treated in full as taxable income from
sources without the Philippines.
(E) Income From Sources Partly Within and Partly Without
the Philippines. — Items of gross income, expenses, losses and
deductions, other than those specified in Subsections (A) and (C) of
this Section, shall be allocated or apportioned to sources within or
without the Philippines, under the rules and regulations prescribed by
the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.
Where items of gross income are separately allocated to sources
within the Philippines, there shall be deducted (for the purpose of
computing the taxable income therefrom) the expenses, losses and
other deductions properly apportioned or allocated thereto and a
ratable part of other expenses, losses or other deductions which cannot
definitely be allocated to some items or classes of gross income. The
remainder, if any, shall be included in full as taxable income from
sources within the Philippines. In the case of gross income derived
from sources partly within and partly without the Philippines, the
taxable income may first be computed by deducting the expenses,
losses or other deductions apportioned or allocated thereto and a
ratable part of any expense, loss or other deduction which cannot
definitely be allocated to some items or classes of gross income; and
the portion of such taxable income attributable to sources within the
Philippines may be determined by processes or formulas of general
apportionment prescribed by the Secretary of Finance. Gains, profits
and income from the sale of personal property produced (in whole or
in part) by the taxpayer within and sold without the Philippines, or
produced (in whole or in part) by the taxpayer without and sold within
the Philippines, shall be treated as derived partly from sources within
and partly from sources without the Philippines.

■

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

45

Gains, profits and income derived from the purchase of personal
property within and its sale without the Philippines, or from the
purchase of personal property without and its sale within the
Philippines shall be treated as derived entirely from sources within
the country in which sold: Provided, however, That gain from the
sale of shares of stock in a domestic corporation shall be treated
as derived entirely from sources within the Philippines regardless of
where the said shares are sold. The transfer by a nonresident alien
or a foreign corporation to anyone of any share of stock issued by a
domestic corporation shall not be effected or made in its book unless:
(1) the transferor has filed with the Commissioner a bond conditioned
upon the future payment by him of any income tax that may be due
on the gains derived from such transfer, or (2) the Commissioner has
certified that the taxes, if any, imposed in this Title and due on the
gain realized from such sale or transfer have been paid. It shall be the
duty of the transferor and the corporation the shares of which are sold
or transferred, to advise the transferee of this requirement.

(F) Definitions. — As used in this Section the words "sale" or "sold"
include "exchange"or "exchanged"; and the word "produced" Includes
"created," "fabricated," "manufactured," "extracted," "processed,"
"cured" or "aged."

For the gross income items allocated to sources partly within and
partly without the Philippines,
O

there shall be deducted the expenses, losses and other
deductions properly apportioned, and

o

a ratable part of other expenses, losses and deductions which
cannot properly be allocated to some item of gross income.

If there is any remainder, it shall be included In full as taxable
income from sources within the Philippines
Situs of sale of personal property
•

Gains, profits and income derived from purchase of personal
property within and sold without, or from purchase without and
sale within, are treated as derived entirely from sources with the
country in which it is SOLD.

Situs of sale of stocks in a domestic corporation

•

Gains from sale of shares of stock in a domestic corporation are
treated as DERIVED ENTIRELY from sources within the Philippines
regardless of where the said shares are sold.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

46

E.

Income Tax on Individuals
Now that we know how to determine where income is sourced,
it is time to focus on the different kinds of taxpayers. Let us begin
with individual taxpayers.

Individual taxpayers are classified into:

1.

2.

Citizens, who are divided into:

•

Resident citizens — those citizens whose residence is
within the Philippines; and

•

Nonresident citizens — those citizens whose residence is
not within the Philippines.

Aliens, who are divided into:

•

Resident aliens — those individuals whose residence is
within the Philippines and are not citizens thereof; and

•

Nonresident aliens — those individuals whose residence
is not within the Philippines but are temporarily in the
country and are not citizens thereof. They are:
•

Those engaged in trade or business
Philippines; and

■

Those who are not so engaged. (See N1RC, Sections
23-25)

within the

It Is Important to know the definition of each kind of
individual taxpayer because the tax liability of each differs
(as we shall see later).
Nonresident citizens

Sec. 22. (£) The term "nonresident citizen" means:
(1) A citizen of the Philippines who establishes to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner the fact of his physical presence abroad with a
definite intention to reside therein.

(2) A citizen of the Philippines who leaves the Philippines during
the taxable year to reside abroad, either as an immigrant or for
employment on a permanent basis.
(3) A citizen of the Philippines who works and derives income from
abroad and whose employment thereat requires him to be physically
present abroad most of the time during the taxable year.
(4) A citizen who has been previously considered as nonresident
citizen and who arrives in the Philippines at any time during the
taxable year to reside permanently in the Philippines shall likewise
be treated as a nonresident citizen for the taxable year in which
he arrives in the Philippines with respect to his income derived
from sources abroad until the date of his arrival in the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

47

(5) The taxpayer shall submit proof to the Commissioner to show his
intention of leaving the Philippines to reside permanently abroad or to
return to and reside in the Philippines as the case may be for purpose
of this Section.

Meaning of nonresident citizen:

1.

Citizen who establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner
the fact of his physical presence abroad with a definite
intention to reside therein;

2.

Citizen who leaves the Philippines during the taxable year to
reside abroad, either as an immigrant or for employment on
a permanent basis;

3.

Citizen who works and derives from abroad and whose
employment thereat requires him to be physically present
abroad most of the time during the taxable year;

4.

Citizen who has been previously considered as nonresident
citizen and who arrives in the Philippines at any time during
the taxable year to reside permanently in the Philippines shall
likewise be treated as a nonresident citizen for the taxable
year in which he arrives in the Philippines with respect to
his income derived from sources abroad until the date of his
arrival in the Philippines.

Who are nonresident citizens? (R.R. 1-1979)

1.

Immigrant — one who leaves the Philippines to reside abroad
as an immigrant for which a foreign visa has been secured.

2.

Permanent employee — one who leaves the Philippines to
reside abroad for employment on a more or less permanent
basis.

3.

Contract worker — one who leaves the Philippines on account
of a contract of employment which is renewed from time
to time under such circumstance as to require him to be
physically present abroad most of the time (not less than 183
days).

Nonresident citizens who are exempt from tax with respect to
income derived from sources outside the Philippines shall no
longer be required to file information returns from sources outside
the Philippines beginning 2001. (R.R. 5-2001)

The phrase "most of the time" shall mean that the said citizen
shall have stayed abroad for at least 183 days in a taxable year.

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

48

O

However, citizens who work outside of the Philippines for at
least 183 days in a taxable year due to a contract of employment
with a Philippine employer (such as employees seconded to
a foreign country) are not considered nonresident citizens
because they are not considered employed abroad. They do
not fall within Section 22(E)(3) because their employment
remains with the Philippine employer. (BIR Ruling 116-12)

The wage or income of an OFW/OCW which is earned from outside
the Philippines is exempt from income tax.
O

An OCW is a Filipino citizen who:

-

holds a job outside the Philippines;

-

is physically present in that foreign country where the job
is;

•

is registered with the POEA;

•

has a valid overseas employment certificate;

■

their salaries and wages are paid by an employer abroad
and is not borne by any entity or person in the Philippines.
(R.R. 1-2011)

JKL-PhiHppines Is a domestic corporation affiliated with JKL-Japan, a
Japan-based information technology company with affiliates across
the world. Mr. F is a Filipino engineer employed by JKL-Phitippines.
In 2018, Mr. F was sent to the Tokyo branch of JKL-Japan based on
a contract entered into between the two (2) companies. Under the
said contract, Mr. F would be compensated by JKL-Phiiippines for the
months spent in the Philippines, and by JKL-Japan for months spent
in Japan. For the entirety of 2018, Mr. F spent ten (1O) months in
the Tokyo branch.

On the other hand, Mr. J, a Japanese engineer employed by JKLJapan, was sent to Manila to work with JKL-Phiiippines as a technical
consultant. Based on the contract between the two (2) companies, Mr.
J's annual compensation would still be paid by JKL-Japan. However,
he would be paid additional compensation by JKL-Phiiippines tor the
months spent working as a consultant. For 2018, Mr. J stayed in the
Philippines for five (5) months.

j

{

J9JC9B0M

In 2019, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) assessed JKLPhiiippines for deficiency withholding taxes for both Mr. F and
Mr. J for the year 2018. As to Mr. F, the BIR argued that he is
a resident citizen; hence, his income tax should be based on his
worldwide income. As to Mr. J, the BIR argued that he is a resident
alien; hence, his income tax should be based on his income from
sources within the Philippines at the scheduler rate under Section
24 (A) (2) of the Tax Code, as amended by Republic Act No.
10963, or the “Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion" Law.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

49

a) Is the BIR correct in basing its income tax assessment on Mr. F's
worldwide income? Explain.
b) Is the BIR correct in basing its income tax assessment on Mr. J's
income within the Philippines at the schedular rate? Explain. (2019
Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a)

b)

The BIR is correct. Under the Tax Code, a non-resident citizen is
one who works and derives from abroad and whose employment
thereat requires him to be physically present abroad most of the
time during the taxable year. Mr. F is not a non-resident citizen
because he is still employed by a Philippine firm (JKL-Philippines)
and is therefore not "employed thereat" (abroad). Hence, he is a
resident citizen who is taxable based on his worldwide income.

I

I

The BIR is correct. Mr. J is a resident alien as his work as a
technical consultant in the Philippines does not make him a
mere transient or sojourner. Therefore, under the Tax Code and
jurisprudence, he is a resident alien. As resident aliens are taxed
in a similar manner as resident citizens for their income earned
within the Philippines, Mr. J will also be subject to the schedular
rates under TRAIN.

Resident aliens

Sec. 22. (F) The term “resident alien" means an Individual whose
residence is within the Philippines and who Is not a citizen thereof.

A resident alien is an individual:

1.

Whose residence is within the Philippines, and

2.

Who is not a citizen

Mere physical or body presence Is enough, not Intention to make
the country one's abode. (Garrison v. CA, G.R. No. L-44501, July
19, 1990)

An alien actually present in the Philippines who is not a mere
transient or sojourner is a resident of the Philippines for purposes
of income tax. Whether he is a transient or not is determined
by his intentions with regard to the length and nature of his
stay.
o

A mere floating intention indefinite as to time, to return to
another country is not sufficient to constitute him a transient.

o

If he lives in the Philippines and has no definite intention as
to his stay, he is a resident. One who comes to the Philippines

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

50

for a definite purpose which in its nature may be promptly
accomplished is a transient.
But if his purpose is of such a nature that an extended stay
may be necessary for its accomplishment, and to that end
the alien makes his home temporarily in the Philippines, he
becomes a resident, though it may be his intention at all
times to return to his domicile abroad when the purpose for
which he came has been consummated or abandoned. (R.R.
2-1940)

O

The BIR has ruled that there is intention on the part of an alien to
stay in the Philippines indefinitely when the alien:
O

Had a Special Resident Retiree's Visa;

o

Acquired real property and is actually present most of the
time in the Philippines; and

o

Registered as a taxpayer with the BIR. (BIR Ruling 252-11)

Nonresident aliens engaged in business in the Philippines
Sec. 22. (G) The term "nonresident alien' means an individual whose
residence is not within the Philippines and who is not a citizen thereof.

Who are nonresident aliens?

1.

An individual whose residence is not within the Philippines,
and

2.

Not a citizen of the Philippines

One who comes to the Philippines for a definite purpose which
in its nature may be promptly accomplished is a transient or
nonresident. (R.R. 2-1940)

Nonresident aliens are either:
o

o

Engaged in trade or business, such as:

■

One who actually derives income in the Philippines, or

•

Stays in the Philippines for more than 180 days during
any calendar year (deemed to be a nonresident alien
engaged in the Philippines, Section 25[AJ)

Not engaged in trade or business.

Loss of residence by alien

o

An alien who has acquired residence in the Philippines retains
his status until he abandons the same and actually departs
from the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

51

INCOME TAX

O

A mere intention to change his residence does not change
his status from resident alien to nonresident alien. An alien
who has acquired a residence is taxable as a resident for
the remainder of his stay in the Philippines. (Section 6, R.R.
2-1940)

Minimum wage earner
Sec. 22. (GG) The term 'statutory minimum wage' earner shall refer
to rate fixed by the Regional Tripartite Wage and Productivity Board,
as defined by the Bureau of Labor and Employment Statistics (BLES)
of the DOLE.

(HH) The term 'minimum wage earner' shall refer to a worker in the
private sector paid the statutory minimum wage; or to an employee
in the public sector with compensation income of not more than the
statutory minimum wage in the non-agricultural sector where he/she
is assigned.

The minimum wage is fixed by the Regional Tripartite Wage and
Productivity Board.

Minimum wage earner:
o

Private sector — paid the statutory minimum wage

o

Public sector — not more than the statutory minimum wage
in the non-agricultural sector where he/she is assigned

Senior citizens
Senior citizens are

o

Resident citizens of the Philippines, and

o

Who are at least 60 years old

•

They are not exempt from income taxes unless they are
considered minimum wage earners. (R.A. 9994)

Senior citizens
establishments.
o

are

granted

a

20%

discount

from

select

Sales of goods and services by select establishments to senior
citizens are also exempt from VAT. (R.R. 7-2010)

Discounts for senior citizens are now treated as tax deductions
for businesses, as per The Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2003
(R.A. 9257). This can be very bad for the taxpayer because he
doesn't get the "peso for peso" benefit which he would have
gotten if it were considered a tax credit as before. (Manila
Memorial Park, Inc. v. Secretary of Department of Social Welfare
and Development, G.R. No. 175356, December 3, 2013)

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

52

Persons with disability

Persons with disability (PWD) are:

•

O

Individuals suffering from restriction or different abilities,

0

As a result of mental, physical or sensory impairment to
perform an activity in a manner or within the range considered
normal for human beings.

PWD are granted a 20% discount from selected establishments.
0

These discounts can likewise be claimed as a deduction for
businesses. (R.R. 1-2009)

O

The grant of discount and the corresponding deduction for
businesses have been held as valid and constitutional as a
proper exercise of police power. (Drugstores Association of
the Philippines v. National Council of Disability Affairs, C.R.
No. 194561, September 14, 2016)

National athletes and coaches

National athletes are Filipino athletes (including PWDs) who are:

•

0

Members of the national training pool, and

O

Recognized and accredited by the Philippine Olympic
Committee (POC) and the Philippine Sports Commission
(PSC) (for athletes with disabilities, they should be accredited
by the National Paralympics Committee [NPC] and the PSC).

National coaches are Filipino coaches who are:
O

Coaches of national athletes,

O

Members of the national coaches training pool, and

o

Recognized and accredited by the POC and the PSC, or the
NPC and the PSC, as the case may be.

National athletes and coaches are granted a 20% discount from
selected establishments under RA 10699.
o

These discounts can likewise be claimed as a deduction for
businesses. (R.R. 13-2020)

Congress issued a law allowing a 20% discount on the purchases of
senior citizens from, among others, recreation centers. This 20%
discount can then be used by the sellers as a “tax credit." At the
initiative of BIR, however, Republic Act No. (RA) 9257 was enacted
amending the treatment of the 20% discount as a "tax deduction."
Equity Cinema filed a petition with the RTC claiming that RA 9257 is

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

53

unconstitutional as it forcibly deprives sellers a part of the price
without Just compensation.
a) What is the effect of converting the 20°/o discount from a "tax
credit" to a "tax deduction"?
b) If you are the judge, how will you decide the case? Briefly
explain your answer. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a) The effect of converting the 20°/o discount from tax credit to
a tax deduction is that taxpayers who deal with senior citizens
won't get the "peso for peso" benefit. Since they are now treated as
deductions, they only benefit to the extent of 30°/o (the corporate
income tax rate). They are now used to determine taxable income,
which will be subject to the corporate tax rate, as compared to before
when the credit can be used to decrease the actual tax liability of the
corporation.
b) If I were the court. I'd dismiss the case. The Supreme Court has
previously held that RA 9257 was a valid exercise of police power to
improve the welfare of senior citizens; it's not an exercise of eminent
domain. The shift from a credit system to a deduction system is not
discriminatory, arbitrary, or confiscatory.

Kinds of income and income tax of individuals

Before we get into the smallest details of the tax liabilities of
each kind of individual, let's set down some basic rules which will be
helpful to remember:
•

Only resident citizens (and domestic corporations as we shall
see later) are taxed on income derived from abroad. Worldwide
taxable!

•

For income received from sources within the Philippines and
which are not subject to final withholding tax (like passive income
to be discussed below), a resident citizen, a nonresident citizen, a
resident alien, and a nonresident alien individual engaged in trade
or business in the Philippines are all subject to the graduated
income tax rates in Section 24.
O

But what about nonresident aliens not engaged In trade or
business?
•

For nonresident aliens not so engaged, the tax rate is:
•

25% of the entire or gross income received from
sources within the Philippines or

•

For special aliens (like those employed by regional
headquarters [RHQs], offshore banking units [OBUs],
or foreign petroleum service contractors), the BIR
has stated that the preferential income tax rate is no

J9JC9B0M

1
54

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

longer applicable because of TRAIN, without prejudice
to preferential rates under existing tax treaties. So,
as it stands, these special aliens are now subject to
the regular income tax rate. (R.R. 8-2018)
Income tax formula for individuals

It is important to note the basic formula to determine the taxable
income of an individual. Think of it as a road map where the different
provisions of the code will plug into. The basic formula to determine
the taxable income of an individual is as follows:

Gross Income
Less: Deductions (either itemized or optional standard deduction)
Taxable Income
x Tax Rate
Tax Due

Deductions
•

Individuals, except those who earn purely compensation income,
can claim deductions in two ways:

o

Itemized deductions (which we will discuss in more detail), or

O

belo'w)9

0ptl0nal star,dard deduction (which is discussed

Optional Standard Deduction

dPd,’,?pWena/ s^dard Deduction (OSD). — In lieu of the
siihiaC<IO?S a^owed under the preceding Subsections, an individual
mav C| t taX un<^er Section 24, other than a nonresident alien,
nercf?t'fAno stanbard deduction in an amount not exceeding forty
be irTth 40 /o) °f h,s 9ross sales or gross receipts, as the case may
and 2R(A\fC^e- °f a corPorat*on subject to tax under Sections 27(A)
standard deduction in an amount not
r '
may e*ect
Avrnod
Ser-tinn"1?? eX Percent (40%) of its gross income as defined in
°' ^'S (*obe- Unless the taxpayer signifies in his return
his inr
rnnciHen l°n
e*ect the optional standard deduction, he shall be
thp nra^ri- aS bavin9 availed himself of the deductions allowed in
ch 11 . ce ln9 Subsections. Such election when made in the return
Prni/iH«JrrTK°^able fOr the taxable year for which the return is made:
nriH_. i ' a at an individual who is entitled to and claimed for the
optfonal standard deduction shall not be required to submit with his
financial
taxH return such fi
r
nanc*al statements otherwise required under this
the
^u^er' That a general professional partnership and
p
ners comprising such partnership may avail of the optional

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

55

standard deduction only once, either by the general professional
partnership or the partners comprising the partnership: Provided,
finally, That except when the Commissioner otherwise permits, the
said individual shall keep such records pertaining to his gross sales
or gross receipts, or the said corporation shall keep such records
pertaining to his gross income as defined in Section 32 of this Code
during the taxable year, as may be required by the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner. (Amended by TRAIN)

Optional standard deduction is the deduction which an individual
other than a nonresident alien, subject to income tax, may elect
in an amount not exceeding 40% of his gross sales or gross
receipts, as the case may be, or a corporation, in an amount not
exceeding 40% of its gross income, in lieu of taking itemized
deductions.
Note that the codal states that a general professional partnership
(GPP) (like a law firm) and the partners comprising such
partnership may only use OSD once, either by the GPP itself or
the partners comprising the partnership. (Reconcile this with R.R.
8-2018)

More on OSD in the section of Deductions.
Persona! and additional exemptions and premium payments on
health and/or hospitalization insurance

•

If you're wondering what happened to personal exemptions and
health/hospitalization insurance, well, they've gone the way of
the dodo and are gone now. TRAIN repealed Section 35, NIRC,
which granted personal exemptions for taxpayers and additional
exemptions for their dependents, and Section 34 (M), which
allowed deductions for health and hospitalization premiums.

Now that we have a working Idea of how to arrive at an
individual's taxable income, let's focus on the different tax rates per
individual and the treatment of their passive Income.
Citizens (resident and nonresident) and resident aliens

Sec. 24. Income Tax Rates. —
(A) Rates of Income Tax on Individual Citizen and Individual
Resident Alien of the Philippines. —

(1) An income tax is hereby imposed:
(a) On the taxable income defined In Section 31 of this Code,
other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and

J9JC9B0M

56

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources
within and without the Philippines by every individual citizen of the
Philippines residing therein;

(b) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code,
other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and
(D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources
within the Philippines by an individual citizen of the Philippines who is
residing outside of the Philippines including overseas contract workers
referred to in Subsection (C) of Section 23 hereof; and
(c) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code,
other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C), and
(D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources
within the Philippines by an individual alien who is a resident of the
Philippines.

(2) Rates of Tax on Taxable Income of Individuals. — The tax shall
be computed in accordance with and at the rates established in the
following schedule:
(a) Tax Schedule Effective January 1, 2018 until December 31,
2022:

Not over P250,000

0%

Over P250,000 but not over P400,000

20% of the excess over
P250,000

Over P400,000 but not over P800.000

P30,000 + 25% of the
excess over P400,000

Over P800,000 but not over P2,000,000

P130.000 + 30% of the
excess over P800.000

Over P2,000,000 but not over P8,000,000

P490,000 + 32% of the
excess over P2,000,000

Over P8,000,000

P2,410,000 + 35% of
the excess over
P8,000,000

Tax Schedule Effective January 1, 2023 and onwards:
Not over P250,000

0%

Over P250,000 but not over P400,000

15% of the excess over
P250,000

Over P400,000 but not over P800,000

P22,500 + 20% of the
excess over P400,000

Over P800,000 but not over P2,000,000

P102,500 + 25% of the
excess over P800,000

Over P2,000,000 but not over P8,000,000

P402,500 + 30% of the
excess over P2,000,000

Over P8,000,000

P2,202,500 + 35% of
the excess over
P8,000,000

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

57

For married individuals, the husband and wife, subject to the provision
of Section 51(D) hereof, shall compute separately their individual
income tax based on their respective total taxable income: Provided,
That if any income cannot be definitely attributed to or identified as
income exclusively earned or realized by either of the spouses, the
same shall be divided equally between the spouses for the purpose of
determining their respective taxable income.

Provided, That minimum wage earners as defined in Section 22(HH)
of this Code shall be exempt from the payment of income tax on their
taxable income: Provided, further. That the holiday pay, overtime pay,
night shift differential pay and hazard pay received by such minimum
wage earners shall likewise be exempt from income tax.

(b) Rate of Tax on Income of Purely Self-employed Individuals
and/or Professionals Whose Gross Sales or Gross Receipts and Other
Non-operating Income Does Not Exceed the Value-added Tax (VAT)
Threshold as Provided in Section 109(BB). — Self-employed individuals
and/or professionals shall have the option to avail of an eight percent
(8%) tax on gross sales or gross receipts and other non-operating
income in excess of Two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250,000) in
lieu of the graduated income tax rates under Subsection (A)(2)(a) of
this Section and the percentage tax under Section 116 of this Code.
(c) Rate of Tax for Mixed Income Earners. — Taxpayers earning
both compensation income and income from business or practice of
profession shall be subject to the following taxes:

(1) All Income from Compensation — The rates prescribed under
Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section.
(2) All Income from Business or Practice of Profession —
(a) If Total Gross Sales and/or Gross Receipts and Other Nonoperating Income Do Not Exceed the VAT Threshold as Provided In
Section 109(BB) of this Code. — The rates prescribed under Subsection
(A)(2)(a) of this Section on taxable income, or eight percent (8%)
income tax based on gross sales or gross receipts and other nonoperating income in lieu of the graduated income tax rates under
Subsection (A)(2)(a) of this Section and the percentage tax under
Section 116 of this Code.
(b) If Total Gross Sales and/or Gross Receipts and Other Nonoperating Income Exceeds the VAT Threshold as Provided in Section
109(BB) of this Code. — The rates prescribed under Subsection (A)(2)
(a) or this Section.

Income tax is imposed upon taxable compensation or employment
income, business income, and income derived from the practice
of professions derived by citizens and resident aliens.
Married individuals shall compute separately their Individual
income tax based on their respective total taxable income.

J9JC9B0M

58

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

If any income cannot be definitely attributed to, or identified
as income exclusively earned or realized by either of the
spouses, the same shall be divided equally between them for
the purpose of determining their respective taxable income.

O

Minimum wage earners are exempt from the payment of income
tax on their taxable income. Holiday pay, overtime pay, night shift
differential pay, and hazard pay received by them are likewise
exempt from income tax.
o

The SC has declared R.R. 10-2008 unconstitutional. The R.R.
stated that a minimum wage earner (MWE) loses his/her
exempt status and is thus taxable on his/her entire income
if the MWE receives other benefits in excess of the statutory
limit (in this case, the previous P30,000 limit under exclusions
form gross income). (Soriano v. Secretary of Finance, G.R.
No. 184450, January 24, 2017)

•

The R.R. added a requirement not found in R.A. 9504.
It effectively changed the definition of a MWE. A R.R.
cannot expand a law. In fact, this particular R.R. didn't
even clarify the law.

•

Hence, the proper rules are as follows:

•

A MWE who receives taxable income in excess of the
minimum wage will be taxed on the excess, but the
MWE will not lose his/her status as such. Workers
who receive the statutory minimum wage as their
basic pay remain MWEs.

•

Also, the receipt of other income during the year does
not disqualify them as MWEs. But the taxable income
they receive other than as MWEs may be subjected to
appropriate taxes.

•

Hence, bonuses and other benefits received above
the present statutory limit (now P90,000 because of
TRAIN) are taxable. (Soriano v. Secretary of Finance)

The amendment to Section 24(A) is one of the biggest changes
rought by TRAIN. In summary, it changed the following:
O

The tax brackets for individuals, most notably
P250,000 the cut-off for 0% income tax; and

O

The tax treatment of the following taxpayers:

making

Individuals earning purely compensation income;
Self-employed individuals earning income purely from
self-employment or practice of profession; and

J

J9JC9B0M

59

INCOME TAX

Mixed income earners, or those individuals who earn
income both from compensation and self-employment or
practice of profession.

■

Let's go through the rules of each kind of individual taxpayer and
how TRAIN taxes each.
O

Individuals earning purely
under the graduated rates

income:

taxed

First, compensation income is all remuneration for
services performed by an employee for his employer
under an employer-employee relationship.

•

•

•

This includes salaries, wages, emoluments, and
honoraria, allowances, commissions, director's fees
where the director is also an employee. (R.R. 8-2018)

•

So, as long as there's an employer-employee relationship, remuneration arising from it will be considered compensation income.

If an individual earns purely compensation income, then
he or she will be taxed according to his or her taxable
income and tax bracket, i.e., the graduated rates.

•

o

compensation

Taxable income is the individual's gross compensation
less
like
income
income/benefits
non-taxable
13th-month pay and other benefits like de minimis
benefits and employee's share in the Social Security
System (SSS), Government Service Insurance System
(GSIS), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
(PHIC), Pag-IBIG contributions and union dues. (R.R.
8-2018)

Self-employed individuals earning income purely from selfemployment or practice of profession whose gross sales/
receipts and other non-operating Income do not exceed
P3,000,000, a.k.a. the VAT threshold: given two choices—
either a) under the graduated rates or b) 8% income tax rate
•

A self-employed individual is a sole proprietor or an
independent contractor who reports income earned from
self-employment.

•

A professional is a person formally certified by a
professional body belonging to a specific profession (like a
lawyer or a doctor). It also refers to a person who engages
in some art or sport for money as a means of livelihood,
rather than as a hobby (like a professional boxer or a
professional artist). An insurance agent, management

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

60

and technical consultant, and recipients of professional
and talent fees are also considered professionals. (R.R.
8-2018)
So, self-employed individuals and professionals have a
choice to avail of:

•

The graduated rates; or

•

An 8% tax on gross sales/receipts and other nonoperating income in excess of P250,000 in lieu of the
graduated income tax rates and the percentage tax
under Section 116, NIRC.

Rules on availing the 8% tax rate:
The first P250,000 is not subject to tax, since what is
taxed is anything in excess of P250,000.

•

0

Note that this P250,000 "bonus" is not available
to mixed income earners (the third kind of
individual taxpayer)

•

If you choose the 8% tax rate, then you won't be
liable for the 3% percentage tax under Section
116 because the 8% tax rate is in lieu of said 3%
percentage tax.

•

The taxpayer must signify his or her intention to use
the 8% tax rate in the 1st quarter of the percentage/
income tax return. If not, he or she is deemed
considered to have chosen the graduated rates.

•

The 8% tax rate option is not available to the
following:
o

Purely compensation income earners (since they
have to use the graduated rates);

o

VAT-registered taxpayers, regardless of their
gross sales/receipts and other non-operating
income;

o

Non-VAT taxpayers whose gross sales/receipts
and other non-operating income exceeded the
P3,000,000 VAT threshold;

o

Taxpayers subject to Other Percentage Taxes
(except those under Section 116, NIRC);

o

Partners of a general professional partnership
since their distributive share from the GPP is
already net of costs and expenses; and

J9JC9B0M

61

INCOME TAX

O

•

■

What happens if your gross sales/receipts and other nonoperating income exceed the P3,000,000 VAT threshold?

•

You are automatically subject to the graduated rates
and can no longer use the 8% income tax rate.

•

You will also be subject to other business taxes, if
any.

Take note of the different tax base for computing the
graduated rates and the 8% income tax rate.

•

Graduated rates: taxable income

•

8% income tax rate: gross sales/receipts and other
non-operating income to be reduced by P250,000
o

o

Individuals enjoying income tax exemption (like
those registered as Barangay Micro Business
Enterprises). (RMC 50-2018)

Gross receipts include all kinds of deposits.
However, returnable deposits or deposits held in
trust and recorded as liability are excluded. (RMC
50-2018)

Mixed income earners, or those who earn Income from both
compensation and from self-employment: taxed under the
graduated rates for their compensation income and for their
self-employment income, it will depend on VAT threshold
•

The treatment of mixed income earners may seem
complicated, but it's basically just a combination of the
rules.
Mixed income earners are taxed in this way:

•

For compensation
graduated rates;

•

For income from business or practice of profession, It'll
depend whether their gross sales/receipts and other
non-operating income exceed the VAT threshold:

income,

straight out use the

o

If it exceeds the VAT threshold, then straight out
use the graduated rates for that too.

o

If it does not exceed the VAT threshold, then the
taxpayer has a choice to use either:
•

the graduated rates; or

•

8% income tax based on gross sales/receipts
and other non-operating income in lieu of the

J9JC9B0M

I
TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

62

graduated rates and percentage tax under
Section 116.
•

The total income tax liability of the mixed income
earner is the sum of the liability for compensation
income and liability for the income from business or
practice of profession.

For individuals who earn solely from business/profession
and mixed income earners, the rules on availing the 8%
rate are basically the same, except for one thing:
•

Mixed income earners are not entitled to the P250,000
reduction because this has already been applied in
computing the income tax on compensation. (RMC
50-2018)

Final Income tax — interests, royalties, awards, dividends, capital
gains on sale of shares, realty

Note that passive income is usually subject to final tax. In other
words, the income from these passive sources is not used in computing
the gross income to determine the tax bracket of the individual. The
tax liabilities from these passive income are withheld with finality by
the income payor; hence, their nature as "final" taxes.

Sec. 24. (B) Rate of Tax on Certain Passive Income: —

(1) Interests, Royalties, Prizes, and Other Winnings. — A final tax at
the rate of twenty percent (20%) is hereby imposed upon the amount
of Interest from any currency bank deposit and yield or any other
monetary benefit from deposit substitutes and from trust funds and
similar arrangements; royalties, except on books, as well as other
literary works and musical composiuons, which shall be imposed
a final tax of ten percent (10%); prizes (except prizes amounting
to Ten thousand pesos (PIO,000) or less which shall be subject to
tax under Subsection (A) of Section 24; and other winnings (except
winnings amounting to Ten thousand pesos (P10,000) or less from
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes and Lotto which shall be exempt),
derived from sources within the Philippines: Provided, however,
That interest income received by an individual taxpayer (except a
nonresident individual) from a depository bank under the expanded
foreign currency deposit system shall be subject to a final income tax
at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of such interest income: Provided,
further, That interest income from long-term deposit or investment
in the form of savings, common or individual trust funds, deposit
substitutes, investment management accounts and other investments
evidenced by certificates in such form prescribed by the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) shall be exempt from the tax imposed
under this Subsection: Provided, finally. That should the holder of the

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

63

certificate pre-terminate the deposit or investment before the fifth
(5th) year, a final tax shall be imposed on the entire income and
shall be deducted and withheld by the depository bank from the
proceeds of the long-term deposit or investment certificate based on
the remaining maturity thereof:

Four (4) years to less than five (5) years - 5%;
Three (3) years to less than (4) years - 12%; and

Less than three (3) years - 20%
(2) Cash and/or Property Dividends. — A final tax at the rate of
ten percent (10%) shall be imposed upon the cash and/or property
dividends actually or constructively received by an individual from
a domestic corporation or from a joint stock company, insurance
or mutual fund companies and regional operating headquarters of
multinational companies, or on the share of an individual in the
distributable net income after tax of a partnership (except a general
professional partnership) of which he is a partner, or on the share
of an individual in the net income after tax of an association, a joint
account, or a joint venture or consortium taxable as a corporation of
which he is a member or co-venturer.

(C) Capital Gains from Sale of Shares of Stock not Traded in the
Stock Exchange. — The provisions of Section 39(B) notwithstanding,
a final tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) is hereby imposed upon
the net capital gains realized during the taxable year from the sale,
barter, exchange or other disposition of shares of stock in a domestic
corporation, except shares sold, or disposed of through the stock
exchange. (As amended by TRAIN)
(D) Capital Gains from Sale of Real Property. —
(1) In General. — The provisions of Section 39(B) notwithstanding,
a final tax of six percent (6%) based on the gross selling price or
current fair market value as determined in accordance with Section
6(E) of this Code, whichever is higher, is hereby imposed upon capital
gains presumed to have been realized from the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of real property located in the Philippines, classified
as capital assets, including pacto de retro sales and other forms of
conditional sales, by individuals, including estates and trusts: Provided,
That tfie tax liability, if any, on gains from sales or other dispositions
of real property to the government or any of its political subdivisions
or agencies or to government-owned or controlled corporations shall
be determined either under Section 24(A) or under this Subsection,
at the option of the taxpayer.

(2) Exception. — The provisions of paragraph (1) of this Subsection
to the contrary notwithstanding, capital gains presumed to have been
realized from the sale or disposition of their principal residence by
natural persons, the proceeds of which is fully utilized in acquiring or
constructing a new principal residence within eighteen (18) calendar
months from the date of sale or disposition, shall be exempt from the
capital gains tax imposed under this Subsection: Provided, That the

J9JC9B0M

1

64

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

historical cost or adjusted basis of the real property sold or disposed
shall be carried over to the new principal residence built or acquired:
Provided, further. That the Commissioner shall have been duly
notified by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days from the date of sale
or disposition through a prescribed return of his intention to avail of
the tax exemption herein mentioned: Provided, still further. That the
said tax exemption can only be availed of once every ten (10) years:
Provided, finally, that if there is no full utilization of the proceeds of
sale or disposition, the portion of the gain presumed to have been
realized from the sale or disposition shall be subject to capital gains
tax. For this purpose, the gross selling price or fair market value at
the time of sale, whichever is higher, shall be multiplied by a fraction
which the unutilized amount bears to the gross selling price in order to
determine the taxable portion and the tax prescribed under paragraph
(1) of this Subsection shall be imposed thereon.

Tax Rate on Certain Passive Income on
Citizens and Resident Aliens

Final Tax

1.

Interest under the expanded foreign currency
deposit (FCD) system (see R.R. 10-98 below)
Nonresident citizens: exempt

15% (vs. exempt
for nonresident
aliens engaged in
trade/business)

2.

Royalties from books, literary works, and musical
compositions

10%

3.

Royalties other than above

20%

4.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or
other monetary benefits from deposit substitute,
trust fund and similar arrangement

20%

5.

Prizes exceeding P10,000 (prizes amounting to
P10,000 or less shall be taxed under Section
24[A])

20%

6.

Winnings (except PCSO and Lotto winnings
amounting to P10,000 or less, which shall be
exempt)

20%

7.

Dividend from a domestic corporation, or from
a joint stock company, insurance or mutual fund
company, and regional operating headquarters of
multinational company or share in the distributive
net income after tax of a partnership (except a
general professional partnership), joint stock
or joint venture or consortium taxable as a
corporation

10% (vs. 20% for
nonresident aliens
engaged in trade/
business)

8.

Interest on long-term deposit or investment in
banks (with maturity of five years or more)

exempt

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

65

The income sources referred to above are those derived within
the Philippines.

So, what happens if passive income is sourced abroad?
O

For nonresident citizens and aliens, the passive income from
abroad is not taxable in the Philippines. Royalties and other
income must come from within the Philippines since these
taxpayers are only taxed from sources within the Philippines.
However, note that dividends from a foreign corporation may
be considered sourced within the Philippines under Section
42. If these dividends can be grounded locally, the income
here enters into the computation of taxable income under
Section 24(A).

O

For resident citizens, passive income that come from outside
the Philippines goes into their gross income (and thus subject
to the graduated rates under Section 24[A]) because resident
citizens are taxed from income sourced worldwide.

A note on interest income from foreign currency deposits

While R.R. 10-98 in the table below has yet to be amended, I
imagine that the tax treatment of foreign currency deposits of
OCWs will still be treated as exempt.

•

O

Same would go with bank accounts in the joint names
of an OCW and his or her resident spouse: 50% shall be
exempt/50% shall be subject to the now 15% final withholding
tax for interest income from foreign currency deposits

Tax Rate on Interest Income from Foreign Currency Deposit
_______________________ (R.R. 10-1998)_________

1.

Interest income actually received by a resident
citizen or resident alien from FCD

7.5% final
withholding tax
(should be 15%
under TRAIN)

2.

If it was deposited by an OCW or seaman or
nonresident citizen

Exempt

3.

If it was in a bank account in the joint names of an
OCW and his spouse (who is a resident)

50% exempt/
50% final
withholding tax
of 7.5% (should
be 15% under
TRAIN)________

4.

Interest income actually received by a domestic
corporation or resident foreign corporation from
FCD

7.5% final
withholding tax
(should be 15%
under TRAIN)

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

66

A note on deposit substitutes
Sec. 22. (Y). The term "deposit substitutes" sha\\ mean an alternative
form of obtaining funds from the public (the term 'public' means
borrowing from twenty (20) or more individual or corporate lenders at
anyone time) otherthan deposits, through the issuance, endorsement,
or acceptance of debt instruments for the borrowers own account,
for the purpose of relending or purchasing of receivables and other
obligations, or financing their own needs or the needs of their agent
or dealer. These instruments may include, but need not be limited
to bankers' acceptances, promissory notes, repurchase agreements,
including reverse repurchase agreements entered into by and between
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) and any authorized agent bank,
certificates of assignment or participation and similar instruments
with recourse: Provided, however, That debt instruments issued for
interbank call loans with maturity of not more than five (5) days to
cover deficiency in reserves against deposit liabilities, including those
between or among banks and quasi-banks, shall not be considered as
deposit substitute debt instruments.

A deposit substitute is

o

a means of borrowing money from the public (20 or more
individual or corporate lenders)

o

other than by way of deposit with banks through the issuance
of debt instruments (like banker's acceptances, promissory
notes, repurchase agreements, certificates of assignment or
participation).

Nineteen (19)-lender rule: The mere flotation of a debt instrument
is not considered to be public (and therefore not a deposit
substitute) if there are only 19 or less lenders at any one time.

•

o

But what does "at any one time" mean?

•

It means every transaction executed in the primary
or secondary market in connection with the purchase
or sale of securities.

•

Hence, when funds are simultaneously obtained
from more than 20 lenders/investors — whether in
the primary or secondary market — the instrument
is deemed a deposit substitute. (Banco de Oro v.
Republic of the Philippines, G.R. No. 198756, January
13, 2015, where the issue of the PEACE Bonds was
finally resolved; the interpretation was upheld but
applied prospectively upon reconsideration, Banco de
Oro v. Republic, G.R. No. 198756, August 16, 2016)

When it comes to bonds, the investor has two avenues for income:

o

The interest paid by the borrower to the lender/investor; or

J9JC9B0M

67

INCOME TAX

O

The gain if the bond is traded before maturity or when
redeemed at maturity.

O

Banco de Oro, 2016 outlined it, but everything's better with a
table, right? So let's have a table!
Tax Rate_____

Type of income

Basis

Interest Income
Interest or yield
from deposit
substitute

20% (Final Withholding)

Section 24(B)(1);
Section 25(A)(2)

Interest income
from long-term
deposits or
placements with
banks

Exempt

Section 24 (B)(1);
Section 25 (A)(2)

Interest income
if preterminated

5%, 12%, 20% (Final
Withholding, depending
on remaining maturity)

Section 24(B)(1);
Section 25(A)(2)
!

Gains from the Sale or Trade
Long-term bonds
(Instrument has
maturity of more
than 5 years)

Exempt

Section 32(B)(7)
(9)

Shortterm bonds
(Instrument has
maturity of less
than 5 years)

Subject to regular income
tax rates (scheduler for
individuals, 30% for
corporations)

Section 32

Capital Gains Tax (CGT)
•

Capital gains tax only applies to the sale or disposition of the
following:
o

Shares of stock of a domestic corporation not traded through
the local stock exchange, and

o

Sale of real property In the Philippines which is held as a
capital asset.

For the sale or disposition of other capital assets, you must refer
to Section 39, NIRC (to be discussed later).

I

J9JC9B0M

1
68

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Tax Rate on Capital Gains
1.

On sale of shares of stock of a domestic
corporation not traded through a local
stock exchange held as a capita! asset

15% of the
gains

2.

On sale of real property in the Philippines
held as a capita! asset (see R.R. 8-1998)

6% of the gross selling
current
the
or
price,
market value at the time
of sale.
whichever is
higher

net capital

Capita! Gains on Sate or Disposition of Shares of Stock

Tax Rate on Income from Sale, Barter, Exchange or other
Disposition of Shares of Stock of Domestic Corporations
If shares of stock are listed and traded through j 6/10 of 1% of the gross
the local stock exchange
| se i rg once or gross
- !
! value in money of the
shares of stock
If shares not traded through the local stock
exchange

15% of the net
gams

capital

Implications on shares of stock listed and traded in the stock
exchange from those that are not (applies also to corporations):
o

Those listed and traded is subject to the final percentage
tax of 6/10 of 1% on the GROSS SELLING PRICE. (Stock
Transaction Tax)
Hence, imposed whether there was a gain or not.

•

o

Those NOT traded, the net capital gam is subject to the final
capital gains tax of 15%.

Subject to tax only if it results into a gain.

•

Who are liable for capital gains tax?

1.

Individual taxpayer, whether citizen or alien;

2.

Corporate taxpayer, whether domestic or foreign;

3.

Other taxpayers not falling under (1) and (2) above, such as
estate, trust, trust funds and pension funds, among others.
(R.R. 6-2008, as amended)
J

r~*

-----

J9JC9B0M

69

INCOME TAX

Who are exempt from capital gains tax?

1.

Dealers in securities (in terms of CGT for shares of stock)

2.

Investors in shares of stock in a mutual fund company, as
defined in Section 22(BB), and Section 2(s) of R.R. 6-2008,
in connection with the gains realized by said investor upon
redemption of said shares of stock in a mutual fund company,
and

3.

All other persons, whether natural or juridical, who are
specifically exempt from national internal revenue taxes
under existing investment incentives and other special laws.
(R.R. 6-2008)

A loan of shares to another party without any consideration falls
under the "disposition" of shares of stock which Is subject to
capital gains tax. (CIR v. Oder, G.R. No. 192023, November 21,
2018)
How to determine the tax base of
disposition of stock (R.R. 6-2008)

Fair Market Value

Sales of stock listed and traded through
the LSE

FMV is the actual selling price

Sales of stock listed but not traded
through the LSE

FMV is the closing price on the
dav when the shares were sold,
transferred, or exchanged (If no
sale was made on that day In
the LSE, then the closing price
on the day nearest to the date
of sale, transfer, or exchange of
the said shares)

Sales of stock not listed and not traded
through the LSE

For common shares, the book
value based on the latest AFS
prior to the date of the sale but
not earlier than the immediately
preceding year.
For
preferred
shares,
the
liquidation value, which is
equal to the redemption price
of the preferred shares as of
the balance sheet nearest the
including
date,
transaction
any premium and cumulative
preferred dividends In arrears.
In case there are both common
and preferred, deduct the
liquidation value of the preferrec

I

70

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

shares from the total equity first
and then divide the result by the
number of outstanding common
shares as of the balance sheet
nearest the transaction date.

The values no longer need to be
adjusted to include the appraisal
surplus from any property of the
corporation. The latest AFS are

the shares. (R.R. 20-2020)

)

::

Spouses Konstantino and Karina are Filipino citizens and are principal
shareholders of a restaurant chain. Karma's, Inc. The restaurant's
principal office is In Makati City, Philippines.

Korina's became so popular as a Filipino restaurant that the owners
decided to expand its operations overseas. During the period 20102015 alone, it opened ten (IO) stores throughout North America
and five (5) stores in various parts of Europe where there were
large Filipino communities. Each store abroad was in the name of a
corporation organized under the laws of the state or country in which
the store was located. AU stores had identical capital structures: 60%
of the outstanding capital stock was owned by Karina's, Inc., while
the remaining 40% was owned directly by the spouses Konstantino
and Korina.

Beginning 2017, in light of the immigration policy enunciated by US
President Donald Trump, many Filipinos nave since returned to the
Philippines and the number of Filipino immigrants m the US dropped
significantly. On account of these developments, Konstantino
and Karina decided to sell their shares of stock in the five (5) US
corporations that were doing poorly in gross sates. The spouses'
lawyer-friend advised them that they will be taxed 5% on the first
PhPlOO,OOO net capital gain, and 1O% on the net capita! gain in
excess of PhPl 00, OOO.

i

I
i
••

i

i

J9JC9B0M

Is the lawyer correct? If not, how should the spouses Konstantino
and Karina be taxed on the sale of their shares? (20IB Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The lawyer is wrong. The capital gams tax
rule that the lawyer refers to is limited to the sale of shares of
domestic corporations. In this case, the sale are of shares of foreign
corporations, so the capita! gains tax rule does not apply. However,
since Konstantino and Karina are resident citizens, they will still
be taxed from the sale of the foreign shares as they are taxed for
income sources worldwide. Whatever income they do get from the
sale will be included in their gross income which will be subject to
the schedular tax rate. (Note that this question still uses the old
5°/o/10°/o capita! gains tax under the pre-TRAIN regime. In any case,
the answer is the same since we're not talking about rates, but the
issue on the sale of foreign shares.)

J9JC9B0M

71

INCOME TAX

Capital Gains on Sales, Exchanges, or Transfers of Real Properties
(Capital Assets)
Final Tax Rate on Sales, Exchanges, or Transfers of Real
Properties Classified as Capital Assets (R.R. 8-1998)
Sale of real property in the Philippines

6% of the gross selling price,
or the current market value at
the time of sale, whichever is
higher

If sale was made to the government or
to GOCCs

Either 6% of the gross selling
price/current market value or
under the normal income tax
rate, taxpayer's option

The transfer of property through expropriation is a sale or
exchange that is subject to capital gains tax. (Republic v. Spouses
Salvador, G.R. No. 205428, June 7, 2017)

The transfer of property due to the dissolution of community
property is not subject to capital gains tax as such transfer is
equivalent to a conveyance without monetary consideration and
made merely in accordance with a court decision. (BIR Ruling DA
029-08)
The transfer of real property based on a compromise agreement
duly approved by a court is subject to capital gains tax, as this is
covered by the clause "other disposition of real property" under
Section 24(D)(1). (BIR Ruling 423-16, December 7, 2016)
The termination, liquidation, and reversion of property held
in trust back to the trustor from the trustee is not subject to
income tax, capital gains tax, and withholding tax because the
conveyance is not motivated by valuable consideration and merely
confirms and consolidates the legal title and beneficial ownership
over the property in the name of the trustor. (BIR Ruling 445-16,
December 19, 2016)

Payment of capital gains tax on foreclosure of mortgaged property
O

If the mortgagor exercises his right of redemption within
one year, no capital gains tax shall be imposed because no
capital gains have been derived and no transfer of property
was realized. (Supreme Transliner, Inc. v. BPI Family Savings
Bank, Inc., G.R. No. 165617, February 23, 2011)

o

In caseof non-redemption, the buyer of the property is deemed
to have withheld the CGT (or the creditable withholding tax
[CWT], as the case may be) and must remit the said tax to

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER. WITH CODALS AND CASES

72

the BIR. The CGT (or the CWT) shall be based on whichever
is higher between the bid price of the highest bidder or the
FMV or the zonal value under Section 6(E). (R.R. 9-2012)
Hopeful Corporation obtained a loan from Generous Bank and
executed a mortgage on its real property to secure the loan.
When Hopeful Corporation failed to pay the loan. Generous Bank
extrajudicially foreclosed the mortgage on the property and acquired
the same as the highest bidder. A month after the foreclosure.
Hopeful Corporation exercised its right of redemption and was able
to redeem the property. Is Generous Bank liable to pay capital gains
tax as a result of the foreclosure sale? Explain. (201-4 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, Generous Bank is not liable to pay capital
gains tax as a result of the foreclosure sale. According to the Supreme
Court, there is no actual transfer of the mortgaged property until
after the expiration of the one-year redempt.cn period. Likewise,
the rules state that in case the mortgagor exercises his/her right to
redeem, then no capital gains tax shall be imposed. Here, Hopeful
Corporation exercised its right of redemption; hence, there was no
transfer of property and no capita! gams tax should be imposed on
Generous Bank.

Creditable Withholding Tax on Rea! Properties (Ordinary Assets)
Creditable Withholding Tax on Sales, Exchanges or
Transfers of Real Properties classified as Ordinary Assets
(R.R. 8-1998, as amended by R.R. 11-2018)
1.

If the seller is habitually engaged j
in the real estate business
o

Selling price
P500,000

o

Selling price is P500,000 to
P2M

o

Selling price is above P2M

is

less

than

2.

If the iseller
engagedI
in
business

3.

If the seller is exempt from
creditable withholding tax as per
R.R. 2-1998

J9JC9B0M

is not habitually
real
estate
the

1.5%
3%

5% of gross selling price/current
market value, whichever is higher

6% of gross selling price/current
market value, whichever is higher
Exempt

Conditions to be exempt from capital gains tax of 6% on the sale,
exchange, or disposition of a principal residence
O

The proceeds from the sale, exchange, or disposition of
his principal residence must be fully utilized in acquiring or

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

73

construing a new principal residence within 18 months. There
must be proof;

O

This can only be availed of ONLY ONCE every 10 years;

O

The historical cost of his old principal residence shall be
carried over to the cost basis of his new residence;

O

If there is no full utilization, he shall be liable for the deficiency
capital gains tax of the utilized portion;

O

If the principal residence is disposed in exchange for a condo,
and if it is used as his new residence, then he is exempt;

O

The 6% capital gains tax otherwise due must be deposited
in escrow with an authorized agent bank, and can only be
released when sufficient proof is shown that the proceeds
have been fully utilized within 18 months. (R.R. 13-1999)

What is the principal residence anyway?

O

It is the dwelling house, where the husband or wife or
unmarried individual resides; actual occupancy is not
interrupted or abandoned by temporary absence due to
travel, studies, or work abroad.

O

If the ownership of the land and the dwelling house belong to
different persons, only the dwelling house shall be treated as
principal residence.

O

It is not necessarily the "family home." (R.R. 14-2000)
i

Mr. Jose Castillo is a resident Filipino Citizen. He purchased a parcel
of land in Makati City in 1970 at a consideration of Pl Million. In
2011, the land, which remained undeveloped and idle, had a fair
market value of P20 Million. Mr. Antonio Ayala, another Filipino
citizen, is very much interested in the property and he offered to buy
the same for P20 Million. The Assessor of Makati City re-assessed In
2011 the property at PIO Million.

i

Should Mr. Castillo agree to sell the land to Mr. Ayala In 2012 for P20
Million, subject to the condition as stated In The Deed of Sale that
the buyer shall assume the capital gains tax thereon, how much is
the income tax due on the transaction and when must the tax return
be filed and the tax be paid by the taxpayer? Explain your answer.
(2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The income tax due will be Pl20,000. For the
sale of real property held as capital assets, the capital gains tax is
6% of the gross selling price or the current FMV, whichever is higher.
In this case, the gross selling price (P2,000,000) is higher than the
current FMV. Hence, the tax base is P2,000,000; 6% of which Is
Pl 20,000. The tax return must be filed 30 days following the sale.

J9JC9B0M

I

74

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

In 2000, Mr. Belen bought a residential house and lot for Pl, 000,000.
He used the property as his and his family's principal residence. It
is now year 2013 and he is thinking of selling the property to buy a
new one. He seeks your advice on how much income tax he would
pay if he sells the property. The total zonal value of the property
is P5,000,000 and the fair market value per the tax declaration is
P2,500,000. He intends to sell it for P6,000,000.

What material considerations will you take into account in computing
the income tax? Please explain the legal relevance of each of these
considerations. (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Mr. Belen can use Section 25(D)(2) to exempt
himself from the payment of capita! gains tax on the sale of his family
home. He must however prove that the proceeds of the sale was fully
utilized in acquiring or constructing a new principal residence within
18 calendar months from the sale of the house and lot. He must
also file a return showing his intention to avail of the tax exemption
within 30 days from the sale. He must also show that the exemption
will only be availed of once every 10 years. If he fails to do so, he
will be liable to pay P360,000 or 6% of the gross selling price, which
is higher than the fair market value.

Mr. H decided to sell the house and lot wherein he and his family
have lived for the past 10 years, hoping to buy and move to a new
house and lot closer to his children's school. Concerned about the
capital gains tax that will be due on the sale of their house, Mr. H
approaches you as a friend for advice if it is possible for the sale of
their house to be exempted from capital gams tax and the conditions
they must comply with to avail themselves of said exemption. How
will you respond? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: I will tell Mr. H that he can get an exemption
from capital gains tax for the sale of his family home. The proceeds
from the sale must be used to buy a new residence within the next
18 months—and he must prove this fact as well. He snould also hie
a return showing his intention to avail of the tax exemption. The
would-be capital gains tax must be deposited in escrow with a bank,
and will only be released upon sufficient proof that the proceeds
were used to buy a new family home. I will tell him also that he can
only avail of this exemption once every 10 years.

Tax on nonresident aliens
Nonresident aliens engaged in business in the Philippines
Sec. 25. Tax on Nonresident Alien Individual. —
(A) Nonresident Alien Engaged in trade or Business Within the
Philippines. —

(1) In General. — A nonresident alien individual engaged in trade or
business in the Philippines shall be subject to an income tax in the
same manner as an individual citizen and a resident alien individual,

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

75

on taxable income received from all sources within the Philippines.
A nonresident alien individual who shall come to the Philippines and
stay therein for an aggregate period of more than one hundred eighty
(180) days during any calendar year shall be deemed a 'nonresident
alien doing business in the Philippines'. Section 22(G) of this Code
notwithstanding.

(2) Cash and/or Property Dividends from a Domestic Corporation
or Joint Stock Company, or Insurance or Mutual Fund Company or
Regional Operating Headquarters or Multinational Company, or Share
in the Distributable Net Income of a Partnership (Except a General
Professional Partnership), Joint Account, Joint Venture Taxable
as a Corporation or Association, Interests, Royalties, Prizes, and
Other Winnings. — Cash and/or property dividends from a domestic
corporation, or from a joint stock company, or from an insurance or
mutual fund company or from a regional operating headquarters of
multinational company, or the share of a nonresident alien individual
in the distributable net income after tax of a partnership (except a
general professional partnership) of which he is a partner, or the share
of a nonresident alien individual in the net income after tax of an
association, a joint account, or a joint venture taxable as a corporation
of which he is a member or a co-venturer; interests; royalties (in any
form); and prizes (except prizes amounting to Ten thousand pesos
(PIO,000) or less which shall be subject to tax under Subsection
(B)(1) of Section 24) and other winnings (except Philippine Charity
Sweepstakes and Lotto winnings); shall be subject to an Income
tax of twenty percent (20%) on the total amount thereof: Provided,
however, that royalties on books as well as other literary works, and
royalties on musical compositions shall be subject to a final tax of ten
percent (10%) on the total amount thereof: Provided, further, That
cinematographic films and similar works shall be subject to the tax
provided under Section 28 of this Code: Provided, furthermore, That
interest income from long-term deposit or investment In the form
of savings, common or individual trust funds, deposit substitutes,
investment management accounts and other Investments evidenced
by certificates in such form prescribed by the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas (BSP) shall be exempt from the tax Imposed under this
Subsection: Provided, finally, that should the holder of the certificate
pre-terminate the deposit or investment before the fifth (5th) year, a
final tax shall be imposed on the entire income and shall be deducted
and withheld by the depository bank from the proceeds of the
long-term deposit or investment certificate based on the remaining
maturity thereof:
Four (4) years to less than five (5) years — 5%
Three (3) years to less than four (4) years — 12%; and

Less than three (3) years — 20%
(3) Capital Gains. — Capital gains realized from sale, barter or
exchange of shares of stock in domestic corporations not traded
through the local stock exchange, and real properties shall be subject
to the tax prescribed under Subsections (C) and (D) of Section 24.

J9JC9B0M

76

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

•

A nonresident alien engaged in trade or business (NRAETB) in
the Philippines is subject to the same income tax rate as citizens
and resident aliens, on taxable income received from all sources
within the Philippines.

•

A nonresident alien who stays in the Philippines for an aggregate
period of more than 180 days shall be deemed a nonresident
alien doing business in the Philippines.

•

TRAIN did not seem to amend the passive income rates of
nonresident aliens engaged in trade, business, or exercising a
profession in the Philippines. The only change would be on the
capital gains tax on the sale of shares of domestic corporations
not traded through the local stock exchange.

Tax Rate on Certain Passive Income on Nonresident

Final Tax

Aliens Engaged in Trade. Business or Exercising a
Profession

Interest under the expanded foreign currency deposit
system

exempt

Royalties from books, literary works, and musical
compositions

10%

3.

Royalties other than above

20%

4.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust fund
and similar arrangement

20%

5.

Prize exceeding PIO,000

20%

6.

Other winnings, except Phil. Charity Sweepstakes and
Lotto

20%

7.

Dividend from a domestic corp., or from a joint stock
company, insurance or mutual fund company, and
regional operating headquarters of multinational
company or share in the distributive net income after
tax o a partnership (except a general professional
partnership), joint stock or joint venture or consortium
taxable as a corporation

20%
(compare
with citizens
and resident
aliens)

8.

Gross income from cinematographic films and similar
works

25%

9.

Interest on long-term deposit or investment in banks
(with maturity of five years or more)

exempt

1.

J9JC9B0M

77

INCOME TAX

Tax Rate on Capital Gains (same with residents, and nonresident
aliens not engaged in business)

1.

2.

On sale of shares of stock of a domestic
corporation NOT traded through a local
stock exchange held as a capital asset

On sale of real property in
Philippines held as a capital asset

the

15% of the net capital gains

6% of the gross selling
price, or the current market
value at the time of sale,
whichever is higher

Nonresident aliens not engaged in business in the Philippines
Sec. 25. (B) Nonresident Alien Individual Not Engaged in Trade
or Business Within the Philippines. — There shall be levied,
collected and paid for each taxable year upon the entire income
received from all sources within the Philippines by every nonresident
alien individual not engaged in trade or business within the Philippines
as interest, cash and/or property dividends, rents, salaries, wages,
premiums, annuities, compensation, remuneration, emoluments, or
other fixed or determinable annual or periodic or casual gains, profits,
and income, and capital gains, a tax equal to twenty-five percent
(25%) of such income. Capital gains realized by a nonresident alien
individual not engaged in trade or business in the Philippines from the
sale of shares of stock in any domestic corporation and real property
shall be subject to the income tax prescribed under Subsections (C)
and (D) of Section 24.
Nonresident aliens not engaged in business are taxed 25% of
their entire income within the Philippines.

That means they have no deductions.
Their capital gains tax liabilities are the same with nonresident
aliens engaged in business (see table above).
Special aliens
Sec. 25. (C) Alien Individual Employed by Regional or Area
Headquarters and Regional Operating Headquarters of
Multinational Companies. — There shall be levied, collected and paid
for each taxable year upon the gross income received by every alien
individual employed by regional or area headquarters and regional
operating headquarters established in the Philippines by multinational
companies as salaries, wages, annuities, compensation, remuneration
and other emoluments, such as honoraria and allowances, from such
regional or area headquarters and regional operating headquarters,

J9JC9B0M

78

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

a tax equal to fifteen percent (15%) of such gross income: Provided,
however, That the same tax treatment shall apply to Filipinos employed
and occupying the same position as those of aliens employed by
these multinational companies. For purposes of this Chapter, the term
'multinational company' means a foreign firm or entity engaged in
international trade with affiliates or subsidiaries or branch offices in
the Asia-Pacific Region and other foreign markets.
(D) Alien Individual Employed by Offshore Banking Units.
— There shall be levied, collected and paid for each taxable year
upon the gross income received by every alien individual employed
by offshore banking units established in the Philippines as
salaries, wages, annuities, compensation, remuneration and other
emoluments, such as honoraria and allowances, from such off-shore
banking units, a tax equal to fifteen percent (15%) of such gross
income: Provided, however, That the same tax treatment shall apply
to Filipinos employed and occupying the same positions as those of
aliens employed by these offshore banking units.
(E) Alien Individual Employed by Petroleum Service Contractor
and Subcontractor. — An Alien individual who is a permanent
resident of a foreign country but who is employed and assigned in
the Philippines by a foreign service contractor or by a foreign service
subcontractor engaged in petroleum operations in the Philippines
shall be liable to a tax of fifteen percent (15%) of the salaries, wages,
annuities, compensation, remuneration and other emoluments,
such as honoraria and allowances, received from such contractor or
subcontractor: Provided, however, That the same tax treatment shall
apply to a Filipino employed and occupying the same position as an
alien employed by petroleum service contractor and subcontractor.
Any income earned from all other sources within the Philippines by
the alien employees referred to under Subsections (C), (D) and (E)
hereof shall be subject to the pertinent income tax, as the case may
be, imposed under this Code.

Sec. 25. (F) The preferential tax treatment provided in Subsections
(C), (D), and (E) of this Section shall not be applicable to regional
headquarters (RHQs), regional operating headquarters (ROHQs),
offshore banking units (OBUs) or petroleum service contractors
and subcontractors registering with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) after January 1, 2018: Provided, however, That
existing RHQs/ROHQs, OBUs or petroleum service contractors and
subcontractors presently availing of preferential tax rates for qualified
employees shall continue to be entitled to avail of the preferential
tax rate for present and future qualified employees. (TRAIN added
Section 25 (F), but the President subsequently vetoed this addition)

When the President vetoed Section 25(F) of TRAIN, it led to some
confusion whether those who had already been employed by
RHQs, ROHQs, OBUs, and petroleum service contractors before
TRAIN would lose their preferential status.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

79

In any case, the BIR has stated that the preferential income
tax rate for these special aliens is no longer applicable, without
prejudice to preferential rates under existing tax treaties.
0

So, as it stands, these special aliens are now subject to the
regular income tax rate. (R.R. 8-2018)

O

Does this mean they aren't special anymore? Their feelings
though...

Tips on answering problems regarding taxable income of individuals

Questions to ask yourself in answering problems:

1.

Is this income? If not, then it's not really an income tax problem.

2.

Who's the taxpayer? And what's the source of income? Refer to
Sections 23 and 42.

3.

What's the specific rate? See Sections 24 to 25.

What is the tax rate on income derived from royalties from
foreign sources for i) Resident citizens, ii) Resident aliens, and iii)
Nonresident aliens engaged in trade or business?

1.

2.

3.

Resident citizens

a.

Yes, it is income.

b.

The source is outside the Philippines. Are they liable for
sources from outside the Philippines? Yes, Resident citizens
are taxed worldwide.

c.

What is the specific tax rate? Since it is not in any of the
passive income charts, but they still have to be taxed, then
the income they derive from royalties from foreign sources
will be considered in computing the tax rate based on the tax
calendar of Section 24(A).

Resident aliens

a.

Yes, it is income.

b.

The source is outside the Philippines. Are they liable for
sources from outside the Philippines? No. They aren't taxed
worldwide.

Nonresident aliens engaged in trade or business
a.

Yes, it is income.

b.

The source is outside the Philippines. Are they liable for
source from outside the Philippines? No, they aren't taxed
worldwide either.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

80

BBB, Inc., a domestic corporation, enjoyed a particularly profitable
year in 2014. In June 2015, its Board of Directors approved the
distribution of cash dividends to its stockholders. BBB, Inc. has
individual and corporate stockholders. What is the tax treatment
of the cash dividends received from BBB, Inc. by the following
stockholders:

a)

A resident citizen

b)

Non-resident alien engaged in trade or business

c) Non-resident alien not engaged in trade or business (2015 Bar
Exam)

Suggested answer:
Cash dividends to a resident citizen are subject to 10% final tax.

a)

b) Cash dividends to a non-resident alien engaged in trade or
business are subject to 20% final tax.

c) Cash dividends to a non-resident alien not engaged in trade or
business will enter the taxpayer's gross income which is subject to
25% tax on the entire income.
F.

Partnerships

Sec. 26. Tax Liability of Members of General Professional
Partnerships. — A general professional partnership as such shall
not be subject to the income tax imposed under this Chapter.

Persons engaging in business as partners in a general professional
partnership shall be liable for income tax only in their separate and
individual capacities.
For purposes of computing the distributive share of the partners, the
net income of the partnership shall be computed in the same manner
as a corporation.

Each partner shall report as gross income his distributive share,
actually or constructively received, in the net income of the
partnership.
Sec. 73. (D) Net Income ofa Partnership Deemed Constructively
Received by Partners. — The taxable income declared by a
partnership for a taxable year which is subject to tax under Section
27(A) of this Code, after deducting the corporate income tax imposed
therein, shall be deemed to have been actually or constructively
received by the partners in the same taxable year and shall be taxed
to them in their individual capacity, whether actually distributed or
not.
•

For income tax purposes, there are two kinds of partnerships:
o

Partnerships NOT subject to income tax; these are
■

General professional partnership (like your regular law
firm)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

81

Joint venture or consortium agreement formed for the
purpose of
•

undertaking construction projects, or

•

engaging in petroleum, coal, geothermal and other
energy operations

O

O

pursuant to an operating or consortium agreement
under a service contract with the government

Partnerships subject to tax
Usually, those whose income is derived from trade or
business (these are considered "corporations" under
Section 22[B] of the Tax Code — more on this in the next
Section)

■

Differences

NONTAXABLE Partnership

TAXABLE business partnership

With regard to DISTRIBUTIVE SHARE

o

Distributive share is a partner's computed and ascertained share in the
net profits of the partnership,

Whether actually distributed to the partners or not

Will form part of partner's gross
income in the ITR subject to the
graduated income tax rates
Will be subjected to a creditable
withholding tax of 15% (if income
payments exceed P720,000 for the
current year) or 10% (if income
payments do NOT exceed P720,000
for the current year) to be withheld
and paid by the partnership to the
BIR

Partner's distributive share in the
net income is subject to a final tax of
10% (resident citizens, nonresident
citizens, OCWs, or resident aliens)
or 20% (for NRAETB)

With regard to PARTNER'S SHARE IN NET LOSS OF THE PARTNERSHIP

May be claimed as a deductible
expense in his personal income tax
return

Not deductible since subject to final
tax

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

82

With regard to HOW THE PARTNERSHIP is TAXED

Still required to file an annual
information return on their incomes
and expenses for the purpose of
ascertaining the partners' taxable
shares

Deemed and treated as corporations
subject to the corporate income tax
rate

For taxable partnerships (considered "corporations"), remember
the definition of a partnership under Article 1767, Civil Code — By
the contract of partnership two or more persons bind themselves
to contribute money, property, or industry to a common fund,
with the intention of dividing the profits among themselves.
O

Hence, when heirs use the inheritance or the incomes derived
therefrom as a common fund to produce profits forthemselves,
the heirs are taxable as an unregistered partnership. (Ona v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-19342, May 25, 1972)

O

However, not all co-ownerships are unregistered partnerships.
There must bean unmistakable intention to form a partnership.

■

Hence, when children sold land acquired from their
father in an isolated transaction, the Court considered
this a mere co-ownership and not a taxable unregistered
partnership. (Obillos v. CIR, G.R. No. L-68118, October
29, 1985)

On joint ventures

In order that a joint venture or consortium formed to undertake
a construction project not to be considered a taxable corporation,
the joint venture should be:

•

o
o

O

o

For the undertaking of a construction project;
Should involve joining or pooling of resources by licensed
local contracts (/.e., those licensed as general contractor by
the Philippine Contractors Accreditation Board ["PCAB"] of
the DTI);
The contractors are engaged in construction business;
The joint venture itself must be licensed under the PCAB.
(R.R. 10-2012)

When two corporations enter into a Joint Development Agreement
for the formation of a joint venture wherein one will contribute
property and the other will contribute project development
services, the resulting joint venture is not taxable as a joint
venture "for the purpose of undertaking construction projects."

o

The allocation of units between the corporations is likewise
not taxable as no income is realized by either corporation.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

83

The allocation of units between them is a mere return of their
capital.
-

It is the resulting sale of the allocated units which will
give rise to a taxable event. (BIR Ruling 108-2010)

Special Rule on GPPs and the choice of deductions (itemized or OSD)
•

A GPP is not a taxable entity for income tax purposes because it
only acts as a "pass-through" entity where its income is ultimately
passed to the partners.

•

In computing a GPP's distributable taxable income, the GPP may
avail of the following deductions:

O

Itemized expenses; or

o

The 40% OSD.

The GPP then distributes the net income to the partners. The
share of each partner, actually or constructively received, is
taxable income of each partner.

O

The partners cannot claim further deductions from their
distributive share.

O

The partners cannot avail of the 8% income tax rate either.

•

Why can't the partners claim further deductions and use
the 8% income tax rate? Because the distributive share
from the GPP is already net of cost and expenses.

•

But if the partner also derives income from other
sources distinct from the share in the GPP, he or she
can claim either itemized deductions or OSD from the
other source of income. (R.R. 8-2018)

Atty. Gambino Is a partner in a general professional partnership.
The partnership computes its gross revenues, claims deductions
allowed under the Tax Code, and distributes the net income to the
partners, including Atty. Gambino, in accordance with its articles of
partnership.

In filing his own Income tax return, Atty. Gambino claimed deductions
that the partnership did not claim, such as purchase of law books,
entertainment expenses, car insurance and car depreciation. The
BIR disallowed the deductions.

Was the BIR correct? (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The BIR is right. Undercurrent BIR rules, partners
can no longer claim further deductions from their distributive share.
(Note: the suggested answer has been updated to reflect TRAIN
amendments. It's not like I went back in time to the 2013 Bar Exam,
lol.)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

84

G. Corporations

Definition of corporations
Sec. 22. (B) The term "corporation" shall include partnerships, no
matter how created or organized, joint-stock companies, joint accounts
(cuentas en participation), association, or insurance companies, but
does not include general professional partnerships and a joint venture
or consortium formed for the purpose of undertaking construction
projects or engaging in petroleum, coal, geothermal and other
energy operations pursuant to an operating consortium agreement
under a service contract with the Government. "General professional
partnerships" are partnerships formed by persons for the sole purpose
of exercising their common profession, no part of the income of which
is derived from engaging in any trade or business.

Corporations include:

•

O

Partnerships, no matter how created or organized;

0

Joint-stock companies;

0

Joint accounts;

O

Associations; and

O

Insurance companies

It does not include:
0

General professional partnerships;

O

Joint venture or consortium formed for the purpose of
undertaking construction projects, or engaging in petroleum,
coal, geothermal and other energy operations pursuant to
an operating or consortium agreement under a service
contract with the government. (Note: The JV should NOT be
incorporated.)

Corporations are classified into the following:

1.

Domestic Corporations — those which are incorporated in the
Philippines

2.

Foreign Corporations

a.

Resident foreign corporations — those which are incorporated
abroad but have a license to do business in the Philippines

b.

Nonresident foreign corporations

Like our treatment of persons, it is important to know the
definition of each kind of corporation because the tax liability of each
differs. Let's start with domestic corporations.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

85

Income Tax Rates of Domestic Corporations

Sec. 27. Rates of Income tax on Domestic Corporations. —
(A) In General. — Except as otherwise provided in this Code, an
income tax of thirty-five percent (35%) is hereby imposed upon the
taxable income derived during each taxable year from all sources
within and without the Philippines by every corporation, as defined in
Section 22(B) of this Code and taxable under this Title as a corporation,
organized in, or existing under the laws of the Philippines: Provided,
That effective January 1, 2009, the rate of income tax shall be thirty
percent (30%).
In the case of corporations adopting the fiscal-year accounting period,
the taxable income shall be computed without regard to the specific
date when specific sales, purchases and other transactions occur.
Their income and expenses for the fiscal year shall be deemed to have
been earned and spent equally for each month of the period.

The corporate income tax rates shall be applied on the amount
computed by multiplying the number of months covered by the new
rates within the fiscal year by the taxable income of the corporation
for the period, divided by twelve.
Provided, further, That the President, upon the recommendation
of the Secretary of Finance, may effective January 1, 2000, allow
corporations the option to be taxed at fifteen percent (15%) of gross
income as defined herein, after the following conditions have been
satisfied:
(1) A tax effort ratio of twenty percent (20%) of Gross National
Product (GNP);
(2) A ratio of forty percent (40%) of income tax collection to
total tax revenues;

(3) A VAT tax effort of four percent (4%) of GNP; and

(4) A 0.9 percent (0.9%) ratio of the Consolidated Public Sector
Financial Position (CPSFP) to GNP.

The option to be taxed based on gross income shall be available
only to firms whose ratio of cost of sales to gross sales or receipts
from all sources does not exceed fifty-five percent (55%).
The election of the gross income tax option by the corporation
shall be irrevocable for three (3) consecutive taxable years during
which the corporation is qualified under the scheme.

For purposes of this Section, the term 'gross income' derived
from business shall be equivalent to gross sales less sales returns,
discounts and allowances and cost of goods sold. "Cost of goods sold"
shall include all business expenses directly incurred to produce the
merchandise to bring them to their present location and use.

For a trading or merchandising concern, "cost of goods" sold shall
include the invoice cost of the goods sold, plus import duties, freight

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

86

in transporting the goods to the place where the goods are actually
sold, including insurance while the goods are in transit.

For a manufacturing concern, "cost of goods manufactured and
sold" shall include all costs of production of finished goods, such as
raw materials used, direct labor and manufacturing overhead, freight
cost, insurance premiums and other costs incurred to bring the raw
materials to the factory or warehouse.

In the case of taxpayers engaged in the sale of service, 'gross
income' means gross receipts less sales returns, allowances and
discounts.

Tax rate of Domestic
Corporations

•

30% of taxable income from all sources within
and outside the Philippines, or
2% of gross income if MCIT applies, or
15% of gross income if the following conditions
are met:
1.

tax effort ratio of 20% of GNP

2.

ratio of 40% of income tax collection to total
tax revenues

3.

VAT tax effort of 4% of GNP; and

4.

0.9% ratio of the Consolidated Public Sector
Financial Position (CPSFP) to GNP (this last
one has yet to be implemented)

Option to be taxed based on gross income shall be available only
to firms whose ratio of cost of sales to gross sales or receipts
from all sources does not exceed 55%
O

Election of the gross income tax option by the corporation
shall be irrevocable for three consecutive taxable years

Domestic corporations are subject to any or some of the following:
O

Capital gains tax;

O

Final tax on passive income;

O

Normal tax;

O

Minimum corporate income tax (MCIT);

O

Gross income tax (GIT);

0

Improperly accumulated earnings tax (IAET).

■

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

87

Gross Income Computation

Gross Sales
Less: Sales Returns

Discounts
Allowances

Cost of Goods Sold (CoGS) (all business expenses directly incurred to
produce the merchandise and bring them to their present location or use)
Total Gross Income

CoGS for a Trading or Merchandise Concern
Invoice cost of goods sold

Import duties
Freight in transporting the goods to the place where the goods are actually
sold

Insurance while the goods are in transit
CoGS for a Manufacturing Concern
All costs of production of finished goods such as raw materials, direct labor
and manufacturing overhead
Freight cost

Insurance premiums
Other costs incurred to bring the raw materials to the factory or warehouse

Gross Income Computation for a Service Concern
Gross Receipts
Less: Sales Returns

Discounts

Allowances
Cost of Services (all direct costs and expenses necessarily incurred to
provide the services required by the customers and clients including:
Salaries and employee benefits of personnel, consultants and specialists
directly rendering the service
Cost of facilities directly utilized in providing the service such as depreciation
or rental of equipment use and cost of supplies)

Total Gross Income of a service concern

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

88

Special Rule on Proprietary Educational Institutions and Hospitals
(B) Proprietary Educational Institutions and Hospitals. —
Proprietary educational institutions and hospitals which are nonprofit
shall pay a tax of ten percent (10%) on their taxable income except
those covered by Subsection (D) hereof: Provided, that if the gross
income from unrelated trade, business or other activity exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the total gross income derived by such educational
institutions or hospitals from all sources, the tax prescribed in
Subsection (A) hereof shall be imposed on the entire taxable income.
For purposes of this Subsection, the term 'unrelated trade, business or
other activity' means any trade, business or other activity, the conduct
of which is not substantially related to the exercise or performance
by such educational institution or hospital of its primary purpose or
function. A "[Proprietary educational institution" is any private school
maintained and administered by private individuals or groups with an
issued permit to operate from the Department of Education, Culture
and Sports (DECS), or the Commission on Higher Education (CHED),
or the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA),
as the case may be, in accordance with existing laws and regulations.

A proprietary educational institution is:
o

Any private school maintained and administered by private
individuals or groups

o

With an issued permit to operate from the DECS or CHED or
TESDA.

A proprietary hospital is also given a special tax rate.
o

Proprietary likewise means "private." (CIR v. St. Luke's
Medical Center, Inc., G.R. No. 195909, September 26, 2012)

o

"Non-profit" means no net income or asset accrues to or
benefits any member or specific person, with all the net
income or asset devoted to the institution's purposes and
all its activities conducted not for profit. (CIR v. St. Luke's
Medical Center, Inc., G.R. No. 195909, September 26, 2012)

Hospitals and educational institutions that fail to meet the above
definition of "proprietary" and "non-profit" shall be taxed as a
regular corporation. (RMC 67-2012)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

Tax rate of proprietary educational institutions and hospitals which are non-profit

89

10% on their taxable income (except for
passive income), or

30% on their entire taxable income if
the gross income from unrelated trade,
business or other activity exceeds 50% of
the total gross income of the institution
•

In computing this 30% on the entire
taxable income scenario, include:
o

Income subject to tax

o

Income which are exempt

Unrelated trade, business or other activity means
O

Any trade, business or other activity

O

The conduct of which is not substantially related to the
exercise or performance by such institution of its primary
purpose or function.

The gross income from unrelated trade, business or activity
should not exceed 50% of the total gross income. If it exceeds
50%, the proprietary educational institution or hospital which is
nonprofit will be taxed like a normal corporation, i.e., 30% of
entire taxable income.

Summary of rules on educational institutions
•

For private educational institutions, they are entitled to the
reduced rate of 10% corporate income tax, if:
O

The proprietary educational institution is non-profit; and

O

Its gross income from unrelated trade, business, or activity
does not exceed 50% of its total gross income. (CIR v. DLSU,
G.R. No. 196596, November 9, 2016)

•

It seems the SC is equating proprietary with stock
corporations. If that's the case, how can a proprietary
educational institution be considered non-profit (since
stock corporations are for-profit because of the ability to
give dividends)?
•

Well, because "non-profit" also means no part of
its net income or asset accrues to or benefits any
member or specific person, with all the net income
or asset devoted to the institution's purposes and all
its activities conducted not for profit. (RMC 51-14,
quoting CIR v. St. Luke's)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

90

•

So, it's possible for a private (stock) educational
institution to be non-profit and get the reduced
rate of 10% if no profit inures for the benefits of its
members.

[Tax rant coming, no need to read this: This is
weird. I submit that the phrase "for profit" only
qualifies hospitals, not educational institutions. The
Constitution (Article XIV, Section 4[3]) wanted to
reward proprietary educational institutions with
incentives limited by law. We value education, that's
why we want to give tax incentives to educational
institutions, whether they're for profit or not, private
or not. But with the current interpretation by both the
SC and the BIR that the net income must not inure to
the benefit of the stockholders, the incentive of the
10% reduced rate is gone, and would-be educatorstockholders will be discouraged to put up schools.
Case in point: if you're someone who wants to put up
a school to earn some money (like a law school) and
then learn you can't actually earn because receiving
dividends will make your school lose the 10% tax
incentive, wouldn't you be discouraged? If the school
gave you dividends, then you'll be sitting in the
same boat as non-incentivized normal corporations.
The interpretation goes against the spirit of the
Constitution. Whatever, I could be wrong.]
O

However, income derived from trade, business or other
activity is still taxable.

O

Their bank deposits and foreign currency deposits are exempt
from withholding taxes but they must show proof that such
income is used to fund proposed projects for their institution's
improvement.

O

They shall also be the withholding agents for their employee's
compensation income subject to withholding tax. (R.MC 762003)

For non-stock, non-profit educational institutions, all revenues
(and assets) used actually, directly and exclusively for educational
purposes are exempt. (Article XIV, Section 4[3], 1987 Philippine
Constitution)
O

Income from cafeterias, canteens and bookstores are also
exempt if they are owned and operated by the educational
institution and are located within the school premises. (RMC
76-2003)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

91

O

Note that the exemption of non-stock, non-profit educational
institutions is granted by none other than the 1987
Constitution, and not merely by the NIRC. Hence, the profit of
non-stock, non-profit educational institutions, even if through
the lease of properties (as stated in Section 30, NIRC), are
tax-exempt if the profits are used actually, directly, and
exclusively for educational purposes. (CIR v. DLSU, G.R. No.
196596, November 9, 2016)

O

Just because a non-profit institution generates profits doesn't
automatically make it a for-profit institution. It still has to
be run as a responsible organization, which means having
the necessary profits to survive. (La Sallian Educational
Innovators Foundation v. CIR, G.R. No. 202792, February 27,
2019)
■

Segue to real property tax: assets used actually, directly,
and exclusively for educational purposes are likewise
exempt.

For non-stock, non-profit corporations who are exempt under
Section 30 (more on this later), they are still liable for taxes on:
O

Income derived from any of their real properties (such as
rental payment from their building premises)

O

Any activity conducted from profit regardless of disposition
thereof

O

Interest income from any bank deposits or yield on deposit
substitutes (final tax of 20%)

o

If it's foreign currency deposit (FCD), final tax of 15% (TRAIN)

o

They shall also be withholding agents for their employee's
compensation income subject to withholding tax (RMC 762003)

Special Rule on GOCCs, Agencies or Instrumentalities

Sec. 27. (C) Government-owned or -Controlled Corporations,
Agencies or Instrumentalities. — The provisions of existing special
or general laws to the contrary notwithstanding, all corporations,
agencies, or instrumentalities owned or controlled by the Government,
except the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), the Social
Security System (SSS), the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
(PHIC), and the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO), shall
pay such rate of tax upon their taxable income as are imposed by
this Section upon corporations or associations engaged in a similar
business, industry, or activity.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

92
•

GOCCs, agencies or instrumentalities shall pay the same rate
upon their taxable income upon corporations or associations
engaged in similar business, industry, or activity.
0

EXCEPT for the following exempt GOCCs:
■

GSIS

•

SSS

•

PHIC

•

PCSO

•

As per R.A. 9337, PAGCOR was deleted from the
list of exempt GOCCs. (Philippine Amusement and
Gaming Corporation v. BIR, G.R. No. 172807, March
15, 2011)

•

PAGCOR's income derived from gaming operations is
subject to 5% franchise tax. For income derived from
the operation of other related services, it is subject to
normal corporate income tax. (PAGCOR v. BIR, G.R.
No. 215427, December 10, 2014)

•

PAGCOR's contractees and licensees are subject to
the same rule. (Bloomberry Resorts and Hotels, Inc.
v. BIR, G.R. No. 212530, August 10, 2016)

Passive Income of Domestic Corporations

Sec. 27. (D) Rates of Tax on Certain Passive Incomes. —
(1) Interest from Deposits and Yield or any other Monetary
Benefit from Deposit Substitutes and from Trust Funds and Similar
Arrangements, and Royalties. — A final tax at the rate of twenty
percent (20%) is hereby imposed upon the amount of interest on
currency bank deposit and yield or any other monetary benefit from
deposit substitutes and from trust funds and similar arrangements
received by domestic corporations, and royalties, derived from
sources within the Philippines: Provided, however, That interest
income derived by a domestic corporation from a depository bank
under the expanded foreign currency deposit system shall be subject
o a final income tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of such
interest Income.

Gams from the Sale of Shares of Stock Not Traded In the
stock Exchange. - A final tax at the rate of fifteen percent (15%)
prescribed below shall be imposed on net capital gains realized
during the taxable year from the sale, exchange or other disposition
or shares of stock in a domestic corporation except shares sold or
disposed of through the stock exchange.

■

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

93

(3) Tax on Income Derived under the Expanded Foreign Currency
Deposit System. — Income derived by a depository bank under the
expanded foreign currency deposit system from foreign currency
transactions with nonresidents, offshore banking units in the
Philippines, local commercial banks including branches of foreign
banks that may be authorized by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP) to transact business with foreign currency deposit system shall
be exempt from all taxes, except net income from such transactions as
may be specified by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation
by the Monetary Board to be subject to the regular income tax
payable by banks: Provided, however. That interest income from
foreign currency loans granted by such depository banks under said
expanded system to residents other than offshore banking units in
the Philippines or other depository banks under the expanded system
shall be subject to a final tax at the rate of ten percent (10%).
Any income of nonresidents, whether individuals or corporations,
from transactions with depository banks under the expanded system
shall be exempt from income tax
(4) Intercorporate Dividends. — Dividends received by a domestic
corporation from another domestic corporation shall not be subject
to tax.
(5) Capita! Gains Realized from the Sale, Exchange or Disposition of
Lands and/or Buildings. — A final tax of six percent (6%) is hereby
imposed on the gain presumed to have been realized on the sale,
exchange or disposition of lands and/or buildings which are not
actually used in the business of a corporation and are treated as
capital assets, based on the gross selling price of fair market value as
determined in accordance with Section 6(E) of this Code, whichever
is higher, of such lands and/or buildings. (As amended by TRAIN)

Tax Rate on Passive Income of Domestic
Corporations

Final Tax

1.

Interest under the expanded foreign currency deposit
system

15%

2.

Royalty of all types within the Philippines

20%

o

Royalty from abroad? Enters the taxable income
30% tax rate

3.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust fund
and similar arrangement

20%

4.

Dividend from domestic corporations (intercorporate
dividend)

exempt

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

94

A note on banks and income derived under the expanded foreign
currency deposit system
Tax Rate of BANKS on Income Derived under the
Expanded FCD System

Final Tax

1.

Income derived by a depository bank from foreign
currency transactions with nonresidents, OBUs, etc.

exempt

2.

Interest income from foreign currency loans granted by
a bank to residents other than OBUs

10%

Income of nonresidents (individuals or corporations) from
transactions with depository bank under the expanded FCD
system are exempt.

Intercorporate dividends
•

Dividends received by a domestic corporation from
domestic corporation shall not be subject to tax.
O

another

Why? Law assumes that the dividends received will be
injected to the capital, which will eventually be taxed when
the corporation gets income from the use of the capital.

Capital gains
The capital gains treatment is similar to that of individuals. Refer
to the section on individuals for a more in-depth discussion.

Tax Rate on Capital Gains

1.

On sale of shares of stock of
a domestic corporation NOT
traded through a local stock
exchange held as a capita! asset

15% of the net capital gains

2.

On sale of real property in the
Philippines held as a capital
asset (only applies to lands and/
or buildings)

6% of the gross selling price, or the
current market value at the time of
sale, whichever is higher

Capita! Gains on Sale or Disposition of Shares of Stock
Tax Rate on Income from Sale, Barter, Exchange or other
Disposition of Shares of Stock (R.R. 6-2008, as amended)

If shares of stock are listed and
traded through the local stock
exchange

6/10 of 1% (or 0.005%) of the gross
selling price or gross value in money
of the shares of stock

J9JC9B0M

95

INCOME TAX

If shares not traded through the
local stock exchange

How to determine the tax
base of disposition of stock
(R.R. 6-2008, as amended)

15% of the net capital gains

Fair Market Value

Sales of stock listed and traded
through the LSE

FMV is the actual selling price

Sales of stock listed but not traded
through the LSE

FMV is the closing price on the
day when the shares were sold,
transferred, or exchanged (if no
sale was made on that day in the
LSE, then the closing price on the
day nearest to the date of sale,
transfer, or exchange of the said
shares)

Sales of stock not listed and not
traded through the LSE

For common shares, the book
value based on the latest available
financial statements (AFS) prior to
the date of the sale but not earlier
than the immediately preceding
year.

preferred
For
the
shares,
liquidation value, which is equal
to the redemption price of the
preferred shares as of the balance
the
nearest
transaction
sheet
date, including any premium and
cumulative preferred dividends in
arrears.
In case there are both common and
preferred, deduct the liquidation
value of the preferred shares from
the total equity first and then
divide the result by the number
of outstanding common shares as
of the balance sheet nearest the
transaction date.

The values no longer need to be
adjusted to include the appraisal
surplus from any property of the
corporation. The latest AFS are
enough to determine the FMV of the
shares. (R.R. 20-2020)

J9JC9B0M

1
TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

96

Capita! Gains on Sale, Exchange, or Transfer of Rea! Property
Classified as Capital Assets

Final Tax Rate on Sales, Exchanges, or Transfers of Real Properties
Classified as Capital Assets (R.R. 8-1998)
Sale of real property in the Philippines
(Note: only applies to lands and/or
buildings)

6% of the gross selling price, or the
current market value at the time of
sale, whichever is higher

Payment of capital gains tax on foreclosure of mortgaged property
O

If the mortgagor exercises his right of redemption within
one year, no capital gains tax shall be imposed because no
capital gains have been derived and no transfer of property
was realized. (Supreme Transliner, Inc. v. BPI Family Savings
Bank, Inc., G.R. No. 165617, February 23, 2011)

o

In case of non-redemption, the buyer of the property is
deemed to have withheld the CGT (or the CWT, as the case
may be) and must remit the said tax to the BIR. The CGT (or
the CWT) shall be based on whichever is higher between the
bid price of the highest bidder or the FMV or the zonal value
as determined by Section 6(E). (R.R. 9-2012)

Tax Treatment of Sales, Exchanges, or Transfers of Rea! Properties
Classified as Ordinary Assets
Creditable Withholding Tax on Sales, Exchanges or Transfers of
Real Properties classified as Ordinary Assets (R.R. 8-1998)

1.

2.

If the seller is habitually engaged
in the real estate business

o

Selling price Is less than
P500,000

1.5%

o

Selling price is P500,000 to
P2M

3%

o

Selling price is above P2M

5% of gross selling price/current
market value, whichever is higher

If the seller is not habitually
engaged in the real estate
business

6% of gross selling price/current
market value, whichever is higher

J9JC9B0M

97

INCOME TAX

3.

If the seller Is exempt from
creditable withholding tax as
per R.R. 2-1998

Exempt

Minimum Corporate Income Tax (MCIT)

Sec. 27. (E) Minimum Corporate Income Tax on Domestic
Corporations. —

(1) Imposition of Tax. — A minimum corporate income tax of two
percent (2%) of the gross income as of the end of the taxable year, as
defined herein, is hereby imposed on a corporation taxable under this
Title, beginning on the fourth taxable year immediately following the
year in which such corporation commenced its business operations,
when the minimum income tax is greater than the tax computed
under Subsection (A) of this Section for the taxable year.
(2) Carry Forward of Excess Minimum Tax. — Any excess of the
minimum corporate income tax over the normal income tax as
computed under Subsection (A) of this Section shall be carried
forward and credited against the normal income tax for the three (3)
immediately succeeding taxable years.
(3) Retief from the Minimum Corporate Income Tax Under Certain
Conditions. — The Secretary of Finance is hereby authorized to
suspend the imposition of the minimum corporate income tax on
any corporation which suffers losses on account of prolonged labor
dispute, or because of force majeure, or because of legitimate
business reverses.

The Secretary of Finance is hereby authorized to promulgate, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, the necessary rules and
regulation that shall define the terms and conditions under which he
may suspend the imposition of the minimum corporate income tax in
a meritorious case.
(4) Gross Income Defined. — For purposes of applying the minimum
corporate income tax provided under Subsection (E) hereof, the term
'gross income' shall mean gross sales less sales returns, discounts and
allowances and cost of goods sold. "Cost of goods sold" shall include
all business expenses directly incurred to produce the merchandise to
bring them to their present location and use.

For a trading or merchandising concern, "cost of goods sold" shall
include the Invoice cost of the goods sold, plus import duties, freight
In transporting the goods to the place where the goods are actually
sold including insurance while the goods are in transit.
For a manufacturing concern, cost of "goods manufactured and sold"
shall include all costs of production of finished goods, such as raw
materials used, direct labor and manufacturing overhead, freight
cost, insurance premiums and other costs incurred to bring the raw
materials to the factory or warehouse.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

98

In the case of taxpayers engaged in the sale of service, 'gross income'
means gross receipts less sales returns, allowances, discounts and
cost of services. "Cost of services" shall mean all direct costs and
expenses necessarily incurred to provide the services required by the
customers and clients including (A) salaries and employee benefits of
personnel, consultants and specialists directly rendering the service
and (B) cost of facilities directly utilized in providing the service such
as depreciation or rental of equipment used and cost of supplies:
Provided, however, That in the case of banks, "cost of services" shall
include interest expense.

Beginning with the fourth year of operations, a domestic
corporation (or resident foreign corporation) is taxed by whichever
is higher:

•

o

Normal tax of 30%, or

o

Minimum corporate income tax of 2%

The MCIT is 2% of gross income (compare with the normal tax
which has taxable income as its tax base).

•

o

•

Is MCIT constitutional?
o

•

Gross income includes all items of gross income enumerated
under Section 32(A), except those income exempt from
income tax and income subject to final withholding tax.

Yes, it is. The MCIT is NOT a tax on capital. It is imposed
on gross income which is arrived at by deducting the capital
spent by a corporation in the sale of its goods, i.e., the cost
of goods and other direct expenses from gross sales. Clearly,
the capital is not being taxed. Thus, MCIT is constitutional.
(Chamber of Real Estate and Builders' Associations, Inc. v.
Romulo, G.R. No. 160756, March 9, 2010)

Any excess of the MCIT over the normal tax of a year shall be
carried forward and credited against the normal tax for the three
--------ediatelv
iran]
J ‘ 1
succeeding taxable years.
O

For the carry forward to apply, the normal tax should be
higher than the minimum corporate income tax.

o

So, you usually compute both first; then apply either the
MCIT or normal tax rate, whichever is higher.

J9JC9B0M

99

INCOME TAX

Example

Year 4

Year 5

Year 6

Year 7

MCIT
Normal

200
100

400
200

100
300

100
200

Tax Payable
Excess MCIT

200
(100)

400
(100)
(200)

0
0
0

200
0
0

MCIT is implemented on domestic and resident foreign corporations
whenever they have zero or negative taxable income, or when the
MCIT is greater than the normal income tax due. (R.R. 9-1998)

The following are exempted from the MCIT:
o

Resident foreign corporations engaged in business
international carriers (see below for more discussion)

o

Resident foreign corporations engaged in business as offshore
banking units

o

Resident foreign corporations engaged in business as regional
operating headquarters

o

Firms that are taxed under a special income tax regime (like
those under PEZA or other economic zones)

o

Proprietary Education Institutions

o

Non-profit hospitals

o

Depositary banks under the foreign currency deposit unit
(FCDU)

o

REIT (Real Estate Investment Trusts) (R.A. 9856)

o

Nonresident foreign corporations

as

When can you apply for relief from the MCIT?
o

Losses on account of prolonged labor dispute

•

o

Losses arising from a strike staged by employees which
lasted for more than six months within a taxable period
and which has caused the temporary shutdown of
business operations

Force majeure
■

Any cause due to an irresistible force as by "act of God"

•

What about an irresistible force such as an act of
love? No, the law does not talk of love.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

100

•

o

Also includes armed conflict such as war or insurgency.

Legitimate business reverses
•

Includes substantial losses due to fire, robbery, theft or
embezzlement, or other economic reasons

KKK Corp, secured its Certificate of Incorporation from the Securities
and Exchange Commission on June 3, 2013. It commenced business
operations on August 12, 2013. In April 2014, Ms. J, an employee of
KKK Corp- in charge of preparing the annual income tax return of the
corporation for 2013, got confused on whether she should prepare
payment for the regular corporate income tax or the minimum
corporate income tax.
a)

As Ms. J's supervisor, what will be your advice?

b) What are the distinctions between regular corporate income tax
and minimum corporate income tax? (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

a) I will tell Ms. J to prepare payment for the regular corporate
income tax. MCIT will not apply yet because it only applies beginning
the 4th year of operations of the domestic corporation. In this case,
KKK Corp, has not yet reached the 4th year of its operations.

b) MCIT is 2°/o of a corporation's gross income and only applies
beginning the 4th year of its operations. Regular corporate income
tax is 30°/o of a corporation's taxable income and applies immediately.
Income Tax on Resident Foreign Corporations
Sec. 28. (A) Tax on Resident Foreign Corporations. —

(1) In General. — Except as otherwise provided in this Code, a
corporation organized, authorized, or existing under the laws of any
foreign country, engaged in trade or business within the Philippines,
shall be subject to an income tax equivalent to thirty-five percent
(35%) of the taxable income derived in the preceding taxable year
from all sources within the Philippines: Provided, That effective
January 1, 2009, the rate of income tax shall be thirty percent (30%).
In the case of corporations adopting the fiscal-year accounting period,
the taxable income shall be computed without regard to the specific
date when sales, purchases and other transactions occur. Their income
and expenses for the fiscal year shall be deemed to have been earned
and spent equally for each month of the period.

The reduced corporate income tax rates shall be applied on the
amount computed by multiplying the number of months covered by
the new rates within the fiscal year by the taxable income of the
corporation for the period, divided by twelve.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

101

Provided, however, That a resident foreign corporation shall be
granted the option to be taxed at fifteen percent (15%) on gross
income under the same conditions, as provided in Section 27(A).
(2) Minimum Corporate Income Tax on Resident Foreign Corporations.
— A minimum corporate income tax of two percent (2%) of gross
income, as prescribed under Section 27(E) of this Code, shall be
imposed, under the same conditions, on a resident foreign corporation
taxable under paragraph (1) of this Subsection.
A foreign corporation is one which is not organized or incorporated
in the Philippines.

o

It may be a resident or nonresident corporation.

A resident foreign corporation is a foreign corporation engaged in
business in the Philippines.

O

A foreign corporation can engage in business in the Philippines
only after it had registered with, and had been allowed by, the
regulatory agencies of the Philippine government to engage
in business in the Philippines.

O

However, even without the license, if the facts show that
the foreign corporation actually engages in business in the
Philippines, then it will be considered a resident foreign
corporation.

Tax Rate of Foreign Resident
Corporations

30% of taxable income from all sources
within the Philippines, or
2% of gross income if MCIT applies, or

15% of gross income (again, the GIT
has yet to be implemented)

Passive Income of Foreign Resident Corporations
Sec. 28. (A) (7) Taxon Certain Incomes Received by a Resident
Foreign Corporation. — (a) Interest from Deposits and Yield or
any other Monetary Benefit from Deposit Substitutes, Trust
Funds and Similar Arrangements and Royalties — Interest from
any currency bank deposit and yield or any other monetary benefit
from deposit substitutes and from trust funds and similar arrangements
and royalties derived from sources within the Philippines shall be
subject to a final income tax at the rate of twenty percent (20%)
of such interest: Provided, however, That interest income derived
by a resident foreign corporation from a depository bank under the

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

102

expanded foreign currency deposit system shall be subject to a final
income tax at the rate of seven and one-half percent (7 1/2%) of
such interest income.
(b) Income Derived under the Expanded Foreign Currency
Deposit System. — Income derived by a depository bank under
the expanded foreign currency deposit system from foreign currency
transactions with local commercial banks including branches of foreign
banks that may be authorized by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP) to transact business with foreign currency deposit system
units, including interest income from foreign currency loans granted
by such depository banks under said expanded foreign currency
deposit system to residents, shall be subject to a final income tax at
the rate often percent (10%) of such income.

Any income of nonresidents, whether individuals or corporations,
from transactions with depository banks under the expanded system
shall be exempt from income tax.
(c) Capital Gains from Sale of Shares of Stock Not Traded in
the Stock Exchange. — A final tax at the rates prescribed below is
hereby imposed upon the net capital gains realized during the taxable
year from the sale, barter, exchange or other disposition of shares
of stock in a domestic corporation except shares sold or disposed of
through the stock exchange:

Not over P100,000 ..............................

5%

On any amount in excess of P100,000

10%

(d) Intercorporate Dividends. — Dividends received by a resident
foreign corporation from a domestic corporation liable to tax under
this Code shall not be subject to tax under this Title.

Tax Rate on Passive Income of Foreign Resident
Corporations

Final Tax

Interest under the expanded foreign currency deposit
system

7.5%

Royalty of all types within the Philippines

20%

o

Royalty from abroad? Exempt. (Remember, only
taxed from sources within the Philippines)

3.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust fund
and similar arrangement

20%

4.

Dividend from domestic corporations (inter-corporate
dividend)

exempt

J9JC9B0M

103

INCOME TAX

TRAIN did not amend Section 28, NIRC, which talks about the tax
treatment of resident and nonresident foreign corporations. So,
foreign corporations are still taxed the same, which means:
O

Their capital gains tax on the sale of shares of domestic
corporations by foreign corporations are still subject to the
old 5%/10% of the net capital gains regime.

Capita! gains
Tax Rate on Capital Gains

1.

2.

On sale of shares of stock of a domestic
corporation NOT traded through a local
stock exchange held as a capital asset,
o

Capital gains not over P100,000

5% of the net capital gains

o

Capital gains in excess of P100,000

10% of the net capital gains

On sale of
Philippines

real

property

in

the

No provision for capital gains
for sale of realty. Hence, it
will be subject to the regular
corporate income tax rate.

Special Rule on International Carriers

Sec. 28 (A)
(3) International Carrier. — An international carrier doing
business in the Philippines shall pay a tax of two and one-half percent
(2 1/2%) on its 'Gross Philippine Billings' as defined hereunder:
(a) International Air Carrier. — 'Gross Philippine Billings' refers
to the amount of gross revenue derived from carriage of persons,
excess baggage, cargo, and mail originating from the Philippines
in a continuous and uninterrupted flight, irrespective of the place
of sale or issue and the place of payment of the ticket or passage
document: Provided, That tickets revalidated, exchanged and/
or Indorsed to another international airline form part of the Gross
Philippine Billings if the passenger boards a plane in a port or point
in the Philippines: Provided, further, That for a flight which originates
from the Philippines, but transshipment of passenger takes place at
any part outside the Philippines on another airline, only the aliquot
portion of the cost of the ticket corresponding to the leg flown from
the Philippines to the point of transshipment shall form part of Gross
Philippine Billings.

(b) International Shipping. — 'Gross Philippine Billings' means gross
revenue whether for passenger, cargo or mail originating from the
Philippines up to final destination, regardless of the place of sale or
payments of the passage or freight documents.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

104

Provided, That international carriers doing business in the Philippines
may avail of a preferential rate or exemption from the tax herein
imposed on their gross revenue derived from the carriage of persons
and their excess baggage on the basis of an applicable tax treaty or
international agreement to which the Philippines is a signatory or
on the basis of reciprocity such that an international carrier, whose
home country grants income tax exemption to Philippine carriers,
shall likewise be exempt from the tax imposed under this provision.
(As amended by R. A. 10378)

Tax rate for international carriers is 2.5% of Gross Philippine
Billings (GPB)
O

Note that under R.A. 10378, international carriers doing
business in the Philippines may avail of a preferential rate or
exemption from tax based on:
•

A treaty or international agreement to which our beloved
Philippines is a signatory, or

•

The basis of reciprocity.

Gross Philippine Billings refers to
excess

o

Gross revenue derived from carriage of persons,
baggage, cargo and mail

o

Originating from the
uninterrupted flight

o

Irrespective of the place of sale or issue and the place of
payment of the ticket or passage document

Philippines

in

a

continuous

and

An off-line carrier refers to an international air carrier having no
flight operations to and from the Philippines. (R.R. 15-2002)

An on-line carrier refers to an international air carrier having or
maintaining flight operations to and from the Philippines. (R.R.
15-2002)
Off-line flights refer to flight operations between ports or points
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Philippines, without
touching a port of point situated in the Philippines, except when
in distress or due to force majeure.

o

What if it lands in the Spratlys?

Remember the CIR v. BOAC (G.R. No. L-65773, April 30, 1987)
case! British Overseas Airways did not have any landing rights
nor did they have license to operate here. They also did not carry
passengers or cargo to or from the Philippines. They did, however,
have a general sales agent which sold BOAC tickets. They were

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

105

taxed for the sale of the tickets (because of the situs of taxation
principle), even if the service to be rendered was outside the
Philippines. They were not liable for carrier's tax though.

o

Doing business has no specific criterion. As long as there was
a continuity of conduct and intention to establish a continuous
business and not one of a temporary character, then you are
doing business in the Philippines.

An offline airline which has a branch/agent in the Philippines and
sells passage documents to cover offline flights of its principal
or other airlines is NOT considered engaged in business as an
international air carrier in the country and is NOT subject to the
GPB.

If the airline has flights which originate from any point in the
Philippines, it is subject to the 2.5% GPB tax unless it is subject
to a different tax rate under a tax treaty to which the Philippines
is a signatory.
In a nutshell, if an international air carrier maintains flights to
and from the Philippines, it shall be taxed at the rate of 2.5%
GPB while international air carriers that do not have flights to
and from the Philippines but nonetheless earn income from other
activities in the country will be taxed at the normal corporate
income tax rate of such income. (South African Airways v. CIR,
G.R. No. 180356, February 16, 2010)

What is included in computing the GPB for international air
carriers?
O

Gross revenue from passage of persons (actual amount as
reflected in the tax coupon part of the plane ticket)

o

Excess baggage

o

Cargo and mail originating from the Philippines in a continuous and uninterrupted flight

o

To compute the GPB: (monthly average net fare of all the tax
coupons of plane tickets per point of final destination, per
class of passage, per classification of passenger) MULTIPLIED
by the (total number of passengers flown for the month as
declared in the flight manifest)

In case of passengers' flights from any point in the Philippines

and back, that portion of revenue pertaining to the return trip to
the Philippines is NOT included as part of the GPB. (R.R. 15-2002)

For international shippers, demurrage and detention fees are not
included in GPB.

J9JC9B0M

106

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
0

Demurrage fees are in the nature of rent for the use of
property of the carrier in the Philippines. It's considered
income from Philippine sources and is subject to income tax
under the regular rate as the other types of income of the online carrier. (Association of International Shipping Lines, Inc.
v. Secretary of Finance, G.R. No. 222239, January 15, 2020)

0

Detention fees and other charges relating to outbound
cargoes and inbound cargoes are all considered Philippinesourced income of international sea carriers as they are
,ected fortbe use of property or rendition of services in the
Philippines. These are subject to the Philippine income tax
un er e regular rate. (Association of International Shipping
SecretarY of Finance, G.R. No. 222239, January
k X

Special Rule for Offshore Banking Units
(4) Offshore Banking Units. — The provisions of any law to the
contrary notwithstanding, income derived by offshore banking units
authorized by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to transact
business with offshore banking units, including any interest income
derived from foreign currency loans granted to residents, shall be
subject to a final income tax at the rate of ten percent (10%) of such
income.
Any income of nonresidents, whether individuals or corporations,
from transactions with said offshore banking units shall be exempt
from income tax.

•

Tax rate of offshore banking units authorized by the BSP (including
any interest income foreign currency loans granted to residents)
is 10% final tax.

Income of nonresidents (individuals or corporations)
transactions with OBUs shall be exempt from income tax.

from

An offshore banking unit is a branch of a foreign bank which is
the Phi'Hppinesthe BSP t0 transact offshore banking business in
A foreign currency deposit unit is a department of a local bank or
in an existing local branch of a foreign bank which is authorized
by the BSP to operated under the expanded foreign currency
deposit system.

•

Gross onshore income covers all income arising from transactions
allowed by the BSP conducted by and between an offshore bank
with another offshore bank or with an FCDU or with a nonresident.
(R.R. 10-1976)

J

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

107

The following are included in computing the gross onshore income
of OBUs and FCDUs:
O

Gross interest income arising from foreign currency loans and
advances and investments with residents

O

Fees, commissions and other charges which are integral parts
of the income from foreign currency loan transactions are
EXEMPT. They are not to be included in computing the final
tax. (R.R. 14-1977)

Special Rule on Profits Remitted by a Branch (Branch Profit Remittance
Tax [BPRT])

(5) Tax on Branch Profits Remittances. — Any profit remitted
by a branch to its head office shall be subject to a tax of fifteen
(15%) which shall be based on the total profits applied or earmarked
for remittance without any deduction for the tax component thereof
(except those activities which are registered with the Philippine
Economic Zone Authority). The tax shall be collected and paid in the
same manner as provided in Sections 57 and 58 of this Code: Provided,
that interests, dividends, rents, royalties, including remuneration for
technical services, salaries, wages premiums, annuities, emoluments
or other fixed or determinable annual, periodic or casual gains, profits,
income and capital gains received by a foreign corporation during
each taxable year from all sources within the Philippines shall not be
treated as branch profits unless the same are effectively connected
with the conduct of its trade or business in the Philippines.
Any profit remitted by a branch to its head office shall be subject
to a tax of 15% of the total profits applied or earmarked for
remittance without any deduction for the tax component
O

Except those registered with PEZA (they have their own tax
rules as incentives)

What is the base for the BPRT?
o

It Is the total profits applied for remittance or earmarked for
remittance without any deduction for the tax component, not
the profit actually remitted abroad.

o

The following are not treated as branch profits:
■

Interests

•

Dividends

-

Rents

■

Royalties

■

Payment for technical services

-

Salaries and wage premiums

!

I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

108

•

Annuities, emoluments, or other fixed or determinable
casual gains

•

Profits, income and capital gains
•

•

Except if the above are connected with the conduct
of a foreign corporation's trade or business in the
Philippines.

Passive income is not included in computing for the BPRT. It is
subject to a final tax. (Compania General de Tabacos de Filipinos
v. CIR, CTA Case No. 4141, August 23, 1993)
0

Except when it arises from business activity in which the
corporation is engaged or connected with the conduct of its
business in the Philippines.

Kria, Inc., a Korean corporation engaged in the business of
manufacturing electric vehicles, established a branch office in
the Philippines in 2010. The Philippine branch constructed a
manufacturing plant in Kabuyao, Laguna, and the construction lasted
three (3) years. Commercial operations in the Laguna plant began
in 2014.

In just two (2) years of operation, the Philippine branch had remittable
profits in an amount exceeding 175% of its capital. However, the
head office in Korea instructed the branch not to remit the profits to
the Korean head office until instructed otherwise. The branch chief
finance officer Is concerned that the BIR might hold the Philippine
branch liable for the 10% improperly accumulated earnings tax
(IAET) for permitting its profits to accumulate beyond reasonable
business needs.

Is it subject to 15% branch profit remittance tax (BPRT)? (2018 Bar
Exam)
Suggested answer: No, It is not subject to BPRT. BPRT is imposed on
any profit remitted by the branch to its head office. In this case, the
profits were not remitted yet. Hence, BPRT may not be imposed yet.
Special Rule on Regional or Area Headquarters (RAHQs) and Regional
Operating Headquarters (ROHQs)

Sec. 22. (DD) The term "regional or area headquarters" shall mean a
branch established in the Philippines by multinational companies and
which headquarters do not earn or derive income from the Philippines
and which act as supervisory, communications and coordinating
center for their affiliates, subsidiaries, or branches in the Asia-Pacific
Region and other foreign markets.

(EE) The term "regional operating headquarters"shall mean a branch
established in the Philippines by multinational companies which are

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

109

engaged in any of the following services: general administration
and planning; business planning and coordination; sourcing and
procurement of raw materials and components; corporate finance
advisory services; marketing control and sales promotion; training
and personnel management; logistic services; research and
development services and product development; technical support
and maintenance; data processing and communications; and business
development.

Sec. 28. (A) (6) Regional or Area Headquarters and Regional
Operating Headquarters of Multinational Companies. — (a)
Regional or area headquarters as defined in Section 22(DD) shall not
be subject to income tax.

(b) Regional operating headquarters as defined in Section 22(EE)
shall pay a tax of ten percent (10%) of their taxable income.

Regional or Area Headquarters is a branch established in the
Philippines by multi-nationals and which headquarters:
O

Do NOT earn or derive income from the Philippines, and

O

Which act as supervisory, communications and coordinating
center fortheir affiliates, subsidiaries or branches in the AsiaPacific Regions.

They are EXEMPT from income tax.

•

Regional Operating Headquarters is a branch established in the
Philippines by multi-nationals which are engaged in any of the
following sendees:
O

General admin and planning;

O

Business planning and coordination;

O

Sourcing and procurement of raw materials and components;

O

Corporate finance advisory services;

O

Marketing control and sales promotion;

O

Training and personnel management;

O

Logistic services;

O

Research and development services and product development;

O

Technical support and maintenance;

O

Data processing and communications; and

O

Business development.
•

They are taxed 10% on taxable income.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

110

Income Tax on Nonresident Foreign Corporations
In General

(B) Tax on Nonresident Foreign Corporation. —
(1) In General. — Except as otherwise provided in this Code, a
foreign corporation not engaged in trade or business in the Philippines
shall pay a tax equal to thirty-five percent (35%) of the gross
income received during each taxable year from all sources within the
Philippines, such as interests, dividends, rents, royalties, salaries,
premiums (except reinsurance premiums), annuities, emoluments or
other fixed or determinable annual, periodic or casual gains, profits
and income, and capital gains, except capital gains subject to tax
under subparagraph 5(c) Provided, That effective January 1, 2009,
the rate of income tax shall be thirty percent (30%).

•

Nonresident foreign corporations are subject to 30% income tax
on the gross income derived during each taxable year from all
sources within the Philippines only

o

Special corporations (discussed below) are subject to a
different tax rate

•

When the foreign corporation transacts business in the
Philippines independently of its branch in the country, the
principal-agent relationship (between the foreign corporation and
the branch) is set aside. The transaction becomes that of the
foreign corporation, not of the branch; hence, the corporation is
considered a nonresident foreign corporation for that isolated and
independent transaction. (Marubeni Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No.
76573, September 14, 1989)

•

A casual activity in the Philippines by a foreign corporation does
not amount to engaging in trade or business in the Philippines
for income tax purposes. In order that a foreign corporation
may be considered engaged in trade or business, its business
transactions must be continuous. (N.V. Reederij "Amsterdam"
and Royal Interocean Lines v. CIR, G.R. No. L-46029, June 23,
1988)

Special nonresident foreign corporations

(2) Nonresident Cinematographic Film Owner, Lessor or
Distributor. — A cinematographic film owner, lessor, or distributor
shall pay a tax of twenty-five percent (25%) of its gross income from
all sources within the Philippines.

(3) Nonresident Owner or Lessor of Vessels Chartered by
Philippine Nationals. — A nonresident owner or lessor of vessels

J9JC9B0M

111

INCOME TAX

shall be subject to a tax of four and one-half percent (4 1/2%) of
gross rentals, lease or charter fees from leases or charters to Filipino
citizens or corporations, as approved by the Maritime Industry
Authority.

(4) Nonresident Owner or Lessor of Aircraft, Machineries and
Other Equipment. — Rentals, charters and other fees derived by a
nonresident lessor of aircraft, machineries and other equipment shall
be subject to a tax of seven and one-half percent (7 1/2%) of gross
rentals or fees.
Tax rate on certain incomes of nonresident foreign corporations

(5) Tax on Certain Incomes Received by a Nonresident Foreign
Corporation. —
(a) Interest on Foreign Loans. — A final withholding tax at the
rate of twenty percent (20%) is hereby imposed on the amount of
interest on foreign loans contracted on or after August 1, 1986;
(b) Intercorporate Dividends. — A final withholding tax at the
rate of fifteen percent (15%) is hereby imposed on the amount of
cash and/or property dividends received from a domestic corporation,
which shall be collected and paid as provided in Section 57(A) of
this Code, subject to the condition that the country in which the
nonresident foreign corporation is domiciled, shall allow a credit
against the tax due from the nonresident foreign corporation taxes
deemed to have been paid in the Philippines equivalent to twenty
percent (20%), which represents the difference between the regular
income tax of 35% and the 15% tax on dividends as provided in this
subparagraph: Provided, that effective January 1, 2009, the credit
against the tax due shall be equivalent to 15%, which represents the
difference between the regular income tax of 30% and the 15% tax
on dividends. (As amended by R.A. 9337)

(c) Exchange. — A final tax at the rates prescribed below is hereby
imposed upon the net capital gains realized during the taxable year
from the sale, barter, exchange or other disposition of shares of stock
in a domestic corporation, except shares sold, or disposed of through
the stock exchange:
Not over P100,000

5%

On any amount in excess of P100,000

10%

Tax Rate on Passive Income of Foreign Nonresident
Corporations

1.

Interest on foreign loans (i.e., foreign nonresident
lends to a domestic corporation)

Final Tax

20%

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

112

Dividend from domestic corporations (inter-corporate
dividend)

15%

This is subject to the condition that the country in which
the nonresident foreign corporation is domiciled allows a
credit against the tax due from the nonresident foreign
corporation taxes deemed to have been paid in the
Philippines equivalent to 15%. If they don't, the dividends
will be taxed at 30% of gross income.
Tax Rate on Capital Gains
(same as foreign resident corporations)

On sale of shares of stock of a domestic
corporation NOT traded through a local
stock exchange held as a capital asset,

1.

o

Capital gains not over P100,000

5% of the net capital gains

0

Capital gains in excess of P100,000

10% of the
gains

On sale of real property in the Philippines

2.

net capital

No provision for capital
gains for sale of realty.

Hence, it will be subject to
regular corporate income
tax of 30% of gross income.
On inter-corporate dividends

•

The ordinary 30% tax rate applicable to dividend remittances to
nonresident corporate stockholders of a Philippine corporation,
goes down to 15% if the country of domicile of the foreign
stockholder corporation "shall allow" such foreign corporation a
tax credit for "taxes deemed paid in the Philippines," applicable
against the tax payable to the domiciliary country by the foreign
stockholder corporation.
0

The RP-US Tax Treaty created a treaty obligation on the part
of the US that it "shall allow" to a US parent corporation
receiving dividends from its Philippine subsidiary "a tax credit
for the appropriate amount of taxes paid or accrued to the
Philippines by the said Philippine subsidiary. The US allowed
a "deemed paid" tax credit to US corporations on dividends
received from foreign corporation based on Section 902 of the
US Internal Revenue Code. Hence, the 15% preferential rate
applies. (Commissioner of Internal Revenue v. Interpublic
Group of Companies, Inc., G.R. No. 207039, August 14,
2019)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

113

When the domicile of the nonresident foreign corporation does
not impose any tax on dividends received from foreign sources,
the preferential 15% tax on intercorporate dividends will apply.
(BIR Ruling DA-145-07)
BBB, Inc., a domestic corporation, enjoyed a particularly profitable
year in 2014. In June 2015, its Board of Directors approved the
distribution of cash dividends to its stockholders. BBB, Inc. has
individual and corporate stockholders. What is the tax treatment
of the cash dividends received from BBB, Inc. by the following
stockholders:
a)

Domestic corporation

b)

Non-resident foreign corporation (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a)

Cash dividends to a domestic corporation is exempt.

b) Cash dividends to a non-resident foreign corporation will be
subject to 15% final tax, if the domicile of such corporation allows
a credit against the tax due from the corporation taxes deemed to
have been in the Philippines equivalent to 15%. If the domicile does
not, then it will be included in the corporation's gross income from
sources in the Philippines to be taxed 30%.

Income covered by tax treaties
•

In negotiating tax treaties, the underlying rationale for reducing
the tax rate is that the Philippines will give up a part of the
tax in the expectation that the tax given up for this particular
investment is not taxed by the other country. There would be
some incentives on the part of the foreigners to invest in the
Philippines because the rates of tax are lowered and at the same
time, they are credited against the domestic tax abroad a figure
higher than what was collected in the Philippines.

o

Thus, if the rates of tax are lowered here, there should be a
concomitant commitment on the part of the state of residence
(of the foreign corporation) to grant some form of tax relief,
whether this be in the form of a tax credit or exemption.
Otherwise, the tax which would have been collected here will
simply be collected by another state, defeating the object of
the tax treaty since the tax burden imposed would remain
unrelieved.

o

The purpose of the most favored nation clause is to establish
the principle of equality of international treatment by
providing that citizens of the contracting nations may enjoy
the privileges accorded by either party to those of the most
favored nation. This allows the taxpayer in one state to avail of

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

114

more liberal provisions granted to another tax treaty to which
his country or residence is also a party. However, the use of
the most favored nation clause is subject to the rationale of
tax treaties and will only apply if the taxes imposed under
both treaties are paid under similar circumstances.
O

If the state of residence does not grant some form of tax
relief to the investor (the foreign nonresident corporation),
no benefit would redound to the Philippines. (CIR v. SC
Johnson and Son, G.R. No. 127105, June 25, 1999, wherein
the issue was with the payment of taxes on royalties. SC
Johnson wanted tax credit based on the US-RP tax treaty
which had a "most favored nation clause." The Germany-RP
treaty was more beneficial because it allowed a 10% rate
on royalties. However, the Germany-RP treaty also allowed
for 20% matching credit for royalties. The US-RP tax treaty
did NOT have this 20% matching credit. So the SC said that
since the RP-US Tax Treaty does not give a matching tax
credit of 20% for the taxes paid to the Philippines on royalties
as allowed under the RP-Germany Tax Treaty, SC Johnson
cannot be deemed entitled to the 10% rate granted under
the latter treaty because there is no payment of taxes on
royalties under similar circumstances.)

•

Based on RMC 46-2002 (affirmed by Golden Arches Development
Corporation v. CIR, CTA Case 6862, 2007), the 10% rate of
withholding tax on royalties remitted to residents of the US may
now be availed of because of the RP-China tax treaty which has
basically the same provisions of the RP-US tax treaty. So, the
(MFN) of the RP-US tax treaty can refer to the RP-China tax treaty
(as compared to the RP-Germany treaty which was essentially
different).

•

The failure of a taxpayer to comply with a BIR issuance on
availing tax treaty benefits should not divest the taxpayer of the
benefit of lower tax treaty rates. To allow such would make a local
administrative regulation trump a treaty, which shouldn't be the
case. (Deutsche Bank AG Manila v. CIR, G.R. No. 188550, August
19, 2013)

Summary of the Tax Rates on Special Corporations
SPECIAL CORPORATIONS
Tax Rate

Nonresident owner of lessor of
vessel

4.5%

Tax Base
Gross rentals, lease and
charter fees from the
Philippines

J9JC9B0M

115

INCOME TAX

Nonresident cinematographic film
owner, lessor, or distributor

25%

Gross income
Philippines

Nonresident lessor of aircraft,
machinery and other equipment

7.5%

Gross rentals, charges and
other fees from Philippines
sources

Proprietary educational institution
and non-profit hospital

10%

Taxable income from all
sources

Resident international carrier

2.5%

Gross Philippine billings

Regional operating headquarters
of multinational corporation

10%

Philippine taxable income

from

the

There's no MCIT for special corporations.
Improperly Accumulated Earnings Tax (IAET)

Sec. 29. Imposition of Improperly Accumulated Earnings
Tax. —
(A) In General. — In addition to other taxes imposed by this Title,
there is hereby imposed for each taxable year on the improperly
accumulated taxable income of each corporation described in
Subsection B hereof, an improperly accumulated earnings tax equal
to ten percent (10%) of the improperly accumulated taxable income.

(B) Tax on Corporations Subject to Improperly Accumulated
Earnings Tax. —
(1) In General. — The improperly accumulated earnings tax imposed
in the preceding Section shall apply to every corporation formed or
availed for the purpose of avoiding the income tax with respect to
its shareholders or the shareholders of any other corporation, by
permitting earnings and profits to accumulate instead of being divided
or distributed.

(2) Exceptions. — The improperly accumulated earnings tax as
provided for under this Section shall not apply to:

(a) Publicly-held corporations;

(b) Banks and other nonbank financial Intermediaries; and

(c) Insurance companies.
(C) Evidence of Purpose to Avoid Income Tax. —
(1) Prlma Facie Evidence. — the fact that any corporation is a mere
holding company or investment company shall be prima facie evidence
of a purpose to avoid the tax upon its shareholders or members.

(2) Evidence Determinative of Purpose. — The fact that the earnings
or profits of a corporation are permitted to accumulate beyond the

J9JC9B0M

1

116

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
reasonable needs of the business shall be determinative of the
purpose to avoid the tax upon its shareholders or members unless
the corporation, by the clear preponderance of evidence, shall prove
to the contrary.

(D) Improperly Accumulated Taxable Income. — For purposes
of this Section, the term 'improperly accumulated taxable income'
means 'taxable income' adjusted by:
(1) Income exempt from tax;
(2) Income excluded from gross income;
(3) Income subject to final tax; and
(4) The amount of net operating loss carry-over deducted;
And reduced by the sum of:

(1) Dividends actually or constructively paid; and
(2) Income tax paid for the taxable year.

Provided, however, That for corporations using the calendar year
basis, the accumulated earnings under tax shall not apply on
improperly accumulated income as of December 31, 1997. In the
case of corporations adopting the fiscal year accounting period,
the improperly accumulated income not subject to this tax, shall
be reckoned, as of the end of the month comprising the twelve
(12)-month period of fiscal year 1997-1998.
(E) Reasonable Needs of the Business. — For purposes of this
Section, the term 'reasonable needs of the business' includes the
reasonably anticipated needs of the business.

•

•

An improperly accumulated earnings tax of 10% of improperly
accumulated taxable income is imposed on corporations that
permit earnings and profits to accumulate instead of being divided
or distributed.

•

The tax on improper accumulation of surplus is designed to compel
corporations to distribute earnings so that the said earnings by
shareholders, could, in turn, be taxed. When corporations do not
declare dividends, income taxes are not paid on the undeclared
dividends received by the shareholders. (Cyanamid Philippines,
Inc. V. CTA, G.R. No. 108067, January 20, 2000)

Who are covered?
0

All domestic corporations which are classified as closely held
corporations

O

A closely-held corporation is one where at least 50% in value
of the outstanding capital stock or at least 50% of the total
combined voting power of all classes of stock is owned directly
or indirectly by not more than 20 individuals. (R.R.. 2-2001)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

■

117

How do you determine if a corporation is a closely-held
one? Look at stock-ownership.
•

If stock not owned by individuals, it will be considered
to be owned proportionately by its shareholders.

•

If it is a family and partnership ownership, an
individual shall be considered to own the stock for his
family members or partners.

•

If there is an option to acquire stocks, it shall be
considered as being owned by the person with the
option. (BIR Ruling 25-02)

Who are not covered by IAET?
O

Publicly-held corporations

O

Banks and other financial institutions

O

Insurance companies

o

Taxable partnerships

o

General professional partnerships

o

Non-taxable joint ventures

o

A branch of a foreign corporation

o

Enterprises registered with PEZA or with the BCDA or with
other special economic zones (R.R. 2-2001)

"Reasonable needs" means the immediate needs of the business.
If the corporation cannot prove this, then it is not an immediate
need. In order to determine whether profits are accumulated for
the reasonable needs of the business as to avoid the surtax upon
shareholders, the controlling intention of the taxpayer is that
which is manifested at the time of accumulation, not subsequently
declared intentions which are merely the product of afterthought.
(Manila Wine Merchants v. CIR, G.R. No. L-26145, February 20,
1984)

o

Immediacy test: The reasonable needs means the immediate
needs of the business including reasonably anticipated needs.
The burden of proof is with the corporation. (R.R. 2-2001)

What are considered reasonable?

o

Allowance for the increase of accumulated earnings up to
100% of the paid-up capital;

o

Earnings reserved for building, plant, or equipment
acquisitions as approved by the Board of Directors (expansion,
improvement, and repairs);

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

118

O

Earnings reserved for compliance with any loan or obligation
established under a legitimate business agreement (debt
retirement);

o

In case of subsidiaries of foreign corporations in the
Philippines, all undistributed earnings intended or reserved
for investments in the Philippines; and

o

Earnings required by law to be retained. (R.R. 2-2001)

What are examples of prima facie evidence of IAE?

o

The fact that any corporation is a mere holding company or
investment company

o

The fact that the earnings or profits of a corporation are
permitted to accumulate beyond the reasonable needs of the
business

o

Investment of substantial earnings in unrelated business or in
stock or securities of an unrelated business

o

Investment in bonds and other long term securities

o

Accumulation of earnings in excess of 100% of paid up capital

The touchstone of liability is the purpose behind the accumulation
of the income and not the consequences of the accumulation. So,
if the failure to pay dividends were for the purpose of using the
undistributed earnings and profits for the reasonable needs of the
business, that purpose would not fall within the interdiction of the
statute. (CIR v. Tuason, G.R. No. 85749, May 15, 1989)

I

I

i

I

Kria, Inc., a Korean corporation engaged In the business of
manufacturing electric vehicles, established a branch office in
the Philippines in 2010. The Philippine branch constructed a
manufacturing plant In Kabuyao, Laguna, and the construction lasted
three (3) years. Commercial operations in the Laguna plant began
in 2014.

In just two (2) years of operation, the Philippine branch had remittable
profits in an amount exceeding 175°/o of its capital. However, the
head office In Korea instructed the branch not to remit the profits to
the Korean head office until instructed otherwise. The branch chief
finance officer Is concerned that the BIR might hold the Philippine
branch Hable for the 10°/o improperly accumulated earnings tax
(MET) for permitting Its profits to accumulate beyond reasonable
business needs.

Is the Philippine branch of Kria subject to the 10°/o IAET under the
circumstances stated above? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No, the Philippine branch is not subject to IAET.
The Tax Code and its rules and regulations state that the IAET does
not apply to a branch of a foreign corporation.

I

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

119

Tax-exempt Corporations

Sec. 30. Exemptions from Tax on Corporations. — The following
organizations shall not be taxed under this Title in respect to income
received by them as such:

(A) Labor, agricultural or horticultural organization not organized
principally for profit;
(B) Mutual savings bank not having a capital stock represented by
shares, and cooperative bank without capital stock organized and
operated for mutual purposes and without profit;

(C) A beneficiary society, order or association, operating for the
exclusive benefit of the members such as a fraternal organization
operating under the lodge system, or mutual aid association or a
nonstock corporation organized by employees providing for the
payment of life, sickness, accident, or other benefits exclusively
to the members of such society, order, or association, or nonstock
corporation or their dependents;
(D) Cemetery company owned and operated exclusively for the
benefit of its members;

(E) Nonstock corporation or association organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, athletic, or cultural
purposes, or for the rehabilitation of veterans, no part of its net
income or asset shall belong to or inures to the benefit of any member,
organizer, officer or any specific person;

(F) Business league chamber of commerce, or board of trade, not
organized for profit and no part of the net income of which inures to
the benefit of any private stock-holder, or individual;

(G) Civic league or organization not organized for profit but operated
exclusively for the promotion of social welfare;
(H) A nonstock and nonprofit educational institution;

(I)

Government educational institution;

(J) Farmers or other mutual typhoon or fire insurance company,
mutual ditch or irrigation company, mutual or cooperative telephone
company, or like organization of a purely local character, the income
of which consists solely of assessments, dues, and fees collected from
members for the sole purpose of meeting its expenses; and

(K) Farmers, fruit growers, or like association organized and operated
as a sales agent for the purpose of marketing the products of its
members and turning back to them the proceeds of sales, less the
necessary selling expenses on the basis of the quantity of produce
finished by them;
Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding paragraphs, the
income of whatever kind and character of the foregoing organizations
from any of their properties, real or personal, or from any of their
activities conducted for profit regardless of the disposition made of
such income, shall be subject to tax imposed under this Code.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

120

The following organizations are INCOME tax-exempt, provided
they are not organized for profit:

•

1. Labor, agricultural and horticultural organizations
2. Mutual savings bank without capital stock represented by
shares and cooperative banks without capital stock
3. A beneficiary society, order or association operating for
the exclusive benefit of the members (like a frat operating
under the lodge system, a mutual aid association, a nonstock corporation organized by employees providing for the
payment of life, sickness, or other benefits exclusive to its
members)
4. Cemetery company owned and operated exclusively for the
benefit of its members

5. Non-stock corporations or associations organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,
athletic or cultural purposes or for the rehab of veterans, no
part of its net income or asset shall belong to or inures to the
benefit of any member or specific person
6. Business league chamber of commerce or board of trade, no
part of its income inures to any individual
7. Civic league or organization operated exclusively for the
promotion of social welfare
8. A non-stock and non-profit educational institution
9. Government educational institution

10. Farmers' or other mutual typhoon or fire insurance company,
mutual ditch or irrigation company, mutual or cooperative
telephone company, or like organizations or a purely local
character, the income of which consists solely of dues,
assessments and fees collected from members for the sole
purpose of meeting its expenses

11. Farmers', fruit growers' or like associations organized and
operated as sales agent for the purpose of marketing the
products of its members and turning back to them the
proceeds less expenses

•

They are not subject to income tax on income received by them
from undertakings which are essential to or necessarily connected
with the purposes for which they were organized and operated.
o

But they are subject to income tax on income of whatever
kind and character from:
•

any of their properties (real or personal), or

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

from any of their activities (unrelated) conducted for
profit, regardless of the disposition made of such income.

■

However, this does not apply to non-stock. non-profit
educational institutions, because the Constitution
clearly states that its revenues, as long as actually,
directly, and exclusively used for educational
purposes, are exempt. (CIR v. DLSU, G.R. No.
196596, November 9, 2016, which stated that
the last paragraph of Section 30 does not qualify
the Constitution. Hence, no matter the source of
the revenue, as long as its actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes, it will be
exempt from income tax.)

•

O

121

If a charitable institution engages in activities conducted for
profit, what happens?

It does not lose its tax exempt status for its not-for-profit
activities. The only consequence is that the "income of
whatever kind and character" of a charitable institution
"from any of its activities conducted for profit, regardless
of the disposition made of such income," shall be subject
to tax. (CIR v. St. Luke's, G.R. No. 195909, September
26, 2012, wherein the SC held that the profit from St.
Luke's paying patients do not form part of its exempted
charitable activities and were taxed the special rate of
10% for proprietary hospitals; the same applies to
proprietary non-profit educational institutions for the
same or similar services [RMC 67-2012])

■

For non-stock corporations or associations organized and operated
exclusively for charitable purposes (Section 30[E])
O

What does "charitable" mean?
■

O

Charitable institutions provide free goods and services to
the public which would otherwise fall on the shoulders
of the government. (CIR v. St. Luke's, G.R. No. 195909,
September 26, 2012; RMC 67-2012)

What does "exclusively" mean?

■

It means it must be both organized and operated
exclusively for charitable purposes.

•

"Organized" refers to its corporate form, as shown by
its articles of incorporation, by-laws, etc.

•

"Operations" refer to its regular activities which must
be exclusively for charity.

J9JC9B0M

122

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
O

St. Luke s was considered organized exclusively
for charitable purposes; however, it was not
operated exclusively for charitable purposes
insofar as its revenues from paying patients were
concerned.

The exclusivity test likewise applies to civic league or
organization operated exclusively for the promotion of
social welfare. (RMC 67-2012)
O

What does "non-stock" mean?
It means no part of its income is distributable as dividends
o i s members, trustees, or officers and that any profit
o ained as an incident to its operations shall, whenever
necessary or proper, be used for the furtherance of the
purposes for which the corporation was organized. (RMC
51-14, quoting Section 87 of the Corporation Code/

o

What does "non-profit" mean?
It means no part of its net income or asset accrues to
or benefits any member or specific person, with all the
net income or asset devoted to the institution's purposes
and all its activities conducted not for profit. (RMC 51-14,
quoting CIR v. St. Luke's)

o

I?
a non-stock and/or non-profit corporation/
association/organization to be exempt based on Section
(. ), its earnings or assets shall not inure to the benefit
any o its trustees, organizers, officers, members or any
specific person.

o

So, what are considered inurements?
Payment of compensation, salaries, or honorarium to its
organizers;

However, limited emoluments subject to liquidation
given to trustees to attend board meetings are not
considered inurements that will remove the exempt
status of the non-profit corporation. (DOF Opinion
No. 005-19, January 29, 2019)
sa .—

—

■

its employees;

nt

or unreasonable compensation to

Provision of welfare aid and financial assistance to its
members.
•

An organization is not exempt from income tax if
its principal activity is to receive and manage funds

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

123

associated with savings or investment programs,
including pension or retirement programs.
This does not cover a society, order, association,
or non-stock corporation under Section 30(C),
providing for the payment of life, sickness, accident
and other benefits exclusively to its members or their
dependents;

•

Donation to any person or entity

•

•

except donations made to other entities formed for
the purpose/purposes similar to its own;

■

The purchase of goods or services for amounts in excess
of the FMV of such goods or value of such services from
an entity in which one or more of its trustees, officers or
fiduciaries has an interest;

-

When upon dissolution and satisfaction of all liabilities,
its remaining assets are distributed to its trustees,
organizers, officers or members.

•

Its assets must be dedicated to its exempt purpose.

•

Accordingly,
its constitutive documents must
expressly provide that in the event of dissolution, its
assets shall be distributed to one or more entities
formed for the purpose/purposes similar to its own,
or to the Philippine government for public purpose.
(RMC 51-14)

Clubs which are organized and operated exclusively for pleasure,
recreation, and other non-profit purposes are subject to income
tax. (RMC 35-2012)
Tax-exempt under Special Laws
•

Barangay Micro Business Enterprises (BMBEs) (R.A. 9178)
O

BMBE refers to any business entity or enterprise engaged in
the production, processing or manufacturing of products or
commodities, including agro-processing, trading and services,
whose total assets including those arising from loans but
exclusive of the land on which the particular business entity's
office, plant and equipment are situated, shall not be more
than P3,000,000.

O

BMBEs are exempt from tax for income arising from the
operations of the enterprise.
■

But not from final taxes on deposits, interest income,
capital gains tax, royalties, etc.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

124

•

Tourism Enterprise Zone (TEZ) Operators (R.A. 9593)
o

TEZ Operators are given an income tax holiday of six years.

•

Foster child agencies are exempt from income tax (R.A. 10165)

•

The association dues and income derived from rentals of the
homeowners' association's properties are exempt from income
tax, provided:
O

The homeowners' association must be a duly constituted
"association" under Section 3(B), R.A. 9904;

O

The LGU having jurisdiction over the homeowners' association
must issue a certification identifying the basic services
provided by the association, and stating its lack of resources
to provide such basic services;

O

The homeowners' association must present proof that the
income and dues are used for the cleanliness, safety, security
and other basic services needed by the members. (RMC
9-2013)

A group of philanthropists organized a nonstock, non-profit hospital
for charitable purposes to provide medical services to the poor. The
hospital also accepted paying patients although none of its income
accrued to any private individual; all income were plowed back for
the hospital's use and not more than 30°/o of its funds were used for
administrative purposes.
Is the hospital subject to tax on its income? If it is, at what rate?
(2013 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The hospital is subject to tax on its income
for its for-profit activities at the rate of 10°/o under the Tax Code
provision on proprietary non-profit hospitals. The hospital fails to
meet the requirements under Section 30(E) and (G) of the NIRC to
be completely tax exempt from all its income. However, it remains
a proprietary non-profit hospital under Section 27(B) of the NIRC
as long as it does not distribute any of its profits to its members
and such profits are reinvested pursuant to its corporate purposes.
This is similar to the case of St. Luke's, wherein the Court ruled
that St. Luke's, as a proprietary non-profit hospital, Is entitled to
the preferential tax rate of 10°/o on its net income from its for-profit
activities.

Kilusang Krus, Inc. (KKI) is a nonstock, non-profit religious
organization which owns a vast tract of land in Kaiinga.
KKI has devoted 1/2 of the land for various uses: a church with a
cemetery exclusive for deceased priests and nuns, a school providing
K to 12 education, and a hospital which admits both paying and
charity patients. The remaining 1/2 portion has remained idle.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

125

The KKI Board of Trustees decided to lease the remaining 1/2 portion
to a real estate developer which constructed a community mall over
the property.
Since the rental income from the lease of the property was substantial,
the KKI decided to use the amount to finance (1) the medical expenses
of the charity patients in the KKI Hospital and (2) the purchase of
books and other educational materials for the students of KKI School.
Is KKI's income from the rental fees subject to income tax? (2018
Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: It is subject to income tax. The Tax Code states
that income of whatever kind or character from a tax-exempt
corporation's properties are subject to income tax. In this case, while
KKI is a tax-exempt corporation, it earns income from its properties.
Hence, the rental fees are subject to income tax.

H.

Estates and Trusts

Sec. 60. Imposition of Tax. —
(A) Application of Tax. — The tax imposed by this Title upon
individuals shall apply to the income of estates or of any kind of
property held in trust, including:
(1) Income accumulated in trust for the benefit of unborn or
unascertained person or persons with contingent interests, and
income accumulated or held for future distribution under the terms of
the will or trust;
(2) Income which is to be distributed currently by the fiduciary to the
beneficiaries, and income collected by a guardian of an infant which
is to be held or distributed as the court may direct;

(3) Income received by estates of deceased persons during the
period of administration or settlement of the estate; and

(4) Income which, in the discretion of the fiduciary, may be either
distributed to the beneficiaries or accumulated.
(B) Exception. — The tax imposed by this Title shall not apply
to employee's trust which forms part of a pension, stock bonus or
profit-sharing plan of an employer for the benefit of some or all of
his employees (1) if contributions are made to the trust by such
employer, or employees, or both for the purpose of distributing to
such employees the earnings and principal of the fund accumulated
by the trust in accordance with such plan, and (2) if under the trust
instrument it is impossible, at any time prior to the satisfaction of all
liabilities with respect to employees under the trust, for any part of
the corpus or income to be (within the taxable year or thereafter)
used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit
of his employees: Provided, That any amount actually distributed

J9JC9B0M

126

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

to any employee or distributee shall be taxable to him in the year
in which so distributed to the extent that it exceeds the amount
contributed by such employee or distributee.

(C) Computation and Payment. —
(1) In General. — The tax shall be computed upon the taxable income
of the estate or trust and shall be paid by the fiduciary, except as
provided in Section 63 (relating to revocable trusts) and Section 64
(relating to income for the benefit of the grantor). (2) Consolidation
of Income of Two or More Trusts. — Where, in the case of two or more
trusts, the creator of the trust in each instance is the same person,
and the beneficiary in each instance is the same, the taxable income
of all the trusts shall be consolidated and the tax provided in this
Section computed on such consolidated income, and such proportion
of said tax shall be assessed and collected from each trustee which
the taxable income of the trust administered by him bears to the
consolidated income of the several trusts.

Sec. 61. Taxable Income. — The taxable income of the estate or
trust shall be computed in the same manner and on the same basis
as in the case of an individual, except that:
(A) There shall be allowed as a deduction in computing the taxable
income of the estate or trust the amount of the income of the estate
or trust for the taxable year which is to be distributed currently by the
fiduciary to the beneficiaries, and the amount of the income collected
by a guardian of an infant which is to be held or distributed as the
court may direct, but the amount so allowed as a deduction shall be
included in computing the taxable income of the beneficiaries, whether
distributed to them or not. Any amount allowed as a deduction under
this Subsection shall not be allowed as a deduction under Subsection
(B) of this Section in the same or any succeeding taxable year.
(B) In the case of income received by estates of deceased persons
during the period of administration or settlement of the estate, and
in the case of income which, in the discretion of the fiduciary, may
be either distributed to the beneficiary or accumulated, there shall be
allowed as an additional deduction in computing the taxable income
of the estate or trust the amount of the income of the estate or trust
for its taxable year, which is properly paid or credited during such
year to any legatee, heir or beneficiary but the amount so allowed as
a deduction shall be included in computing the taxable income of the
legatee, heir or beneficiary.

(C) In the case of a trust administered In a foreign country, the
deductions mentioned in Subsections (A) and (B) of this Section shall
not be allowed: Provided, That the amount of any income included in
the return of said trust shall not be included in computing the income
of the beneficiaries.

Sec. 62. (Repealed!)
Sec. 63. Revocable trusts. — Where at any time the power to
revest in the grantor title to any part of the corpus of the trust is

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

127

vested (1) in the grantor either alone or in conjunction with any
person not having a substantial adverse interest in the disposition of
such part of the corpus or the income therefrom, or (2) in any person
not having a substantial adverse interest in the disposition of such
part of the corpus or the income therefrom, the income of such part
of the trust shall be included in computing the taxable income of the
grantor.

Sec. 64. Income for Benefit of Grantor. —
(A) Where any part of the income of a trust (1) is, or in the discretion
of the grantor or of any person not having a substantial adverse
interest in the disposition of such part of the income may be held or
accumulated for future distribution to the grantor, or (2) may, or in
the discretion of the grantor or of any person not having a substantial
adverse interest in the disposition of such part of the income, be
distributed to the grantor, or (3) is, or in the discretion of the grantor
or of any person not having a substantial adverse interest in the
disposition of such part of the income may be applied to the payment
of premiums upon policies of insurance on the life of the grantor, such
part of the income of the trust shall be included in computing the
taxable income of the grantor.
(B) As used in this Section, the term 'in the discretion of the grantor'
means in the discretion of the grantor, either alone or in conjunction
with any person not having a substantial adverse interest in the
disposition of the part of the Income in question.
Sec. 65. Fiduciary Returns. — Guardians, trustees, executors,
administrators, receivers, conservators and all persons or corporations,
acting in any fiduciary capacity, shall render, in duplicate, a return of
the income of the person, trust or estate for whom or which they
act, and be subject to all the provisions of this Title, which apply to
individuals in case such person, estate or trust has a gross income
of Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000) or over during the taxable year.
Such fiduciary or person filing the return for him or it, shall take oath
that he has sufficient knowledge of the affairs of such person, trust
or estate to enable him to make such return and that the same is, to
the best of his knowledge and belief, true and correct, and be subject
to all the provisions of this Title which apply to individuals: Provided,
That a return made by or for one or two or more joint fiduciaries filed
in the province where such fiduciaries reside; under such rules and
regulations as the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner, shall prescribe, shall be a sufficient compliance with
the requirements of this Section.

Sec. 66. Fiduciaries Indemnified Against Claims for Taxes
Paid. — Trustees, executors, administrators and other fiduciaries are
indemnified against the claims or demands of every beneficiary for
all payments of taxes which they shall be required to make under the
provisions of this Title, and they shall have credit for the amount of
such payments against the beneficiary or principal in any accounting
which they make as such trustees or other fiduciaries.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

128

A trust is a legal arrangement where the owner of the property
(trustor) transfers ownership to a person (trustee) to hold and
control the property for the benefit of another person (beneficiary).

An estate is created by operation of law when an individual dies,
leaving properties to heirs.
Taxable estates and trusts are taxed in the same manner and on
the same basis as in the case of an individual.

The following are allowed deductions for the estate and trust:
O

amount distributed to the beneficiaries, or

O

amount collected by a guardian of an infant which is to be
held or distributed as the court may direct
•

in both these cases, the amount allowed shall be included
in computing the taxable income of the beneficiaries
whether distributed to them or not

Rule for income received by estates of deceased persons during
the period of administration or settlement of the estate, and in the
case of income, which may be either distributed to the beneficiary
or accumulated: the amount paid or credited to any legatee, heir
or beneficiary shall be allowed as a deduction
o

Provided that the amount so allowed as a deduction shall be
included in computing the taxable income of the legatee, heir
or beneficiary

TRAIN has repealed Section 62, NIRC, which had previously
granted a P20,000 exemption for estates and trusts. So, right
now, at this very moment that you are reading this book (and
getting super sleepy in the process), estates and trusts do not
have exemptions.

The income of a trust will be taxed to the:
o

Trustor, if revocable trust

o

Trustee, if irrevocable trust

When this provision will NOT apply: The income tax is NOT
imposed on employees' trust which forms part of a pension, stock
bonus or profit sharing plan of an employer for the benefit of
some or all of his employees

o

If contributions are made to the trust by such employer, or
employees, or both, for the purpose of distributing to such
employees the earnings and principal of the fund accumulated
by the trust in accordance with such plan; and

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

129

If under the trust instrument it is impossible, at any time prior
to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to employees
under the trust, for part of the corpus or income to (within the
taxable year or thereafter) used for, or diverted to, purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the employees.

Any amount, however, actually distributed to any employee
or distributee shall be taxable to him in the year in which so
distributed to the extent that it exceeds the amount contributed
by such employee or distributee.
Income for the benefit of the grantor:
O

Rules on revocable trust will apply for income for the benefit
of the grantor.
•

The following will be included in the taxable income of the
grantor:

•

Where any part of the income of a trust is, or in the
discretion of the grantor or of any person not having
a substantial adverse interest in the disposition of
such part of the income

O

may be held or accumulated for future distribution
to the grantor; or

O

may, or in the discretion of the grantor or of any
person not having a substantial adverse interest
in the disposition of such part of the income, be
distributed to the grantor; or

O

is, or in the discretion of the grantor or of any
person not having a substantial adverse interest
in the disposition of such part of the income may
be applied to the payment of the premiums upon
policies of insurance on the life of the grantor

For easy reference, please see chart below.

Estate

Definition

Trust

whereby
the
Mass of property, rights, Arrangement
and obligations left behind trustor grants the control of
by the decedent upon his certain property in the person of
the trustee for the benefit of the
death.
beneficiary.
For purposes of income tax,
an estate may be under Trusts subject to Income tax:
judicial administration or Income...
one that is not.
a) accumulated for the benefit
of unborn or unascertained

J9JC9B0M

130

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

person or persons
contingent interest

with

b)

accumulated or held for
future distribution
under
the terms of the trust

c)

is to be distributed currently
by the fiduciary to the
beneficiaries

d)

collected by a guardian of an
infant is held or distributed
as the court may direct

e)

income, in the discretion of
the fiduciary, may either be
distributed to the beneficiaries or accumulated

Exempt taxable trust: "employee's trust"

Who files
the ITR
pertaining
to the
taxable
income of
an estate

What gross
income
consists of

Estate

Trust

If under judicial admin:
executor or admin shall file
the return and pay the tax
on the net income of the
estate

trustee
If irrevocable trust:
(fiduciary) is the one who will
file the return and pay the tax
thereon for a trust

If NOT under judicial
admin: heirs shall include
in their respective returns
their distributive shares
in the net income of the
estate

If revocable trust: income of
such part of the trust shall
be included in computing the
taxable income of the GRANTOR
Revocable trust is one where at
any time the power to revest in
the grantor title to any part of
the corpus of the trust is vested:

a)

In the grantor alone or In
conjunction with a person
not
having
substantial
adverse interest on the
corpus

b)

In any person not having a
substantial adverse interest
in the disposition of such
part of the corpus or the
income therefrom

Same as that of an individual taxpayer

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

131

Estate
Deductible
expenses

a)

Trust

Same as an individual
taxpayer

a)

Amount of income b)
of the estate that is
paid or credited to
any legatee, heir, or
beneficiary
c)
cash
Note:
advances
given to surviving spouse
or heir NOT deductible

b)

Same as
taxpayer

an

individual

of
Amount of income
the trust which is to be
distributed currently to the
beneficiaries

Amount of the income
collected by the guardian of
an infant which is to be held
or distributed as the court
may direct

Note: cash advances given to
surviving spouse or heir NOT
deductible

Accounting
period
Miscellaneous notes

Calendar year
Excess of sales proceeds
over the appraised value of
the property is recognized
as taxable gain

If two or more trusts are created
by the SAME grantor in favor
of the SAME beneficiary, the
taxable income of all trusts
shall be CONSOLIDATED for
the purpose of computing the
income tax thereon and each
trustee shall proportionately
bear the taxes.
In this case, the personal
exemption of P20,000 shall be
availed of ONLY ONCE by being
deducted from the consolidated
net income.

I.

Taxable Income

Now that we've tackled the different types of taxpayers, it's time
to learn how to compute their taxable income. It is important to keep
the formula In mind when solving problems as the formula will serve
as a helpful guide or mental map, especially when we start with the
fine details of deductions.
Sec. 31. Taxable Income Defined. — The term taxable income
means the pertinent items of gross income specified in this Code,
less the deductions, if any, authorized for such types of income by
this Code or other special laws. (As amended by TRAIN)

J9JC9B0M

7

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

132

Gross Income
Less: deductions
Taxable income
Gross Income
Let's begin with gross income.

Sec. 32. Gross Income. —

(A) General Definition. — Except when otherwise provided in this
Title, gross income means all income derived from whatever source,
including (but not limited to) the following items:
(1) Compensation for services in whatever form paid, including, but
not limited to fees, salaries, wages, commissions, and similar items;

(2) Gross income derived from the conduct of trade or business or
the exercise of a profession;
(3) Gains derived from dealings in property;

(4) Interests;

(5) Rents;
(6) Royalties;
(7)

Dividends;

(8) Annuities;
(9)

Prizes and winnings;

(10) Pensions; and
(11) Partner's distributive share from the net income of the general
professional partnership.

Gross income means ALL INCOME derived from WHATEVER
SOURCE. This includes, but is not limited to, the enumeration in
the codal.

o

However, gross receipts (and thus, gross income) do not
include monies or receipts entrusted to the taxpayer which
do not belong to them and do not redound to the taxpayer's
benefit; and it is not necessary that there must be a law
or regulation which would exempt such monies and receipts
within the meaning of gross receipts under the Tax Code.
(CIR v. Tours Specialists, Inc., G.R. No. L-66416, March 21,
1990)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

133

O

Condominium association dues, membership fees, and other
assessments/charges are not subject to income tax because
they do not constitute profit or gain. These are collected
purely for the benefit of the condominium owners and are
the incidental consequence of a condominium corporation's
responsibility to effectively oversee, maintain, or even
improve the common areas of the condominium as well as
its governance. (BIR v. First E-Bank Tower Condominium
Corp., G.R. Nos. 215801 & 218924, 15 January 2020, which
invalidated the controversial RMC 65-2012/

O

Membership fees, assessment dues, and other fees of similar
nature of recreational clubs are not subject to income tax.
These only constitute contributions to and/or replenishment of
the funds for the maintenance and operations of the facilities
offered by the clubs to their exclusive members. (Association
of Non-Profit Clubs v. BIR, G.R. No. 228539, June 26, 2019)

■

As long as these membership fees, dues, and the like
are treated as collections as inherent consequences
of membership and are, by nature, intended for the
maintenance, preservation, and upkeep of the recreational
clubs' general operations and facilities, these cannot
be classified as income. It only forms part of capital.
(Association of Non-Profit Clubs v. BIR, G.R. No. 228539,
June 26, 2019)

In answering problems, the first thing you should ask is "Is this
gross income?", and then you ask "is this excludible?" (that's the
thought process to follow!)
Compensation

•

Compensation for services in whatever form paid, including, but
not limited to:
O

fees,

O

salaries,

O

wages,

O

commissions, AND

similar Items.
Compensation earners are not allowed to deduct any other
deductions from their salary

O

O

but they may have deductions applied to income earned from
other sources

Taek, a high-ranking executive in Taek Got Game, Inc. was given
an apartment where he would host parties for the clients of his

J9JC9B0M

134

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

company. He would also travel abroad with his wife, Deok Sun, to
go on meetings. Are these rental allowances and travel allowances
part of the gross income?
o

NO.

O

Convenience of the employer rule: No part of these
redounded to the Taek's personal benefit, nor were such
amounts retained by him. These bills were paid directly by
the employer-corporation. These expenses are COMPANY
EXPENSES, not income by employees which are subject to
tax. (Collector v. Henderson, G.R. No. L-12954, February 28,
1961)

Personal and Equity Retirement Account (PERA)

•

PERA refers to the voluntary retirement account established by
and for the exclusive use and benefit of the Contributor for the
purpose of being invested solely in PERA investment products
in the Philippines. The Contributor shall retain the ownership,
whether legal or beneficial, of funds placed therein, including all
earnings of such funds.

•

PERA contributions from an employer to an employee do NOT
form part of his gross income. (R.R. 17-2011 and R.A. 9505)

Representation and Transportation Allowance (RATA)
•

RATA of private employees is generally taxable as part of gross
compensation.
o

•

■

Expenses are ordinary and necessary in pursuit of trade
or business, and

■

Employee must account for the expenses and liquidate
with receipts and other documents.

RATA of gov't officials is considered reimbursement of expenses
and are therefore exempt.

o

•

However, it is exempt if:

No need to substantiate or liquidate

Additional compensation allowance (ACA) of gov't officials is
considered as "other benefits" under Section 32(B). Hence, only
the excess of P90,000 is subject to the tax. (TRAIN has increased
the amount of nontaxabie benefits to P9O,OOO! Yeay!)

Business income
•

Business income is the gross income derived from the conduct of
trade or business or the exercise of a profession.

j

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

135

In the case of manufacturing, merchandising or other business,
gross income means:
Total Sales
Less: cost of goods sold
Add: all income from incidental and outside sources
Gross Income

Gains

•

Gains derived from dealings in property

•

Gain or loss on sale or exchange of property is recognized when
the property received in exchange is essentially different from the
property disposed and the property received has market value.

•

In sale or exchange of real or personal property, distinguish first
between ordinary versus capital assets because capital assets
have special rules governing them. (We'll discuss these later on.)
■

Interests
•

t

Income from interest income are also to be included in computing
for the gross income.
O

But note that interest income which are already subject to
final tax (such as those in the passive income charts) need
not be included in the computation for gross income for a
taxpayer's annual income tax return.

Rents

•

Rents are included in gross income.

•

Rents deposited by tenants in a bank account because the lessor
refused to accept the same are considered income of the lessor.
The lessor is deemed to have constructively received the rents.
(Llmpan Investment Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. L-21570, July
26, 1966)

•

But what about improvements by lessees? (Section 49, R.R.
2-1940)

o

When a lessee erects a building or makes improvements per
agreement with the lessor, the lessor may report the income
therefrom upon either of the following, at his option:
•

At the time when such building or improvements are
completed, the fair market value of such building or
improvement (outright method)

i

J9JC9B0M

136

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

■

The lessor may spread over the life of the lease
the estimated depreciated value of such building or
improvement at the termination of the lease and report
the income for each of the adequate part (spread out
method)

If the lease is terminated, and it is not through purchase
by the lessor, so that the lessor comes into possession of
the property prior to the time originally fixed, the lessor is
considered to receive additional income for that year (if the
value of the building exceeds the amount already reported as
income).

O

•

No appreciation value due to causes other than premature
termination of the lease shall be included.

O

If the building is destroyed before the expiration of the lease,
the lessor is entitled to deduct as loss for the year when
such destruction occurred the amount previously reported as
income, less any salvage value to the extent that such loss
was not compensated by insurance.

O

If useful life is less than remaining term of lease, lessor will
not repost any income, since he'll get it fully depreciated
anyway.

Note the different treatment for leases and conditional sales:
(R.R. 19-1986)
o

Lease: the amount paid for the lease shall be considered part
of gross income

■
O

Prepaid leases are reported as taxable income in the year
when the prepayment is received.

Conditional sales (rent-to-own schemes, etc.): this will be
treated as a sale; hence, the rules on gains from the sale of
assets will apply and these gains will be treated as income

Royalties

•

Royalties are any payment of any kind received as consideration
for the use of or right toj use:
o

Any patent, trademark, design or model;

O

Secret formula or process;

O

Industrial, commercial or scientific equipment;

O

Information concerning industrial, commercial or scientific
experience.

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

137

Dividends
Sec. 73. Distribution of dividends or Assets by Corporations. —
(A) Definition of Dividends. — The term "dividends" when
used in this Title means any distribution made by a corporation
to its shareholders out of its earnings or profits and payable to its
shareholders, whether in money or in other property.

Where a corporation distributes all of its assets in complete liquidation
or dissolution, the gain realized or loss sustained by the stockholder,
whether individual or corporate, is a taxable income or a deductible
loss, as the case may be.
(B) Stock Dividend. — A stock dividend representing the transfer of
surplus to capital account shall not be subject to tax.

However, if a corporation cancels or redeems stock issued as a dividend
at such time and in such manner as to make the distribution and
cancellation or redemption, in whole or in part, essentially equivalent
to the distribution of a taxable dividend, the amount so distributed in
redemption or cancellation of the stock shall be considered as taxable
income to the extent that it represents a distribution of earnings or
profits.

(C) Dividends Distributed are Deemed Made from Most
Recently Accumulated Profits. — Any distribution made to the
shareholders or members of a corporation shall be deemed to have
been made from the most recently accumulated profits or surplus,
and shall constitute a part of the annual income of the distributee for
the year in which received.

(D) Net Income of a Partnership Deemed Constructively
Received by Partners. — The taxable income declared by a
partnership for a taxable year which is subject to tax under Section
27(A) of this Code, after deducting the corporate income tax imposed
therein, shall be deemed to have been actually or constructively
received by the partners in the same taxable year and shall be taxed
to them in their individual capacity, whether actually distributed or
not.

Dividends are any distribution whether in cash or in other
property In the ordinary course of business even if extraordinary
in amount, made by:
o

A domestic or resident foreign corporation

o

A joint stock corporation

o

A partnership

o

A joint account

o

An association

o

An insurance company

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

138

•

To the shareholders or members out of its earnings or
profits.

The definition of dividends was the main issue in CIR v. Goodyear
Philippines, Inc. (G.R. No. 216130, August 3, 2016), where the
SC held that the cash amounts given by a domestic corporation
to a foreign shareholder for the redemption of shares were not
dividends as these were not distributed out of its earnings or
profits.
When the corporation receives dividends, which are tax-free (like
intercorporate dividends), it becomes taxable as dividends when
it distributes the same to its shareholders.
General rule: Cash and property dividends are taxable. Stock
dividends are not taxable.

Property dividends (or securities other than
taxable (Section 251, R.R. 2-1940)

its own stock):

o

These are considered income in the amount of the full market
value as when received by the stockholder.

O

They are taxed 10% (or 20% if NRAETB).

O

If it was paid in stock of another corporation, it is not
considered a stock dividend. It is still considered property
dividend.

O

The valuation is the market value at the time the dividend
becomes payable. (For shares of stock of another corporation
given as dividends, it is the market value when the shares of
stock are received)

Stock dividends: not taxable.
O

EXCEPT when the stock dividend causes change in the
corporate Identity or a change in the nature of the shares
issued whereby the proportional interest of the stockholders
after the distribution is essentially different from his former
interest. (Section 252, R.R. 2-1940)
•

A stock dividend constitutes income if it gives the
shareholder an interest different from that which his
former stock represented.

■

When a stockholder receives a stock dividend which is
taxable income, the measure of income is the fair market
value of the shares of stock received.

Sale of stock received as dividends
o

Once the recipient sells the stock dividend, he may realize
gain or loss. This gain or loss is treated as arising from

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

139

the sale or exchange of a capital asset. (Section 253, R.R.
2-1940)
Stock declaration and subsequent redemption
O

If after the stock dividend declaration, a corporation
cancels or redeems the same in such time and manner as
to make the distribution/redemption essentially equivalent
to a distribution of a taxable dividend, the amount received
shall be considered as a taxable dividend (10% final tax for
individuals). (Section 254, R.R. 2-1940)

Why do corporations do this?

■

•

So that the shareholder will avoid paying tax.
Remember, stock dividends are not taxable, but
cash dividends are subject to 10% final tax for
individuals (remember your passive income charts!).
So corporations declare stock dividends, and then
redeem them (by giving their shareholders cash)
to go around the tax. But because of the law, their
subsequent redemptions are now taxable.

•

Hence, when the corporation cancels or redeems
stock issued as a dividend at such time and in such
manner as to make the distribution and cancellation or
redemption, in whole or in part, essentially equivalent
to the distribution of a taxable dividend, the amount
so distributed in redemption or cancellation of the
stock shall be considered as taxable income to the
extent that it represents a distribution of earnings
or profits. (CIR v. CA, G.R. No. 108576, January 20,
1999)

Liquidating dividends: taxable
O

When a corporation distributes all its properties or assets in
complete liquidation, the gain realized from this is taxable.

O

Computation is based on Section 39(B) or (C) of the Tax Code
«

When a corporation distributes all of its assets in complete
dissolution and liquidation, there is no dividend income to
the shareholder receiving the liquidating dividend. There
is, instead, a sale or exchange of property. Any gain
realized or loss sustained by the stockholder, whether
individual or corporate, is taxable income or deductible
loss, as the case may be. (Section 256, R.R. 2-1940)

■

When a corporation was dissolved and in process of
complete liquidation and its shareholders surrendered
their stock to it and it paid the sums in question to them

J9JC9B0M

140

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

in exchange, a transaction took place, which was no
different in its essence from a sale of the same stock to
a third party who paid therefore. (Wise v. Meer, G.R. No.
48231, June 30, 1947)
•

In other words, the gain or loss one incurs when a
corporation liquidates goes into your ordinary income
(schedular rate for individuals, 30% for resident
corporations).
O

•

The 12-month 50%/100% of gains threshold
applies (see rules on capital gains)

That's the difference between redeemed shares
(taxed at 10%) and liquidating shares (schedular
rate for individuals, or 30% for resident corporations)

For a trading company that is in the process of liquidation,
and whose shareholders are to receive liquidating dividends in
excess of their investment, the gain is taxable (on the side of the
shareholders) because the shareholders will realize capital gain
or loss.
O

Such gain is the difference between the fair market value
of the liquidating dividends and the adjusted cost to the
stockholders of their respective shareholdings.

*

If the shareholder held his shares for more than 12
months, only 50% of the capital gains is taxable.

•

If less than 12 months, the entire 100% of the capital
gains is taxable. (BIR Ruling 322-87)

On the side of the liquidating corporation, it is not liable for
income tax on either the transfer of its assets to its stockholders,
or on its receipt of the shares surrendered by its stockholders.
(BIR Ruling 039-02)

•

Annuities
•

An annuity is a sum of money payable yearly or at regular
intervals.

•

Note: life insurance annuities are excluded from gross income.
(Section 32[B][1 ])

Prizes and Winnings
•

Prizes and winnings are generally taxable (they are similar to
gains derived from labor)

o

EXCEPT: (these are not taxable,
exclusions from gross income)

based

on

Sec.

32(B)

i

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

141

If the recipient was selected without any action on his part
to enter the contest and he was not required to render
substantial future services as a condition for receiving the
prize or award;

Those granted to athletes in local and international sports
competitions sanctioned by their respective national
sports associations are exempt; and
Those that are in the nature of gifts.
Pensions

•

A pension is a gratuity granted as a favor or reward or one paid
. under given conditions to a person following retirement from
service or to surviving dependents.

•

Note: Pensions and retirement benefits under R.A. 7641 are
excluded from gross income. (Section 32[B][5][a])

Share in GPP's Income
Sec. 26. Tax Liability of Members of General Professional
Partnerships. — A general professional partnership as such shall
not be subject to the income tax imposed under this Chapter. Persons
engaging in business as partners in a general professional partnership
shall be liable for income tax only in their separate and individual
capacities.
For purposes of computing the distributive share of the partners, the
net income of the partnership shall be computed in the same manner
as a corporation.

Each partner shall report as gross income his distributive share, actually
or constructively received, in the net income of the partnership.

The GPP Is tax-exempt, but the income of the individual partners
is subject to tax.
o

Professional partnerships of real estate brokers are included
in this exemption. (Ruling 294-88, July 5, 1988)

Each partner shall report as gross income his distributive share in
the net income of the partnership.
A, B, and C, all lawyers, formed a partnership called ABC Law Firm so
that they can practice their profession as lawyers. For the year 2012,
ABC Law Firm received earnings and paid expenses, among which
are as follows:

Earnings:

(1) Professional/legal fees from various clients

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

142

(2) Cash prize received from a religious society in recognition of the
exemplary service of ABC Law Firm
(3) Gains derived from sale of excess computers and laptops
Payments:

(1) Salaries of office staff
(2) Rentals for office space

(3) Representation expenses incurred in meetings with clients
a) What are the items in the above mentioned earnings which
should be included in the computation of ABC Law Firm's gross
income? Explain.
b) What are the items in the above-mentioned payments which may
be considered as deductions from the gross income of ABC Law Firm?
Explain.
c) If ABC Law Firm earns net income in 2012, what, if any, is the
tax consequence on the part of ABC Law Firm insofar as the payment
of income tax is concerned? What, if any, is the tax consequence on
the part of A, B, and C as individual partners, insofar as the payment
of income tax is concerned? (2014 Bar Exam)

[tip: for long questions like this, take a deep breath first to avoid
panic attacks, and then dive in]
Suggested answer:

a) Professional and legal fees from various clients should be included
in the gross income of the taw firm, as these are income derived from
the conduct of the exercise of a profession which is included in gross
income, as per the Tax Code.
The cash prize should not be included because prizes In recognition of
services are excluded from gross income If the recipient was selected
without any action on his part and is not required to render substantial
future services as a condition to receiving the prize. I assume these
conditions are not present in the case of the law firm.
The gains from the sale of excess computers shall likewise be Included
in the gross income because gross income Includes all Income derived
whatever source. It doesn't matter if they'll be considered capital or
ordinary assets, since they'll all fall into the gross income computation
anyway because these aren't real properties (which, if considered
capital assets, is subject to final tax).

b) The salaries, rentals, and representation expenses may be
considered deductions from gross income. The Tax Code allows
ordinary and necessary professional expenses as deductions, as
long as there is proper documentation and a direct connection to the
operation of a profession. Assuming there is proper documentation
for these expenses, these are proper deductions, as they are directly
connected to the operation of a law firm.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

143

c) ABC Law Firm will not pay income tax because the Tax Code
states that general professional partnerships, such as a law firm, are
not subject to income tax. The net income of GPPs are computed in
the same manner as corporations, but the individual partners will be
subject to income tax because the Tax Code states that the individual
partners will be liable in their individual capacities. Their income tax
liability will be based on their distributive share of the net income of
the general professional partnership.

From whatever source
Cancellation or forgiveness of debt may amount to

o

Payment of income — that's taxable, (a person performs
service for a creditor who cancels his debt)

o

A payment of dividends — that's taxable, (a corporation
forgives the debt of a stockholder, that's like paying dividends)

o

A gift — that's exempt, (a creditor merely wants to benefit
a debtor by canceling the debt without any consideration)
(Section 50, R.R. 2-1940)

Acquisitipn by the Government of private properties through
expropriation, said properties being JUSTLY compensated, is
embraced within the meaning of the term "sale" "disposition
of property," and the proceeds should be included in the gross
compensation. (Gutierrez v. Collector, G.R. No. L-9378, May 31,
1957)

o

Note, however, the doctrine of involuntary dealings.
•

This doctrine states that if property (as a result of its
destruction, in whole or in part, theft or seizure, or an
exercise of the power of requisition or condemnation
or the threat or imminence thereof) is compulsorily
or involuntarily converted into property similar to the
property so converted, or into money, which is forthwith in
good faith expended in the acquisition of other property,
or in the establishment of a replacement fund, no gain
or loss shall be recognized. If any part of the money is
not so expended, the gain shall be recognized, but in an
amount not in excess of the money so expended.

Damages may or may not be considered taxable
depending on the nature of the damages:

o

income,

Compensation for loss of income and exemplary damages
which represent loss of capital: taxable

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

144

Moral damages, reimbursement for hospital bills, return of
capital/property: not taxable

O

■

•

But see Murphy v. Internal Revenue Service, 493 F3rd
170, US Court of Appeals, which held that moral damages
which are not on account of physical injuries should not
be excluded from gross income; (note that the US IRC
upon which the case was decided was similar worded to
Section 32[B][4]), and hence, there is authority to state
that moral damages not arising from physical injuries is
considered taxable as income

When a company pays for the tax liability of one of its officers,
the payment is considered income on the part of the officer. (Old
Colony Trust Co. v. CIR, 279 US 716, June 3, 1929)

Mr. Gipit borrowed from Mr. Maunawain P100,000.00, payable in five
(5) equal monthly installments. Before the first installment became
due, Mr. Gipit rendered general cleaning services in the entire
office building of Mr. Maunawain, and as compensation therefor,
Mr. Maunawain cancelled the indebtedness of Mr. Gipit up to the
amount of P75,000.00. Mr. Gipit claims that the cancellation of his
indebtedness cannot be considered as gain on his part which must be
subject to income tax, because according to him, he did not actually
receive payment from Mr. Maunawain for the general cleaning
services. Is Mr. Gipit correct? Explain. (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Mr. Gipit is wrong. Gross income means all income
derived from whatever source. The cancellation or forgiveness of
debt is considered taxable income when the debtor performs some
service to the creditor who, in return, cancels the debt. In this case,
the debtor, Mr. Gipit, performed general cleaning services for Mr.
Maunawain who, in return, cancelled the indebtedness (up to the
amount of P75,000.00). Hence, this amount forms part of Mr. Gipit's
gross income.

Refunds
Sec. 34. (C) Taxes. — (1) In General. — Taxes paid or Incurred
within the taxable year in connection with the taxpayer's profession,
trade or business, shall be allowed as deduction, except

(a) The income tax provided for under this Title;
(b) Income taxes imposed by authority of any foreign country;
but this deduction shall be allowed in the case of a taxpayer who
does not signify in his return his desire to have to any extent the
benefits of paragraph (3) of this subsection (relating to credits for
taxes of foreign countries);

(c) Estate and donor's taxes; and

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

145

(d) Taxes assessed against local benefits of a kind tending to
increase the value of the property assessed. Provided, That taxes
allowed under this Subsection, when refunded or credited, shall be
included as part of gross income in the year of receipt to the extent
of the income tax benefit of said deduction.
Taxes which were previously claimed and allowed as deductions
but were subsequently refunded or granted as tax credit should
be declared as part of the gross income of that year. The purpose
of this is to put you back in equilibrium — to bring your gross
income back up.

O

EXCEPT:
•

Estate and donor's tax
Income, war-profit and excess profit taxes imposed by a
foreign country

Taxes assessed against local benefits of a kind tending to
increase the value of the property assessed
Stock transaction tax

Taxes which are not allowable as deductions under the
law

When refunded, they are not declarable as gross
income because they are not allowable as deductions.
Dona Evelina, a rich widow engaged in the business of currency
exchange, was assessed a considerable amount of local business
taxes by the City Government of Bagnet by virtue of Tax Ordinance
No. 24. Despite her objections thereto, Doha Evelina paid the taxes.
Nevertheless, unsatisfied with said Tax Ordinance, Doha Evelina,
through her counsel Atty. ELP, filed a written claim for recovery of
said local business taxes and contested the assessment. Her claim
was denied, and so Atty. ELP elevated her case to the Regional Trial
Court (RTC).

The RTC declared Tax Ordinance No. 24 null and void and without
legal effect for having been enacted in violation of the publication
requirement of tax ordinances and revenue measures under the
Local Government Code (LGC) and on the ground of double taxation.
On appeal, the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) affirmed the decision of
the RTC. No motion for reconsideration was filed and the decision
became final and executory.
If Doha Evelina eventually recovers the local business taxes, must the
same be considered as income taxable by the national government?
(2014 Bar Exam)

'•

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

146

Suggested answer: Yes. The Tax Code states that taxes paid or
incurred within the taxable year in connection with the taxpayer's
business shall be allowed as a deduction. However, if these taxes
that had been previously considered as deductions are refunded or
credited, they shall form part of the gross income in the year of
receipt to the extent of the income tax benefit of the deduction.
Hence, assuming the Doha previously claimed it as a deduction, the
refund must be included in her gross income to the extent of the
income tax benefit of the deduction.
•

Cash deposits or advances received by taxpayers other than GPP
from clients and customers shall be booked as income and shall
form part of the taxpayer's gross receipts.

o

It will also be subject to VAT or percentage tax, if applicable.

O

An official receipt shall be issued for every deposit and
advance. (RMC 16-2013)
•

•

Note, however, the case of CIR v. Tours Specialists,
Inc. (G.R. No. L-66416, March 21, 1990) and Medicard
Philippines, Inc. v. CIR (G.R. No. 222743, April 5, 2017)
which, in principle and logic, seem to run counter to RMC
16-2013.

Any income or gain derived by employees from the exercise
of stock options (under a stock option plan) is considered as
additional compensation subject to income tax.

o

Under the plan, employees were given the right to shares o
a foreign corporation at a fixed price regardless of the stoc
future market price.

o

The additional compensation was the difference of the book
value or fair market value of the share (whichever is higher;
at the time of the exercise of the stock option and the price
fixed on the grant date.

o

Thereafter, the subsequent sale of the shares will be subject
to capital gains tax, stock transaction tax, or ordinary income
tax, as the case may be. (RMC 88-2012)

In 2010, Mr. Platon sent his sister Helen $1,000 via a telegraphic
transfer through the Bank of PI. The bank's remittance clerk made
a mistake and credited Helen with $1,000,000 which she promptly
withdrew. The bank demanded the return of the mistakenly
credited excess, but Helen refused. The BIR entered the picture and
investigated Helen.

Would the BIR be correct if it determines that Helen earned taxable
income under these facts? (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Yes, income is income from whatever source.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

147

A note on transfer pricing
Sec. 50. Allocation of Income and Deductions. — In the case
of two or more organizations, trades or businesses (whether or
not incorporated and whether or not organized in the Philippines)
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the same interests, the
Commissioner is authorized to distribute, apportion or allocate gross
income or deductions between or among such organization, trade or
business, if he determined that such distribution, apportionment or
allocation is necessary in order to prevent evasion of taxes or clearly
to reflect the income of any such organization, trade or business.

When two or more organizations, trades or businesses are owned
or controlled directly or indirectly by the same interests, the CIR
can distribute, apportion or allocate gross income or deductions
between or among such organizations, trades or businesses, in
order to prevent tax evasion.

On the basis of Section 50, the CIR issued R.R. 2-2013 or the
Transfer Pricing Regulations.
Transfer pricing is defined as the pricing of cross-border, intra-firm
transactions between related parties or associated enterprises.
o

A transfer price occurs between a taxpayer of a country with
high income taxes and a related or associated enterprise of a
country with low income taxes.

o

Transfer pricing can also occur in domestic transactions; such
as when an associated enterprise with income tax exemptions
is being used to allocate income away from a company subject
to regular income taxes.

Associated enterprises mean two or more enterprises wherein
o

one participates directly or indirectly in the management,
control, or capital of the other, or

o

if the same persons participate directly or indirectly in the
management, control, or capital of the enterprises.

•

The arm's length principle requires the transaction with a related/
associated party to be made under comparable conditions and
circumstances as a transaction with an independent party.

•

The Commissioner is authorized to make transfer pricing
adjustments to ensure that taxpayers clearly reflect income
attributable to controlled transactions and to prevent the
avoidance of taxes with respect to such transactions.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

148

Note, however, that even with Section 50, the CIR still cannot
impose interest rates on its own. (CIR v. FHinvest Development
Corporation, G.R. No. 163653, July 19, 2011)
O

Despite the seemingly broad power of the CIR to distribute,
apportion and allocate gross income under Section 50 of the
Tax Code, the same does not include the power to impute
theoretical interests even with regard to controlled taxpayers'
transactions. This is true even if the CIR is able to prove that
interest expense (on FDC's own loans) was in fact claimed by
FDC.

O

The term in the definition of gross income that even those
income "from whatever source derived" is covered still
requires that there must be actual or at least probable
receipt or realization of the item of gross income sought to be
apportioned, distributed, or allocated.

O

Finally, the rule under the Civil Code that "no interest shall be
due unless expressly stipulated in writing" was also applied in
this case.

O

The Court also ruled that the instructional letters, cash and
journal vouchers qualify as loan agreements that are subject
to documentary stamp tax (DST).

Exclusions from Gross Income
Sec. 32. (B) Exclusions from Gross Income. — The following
items shall not be included in gross income and shall be exempt from
taxation under this title:

(1) Life Insurance. — The proceeds of life insurance policies paid to
the heirs or beneficiaries upon the death of the insured, whether in a
single sum or otherwise, but if such amounts are held by the insurer
under an agreement to pay interest thereon, the interest payments
shall be included in gross income.
(2) Amount Received by Insured as Return of Premium. — The
amount received by the Insured, as a return of premiums paid by him
under life insurance, endowment, or annuity contracts, either during
the term or at the maturity of the term mentioned in the contract or
upon surrender of the contract.

(3) Gifts, Bequests, and Devises. — The value of property acquired
by gift, bequest, devise, or descent: Provided, however, That income
from such property, as well as gift, bequest, devise or descent of
income from any property, in cases of transfers of divided interest,
shall be included in gross income.
(4) Compensation for Injuries or Sickness. — Amounts received,
through Accident or Health Insurance or under Workmen's

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

149

Compensation Acts, as compensation for personal injuries or
sickness, plus the amounts of any damages received, whether by
suit or agreement, on account of such injuries or sickness.

(5) Income Exempt underTreaty. — Income of any kind, to the extent
required by any treaty obligation binding upon the Government of
the Philippines.
(6) Retirement Benefits, Pensions, Gratuities, etc. —
(a) Retirement benefits received under Republic Act No. 7641 and
those received by officials and employees of private firms, whether
individual or corporate, in accordance with a reasonable private
benefit plan maintained by the employer: Provided, That the retiring
official or employee has been in the service of the same employer
for at least ten (10) years and is not less than fifty (50) years of age
at the time of his retirement: Provided, further, That the benefits
granted under this subparagraph shall be availed of by an official
or employee only once. For purposes of this Subsection, the term
'reasonable private benefit plan' means a pension, gratuity, stock
bonus or profit-sharing plan maintained by an employer for the benefit
of some or all of his officials or employees, wherein contributions
are made by such employer for the officials or employees, or both,
for the purpose of distributing to such officials and employees the
earnings and principal of the fund thus accumulated, and wherein its
is provided in said plan that at no time shall any part of the corpus or
income of the fund be used for, or be diverted to, any purpose other
than for the exclusive benefit of the said officials and employees.

(b) Any amount received by an official or employee or by his heirs
from the employer as a consequence of separation of such official
or employee from the service of the employer because of death,
sickness or other physical disability or for any cause beyond the
control of the said official or employee.
(c) The provisions of any existing law to the contrary notwithstanding,
social security benefits, retirement gratuities, pensions and other
similar benefits received by resident or nonresident citizens of
the Philippines or aliens who come to reside permanently in the
Philippines from foreign government agencies and other institutions,
private or public.

(d) Payments of benefits due or to become due to any person residing
in the Philippines under the laws of the United States administered
by the United States Veterans Administration.
(e) Benefits received from or enjoyed under the Social Security
System in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 8282.
(f) Benefits received from the GSIS under Republic Act No. 8291,
including retirement gratuity received by government officials and
employees.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

150

7)

Miscellaneous Items. —

(a) Income Derived by Foreign Government. — Income derived
from investments in the Philippines in loans, stocks, bonds or other
domestic securities, or from interest on deposits in banks in the
Philippines by

(i)

foreign governments,

(ii) financing institutions owned, controlled, or enjoying
refinancing from foreign governments, and

(iii) international
or
regional
established by foreign governments.

financial

institutions

(b) Income Derived by the Government or its Political Subdivisions.
— Income derived from any public utility or from the exercise of any
essential governmental function accruing to the Government of the
Philippines or to any political subdivision thereof.
(c) Prizes and Awards. — Prizes and awards made primarily in
recognition of religious, charitable, scientific, educational, artistic,
literary, or civic achievement but only if:

(i) The recipient was selected without any action on his
part to enter the contest or proceeding; and
(ii) The recipient is not required to render substantial
future services as a condition to receiving the prize or award.

(d) Prizes and Awards in Sports Competition. — All prizes and awards
granted to athletes in local and international sports competitions
and tournaments whether held in the Philippines or abroad and
sanctioned by their national sports associations.
(e) 13th-Month Pay and Other Benefits. — Gross benefits received
by officials and employees of public and private entities: Provided,
however, That the total exclusion under this subparagraph shall
not exceed ninety thousand pesos (P90,000) which shall cover: (As
amended by TRAIN)
(I) Benefits received by officials and employees of the
national and local government pursuant to Republic Act No.
6686;
(ii) Benefits received by employees pursuant to Presidential
Decree No. 851, as amended by Memorandum Order No. 28,
dated August 13, 1986;

(iii) Benefits received by officials and employees not covered
by Presidential decree No. 851, as amended by Memorandum
Order No. 28, dated August 13, 1986; and

(iv) Other benefits such as productivity incentives and
Christmas bonus: Provided, further, That every three (3) years
after the effectivity of this Act, the President of the Philippines
shall adjust the amount herein stated to its present value using

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

151

the Consumer Price Index (CPI), as published by the National
Statistics Office (NSO). (R.A. 10653)
(f) GSIS, SSS, Medicare and Other Contributions. — GSIS, SSS,
Medicare and Pag-Ibig contributions, and union dues of individuals.

(g) Gains from the Sale of Bonds, Debentures or other Certificate
of Indebtedness. — Gains realized from the same or exchange or
retirement of bonds, debentures or other certificate of indebtedness
with a maturity of more than five (5) years.

(h) Gains from Redemption of Shares in Mutual Fund. — Gains
realized by the investor upon redemption of shares of stock in a
mutual fund company as defined in Section 22(BB) of this Code.
(I) Income Derived from the Sale of Gold Pursuant to Republic Act
No. 7076 — Income derived from the following transactions pursuant
to R.A. No. 7076, otherwise known as the "People's Small-scale Mining Act of
1991":
(i) The sale of gold to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas by
registered small-scale miners, as defined under Republic Act No.
7076, and accredited traders; and

(ii) The sale of gold by registered small-scale miners to
accredited traders for eventual sale to the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas. (As amended by R.A. 11256)

The following are tax-exempt and are NOT included in gross
Income:

1.

Life insurance (except if the proceeds are held by the insurer
under an agreement to pay interest thereon. Only the interest
payments are included in the gross income)

2.

Amount received by insured as return of premium

3.

Gifts, bequests, devises or descents (but the income from
such property shall be included in gross income)

4.

Compensation for personal injuries or sickness (plus the
amounts of any damages received on account of such)

5.

Income exempt under any treaty

6.

Benefits received from the US Veterans Administration

7.

Retirement benefits under either a) R.A. 7641 (retirement age
of at least 60 years old, with at least 5 years in the service of
the employer) or b) a reasonable retirement plan maintained
by the employer (retirement age of at least 50 years old, with
at least 10 years in the service of the employer). This can
only be availed of once.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

152

Separation pay caused by death, sickness, or other disability,
or separation pay for any cause beyond the control of the
official or employee

8.

Like the Authorized Causes under the Labor Code

If fault or conduct of employee is to blame, it's taxable and
not exempted (like the Just Causes under the Labor Code)
Social security benefits, retirement gratuities, pensions and
similar benefits from foreign government agencies

9.

10. SSS benefits

11. GSIS benefits
Miscellaneous tax-exempt items:

1.

Income earned by foreign governments in the Philippines
from deposits/investments
•

For it to be exempt, the income should be received by:
i.

Foreign governments

ii.

Financing institutions owned, controlled or enjoying
re-financing from foreign governments

iii. International
financial
or regional
established by foreign governments

institutions

2.

Income earned by the Phil, government or its
subdivisions (like public utilities)

3.

Prizes and awards made primarily in recognition of religious,
charitable, scientific, educational, artistic, literary or civic
achievement — but only if he was selected without any action
on his part to enter the contest and he is not required to
render substantial future services as a condition to receiving
the prize or award

4.

Prizes and awards in sports competitions sanctioned by the
national sports associations

5.

13th-month pay, Christmas bonus, productivity incentive
bonus, loyalty award, gifts in cash or in kind, and other
benefits of similar nature received by officials and employees
of both government and private offices

•
6.

political

But exemptions apply only to the first P90,000.

GSIS, SSS, Medicare,
contributions

Pag-IBIG

union

dues

and

other

J9JC9B0M

153

INCOME TAX

7.

•

These cover only the mandatory/compulsory contributions
of the concerned employees to SSS, GSIS, PHIC, and
HDMF.

•

Voluntary contributions in excess to what the law allows
to these institutions are not excludible from the gross
income of the taxpayer and not exempt from income tax
and withholding tax. (RMC 27-2011)

Gains from sale of bonds, debentures or other certificate of
indebtedness with maturities of more than five years

•

Differentiate with gains from sale of bonds, debentures,
or other certificates of indebtedness with maturities of
less than 5 years—these are subject to regular income
tax rates (Banco de Oro v. Republic, G.R. No. 198756,
August 16, 2016)

8.

Gains from redemption of shares in mutual funds

9.

Interest received by a nonresident individual or a nonresident
corporation from deposits with depository banks under the
expanded FCDU

10.

Intercompany dividends (resident/domestic
from domestic corporations)

11.

De minimis benefits received by employees

12.

Philippine Charity Sweepstakes and Lotto winnings are now
only exempt up to PIO,000. Any winnings above PIO,000 are
subject to 20% final tax.

13.

Sale of gold to the BSP by registered small-scale miners and
accredited traders and sale of gold by registered small-scale
miners to accredited traders for eventual sale to the BSP.
(R.R. 04-2020)

14.

Personal Equity and Retirement Account (PERA) contribution

•

corporations

PERA shall refer to a Contributor's voluntary retirement
account established under R.A. 9505
i.

A Qualified Employer's Contribution to his/its
employee's PERA shall not from part of the employee's
gross income; hence, it is exempt from withholding
tax

ii.

The employer can claim the actual amount of his/
its Qualified Employer's Contribution as a deduction
from his/its gross income, but only to the extent
of the employer's contribution that would complete
the maximum allowable PERA contribution of an
employee. (R.R. 17-2011)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

154

•

Minimum wage earners shall be exempt from the payment of
income tax too. Holiday pay, overtime pay, night shift differential
pay and hazard pay received by such minimum wage earners
shall likewise be exempt from income tax.
O

However, bonuses and other benefits exceeding the statutory
limit (now P90,000) are taxable. (Soriano v. Secretary of
Finance, G.R. No. 184450, January 24, 2017, note that the
MWE does not lose his/her MWE-status because of other
benefits. But when these bonuses and other benefits exceed
the statutory limit, the MWE can be taxed on the excess.}

•

Income from employees' trusts is exempt from ALL kinds of taxes,
including final withholding tax on interest income. (CIR v. CA and
GCL Retirement Plan, G.R. No. 95022, March 23, 1992)

•

Terminal leave pay received by a government official or employee
on the occasion of his compulsory retirement is not part of gross
salary. It is a retirement benefit and is tax exempt. (CIR v. CA &
Castaneda, G.R. No. 96016, October 17, 1991; and Re: Request
of Atty. Zialcita, A.M. No. 90-6-015-SC, October 18, 1990)
Mr. A, a citizen and resident of the Philippines, is a professional boxer.
In a professional boxing match held in 2013, he won prize money in
United States (US) dollars equivalent to P300,000,000.

May Mr. A'sprize money qualify as an exclusion from his gross income?
Why? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: His prize money may qualify as an exclusion from
gross income. However, the boxing match must have been sanctioned
by the national sports association (NSA) for boxing. The Tax Code
excludes prizes and awards in sports competitions, whether local and
International, If these are sanctioned by the respective national sports
association.
(Note: As per R.A. 7549 and BIR Ruling No. 026-00, the NSA must
be duty accredited by the Philippine Olympic Committee. The current
NSA for boxing is the Association of Boxing Alliances in the Philippines,
Inc. which covers amateur boxing. So, an alternative answer Is that
the prize money may not qualify as an exclusion because the NSA
does not sanction professional boxing and therefor the provision on
exclusions does not apply. To know more about sports law, order Laws
for Sports and the Sporty now!)

The Board of Directors of Sumo Corporation, a company primarily
engaged in the business of marketing and distributing pest control
products, approved the partial cessation of its commercial operations,
resulting in the separation of 32 regular employees. Only half of the
affected employees were notified of the board resolution. Rule on the
taxability of the separation pay and indemnity that will be received

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

155

by the affected employees as the result of their separation from
service. Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The separation pay and indemnity will not be
taxable. Under the Tax Code, any amount received by an employee
from the employer as a consequence of separation for any cause
beyond the control of the employee is excluded from gross income.
Here, the partial cessation of commercial operations is not the fault
of the affected employees. Hence, the separation pay and indemnity
will not be taxable.

Kim, a Filipino national, worked with K-Square, Inc. (KSI), and was
seconded to various KSI-affiliated corporations:
1.

from 1999 to 2004 as Vice President of K-Gold Inc.,

2.

from 2004 to 2007 as Vice President of KPB Bank;
from 2007 to 2011 as CEO of K-Com Inc.;

4. from 2011 to 2017 as CEO of K-Water Corporation, where Kim
served as CEO for seven years until his retirement last December 12,
2017 upon reaching the compulsory retirement age of 60 years.
All the corporations mentioned are majority-owned in common
by the Koh family and covered by a BIR-qualified multiemployeremployee retirement plan (MEE RP), under which the employees
may be moved around within the controlled group (i.e., from one
KSI subsidiary or affiliate to another) without loss of seniority rights
or break in the tenure. Kim was well-loved by his employer and
colleagues, so upon retirement, and on his last day in office, KSI
gave him a Mercedes Benz car worth PhP 5 million as a surprise, with
a streamer that reads: "You'll be missed. Good luck, Sir Kim."

a) Are the retirement benefits paid to Kim pursuant to the MEERP
taxable?

b) Which internal revenue tax, If any, will apply to the
grant of the car to Kim by the company? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
a) The retirement benefits are not taxable. Under the Tax Code,
benefits from BIR-qualified retirement plans are excluded from gross
Income. In this case, the retirement plan was approved by the BIR
and It seems Mr. Kim got his benefits from it.
b) Either income tax or donor's tax. Income tax Is applicable
because the car can be seen as remuneration for past services. In
the alternative, donor's tax can apply because it seems to have been
given out of goodwill. (If I were Mr. Kim, I hope the answer is donor's
tax so the company is liable for the tax, not me. Lelz)

i

J9JC9B0M

156

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Mr. D, a Filipino amateur boxer. Joined an Olympic qualifying
tournament held in Las Vegas, USA, where he won the gold medal.
Pleased with Mr. D's accomplishment, the Philippine Government,
through the Philippine Olympic Committee, awarded him a cash prize
amounting to Pl,000,000.00. Upon receipt of the funds, he went to a
casino in Pasay City and won the P30,000,000.00 jackpot in the slot
machine. The next day, he went to a nearby Lotto outlet and bought
a Lotto ticket which won him a cash prize of P5,000.00.

Which of the above sums of money is/are subject to income tax?
Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The cash prize is arguably tax exempt, as prizes
granted to athletes in tournaments sanctioned by the respective
national sports association (NSA) is exempt from tax. Here, as
Mr. D is an amateur boxer, the Olympic qualifying tournament is
necessarily sanctioned by the NSA for boxing (segue to sports law:
NSAs must be accredited by the POC in order for the national athletes
under such NSA to join Olympic qualifier events). Hence, the award
given to him by the Philippine government is arguably tax exempt. (I
say arguably, because an alternative answer is that the cash prize is
taxable, as the prize was not awarded in the tournament—because
it did not come from the organizers, but the government—and
therefore not "prizes and awards in sports competitions, "as required
by the Tax Code)
The P30,000,000.00 slot machine jackpot is subject to income tax,
as gross income includes income from all sources, including gambling
winnings.

The P5,000.00 Lotto cash prize is exempt, as Lotto winnings are only
taxable if the winnings exceed PIO,000.00.

i
j

As a way to augment the income of the employees of DEF, Inc.,
a private corporation, the management decided to grant a special
stipend of P50,000.00 for the first vacation leave that any employee
takes during a given calendar year. In addition, the senior engineers
were also given housing inside the factory compound for the purpose
of ensuring that there are available engineers within the premises
every time there is a breakdown in the factory machineries and
equipment.

Is the special stipend part of the taxable income of the employees
receiving the same? If so, what tax is applicable and what is the tax
rate? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)

-i
!

Suggested answer: The special stipend is not taxable and excluded
from the taxable income of the employees. Under the Tax Code,
benefits given to employees which do not exceed POO,000.00 in a
year are excluded from gross income. The special stipend here can
be considered a benefit. As it is below the P90,000.00 threshold, it
is not taxable. (It is also not a fringe benefit because it seems to be

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

157

given to all employees. If you want to be super nuanced about it,
the P50,000.00 stipend for the non-rank-and-file employees will be
subject to fringe benefit tax, as travel expenses to non-rank-and-file
employees are subject to FBT.)
K.

Deductions
Sec. 34. Deductions from Gross Income. — Except for taxpayers
earning compensation income arising from personal services rendered
under an employer-employee relationship where no deductions shall
be allowed under this Section, in computing taxable income subject to
income tax under Sections 24(A); 25(A); 26; 27(A), (B) and (C); and
28(A)(1), there shall be allowed the following deductions from gross
income: (As amended by TRAIN)
Deductions are amounts allowed by law to reduce the gross
income to taxable income.

These amounts are allowed to taxpayers by legislative grace
and the taxpayer claiming them must prove compliance with the
provisions of the law authorizing the deductions.
o

In other words, taxpayers love deductions.

Deductions and exclusions both reduce actual gross income
although exclusions are not included in the income tax return.

Taxpayers earning compensation under an employer-employee
relationship are not allowed to use any deductions. (It's right
there in the codal!)
Individuals with gross Income from business or the practice of
profession and corporations can either use the optional standard
deduction (OSD) or itemized deductions.

Itemized deductions are generally expenses and losses related to
trade or business or the practice of a profession. That's the entire
focus of Section 34.

The following are the itemized deductions:

1.

Expenses

2.

Interest

3.

Taxes

4.

Losses

5.

Bad debts

6.

Depreciation

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

158

7.

Depletion

8.

Charitable and other contributions

9.

Research and development

10.

Pension trusts

Differentiate tax exclusions from tax deductions. (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: While both deductions and exclusions reduce
actual gross income, exclusions need not be included in the tax return
as these are not included in computing the taxpayer's gross income.
Deductions must be included in the tax return as these reduce the
taxpayer's gross income to arrive at his/her/its taxable income.

Expenses, in general
Sec. 34. (A) Expenses. —
(1) Ordinary and Necessary Trade, Business or Professional
Expenses. —

(a) In General. — There shall be allowed as deduction from gross
income all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred
during the taxable year in carrying on or which are directly attributable
to, the development, management, operation and/or conduct of the
trade, business or exercise of a profession, including:
(i) A reasonable allowance for salaries, wages, and other forms
of compensation for personal services actually rendered, including the
grossed-up monetary value of fringe benefit furnished or granted by
the employer to the employee: Provided, That the final tax imposed
under Section 33 hereof has been paid;
(ii) A reasonable allowance for travel expenses, here and abroad,
while away from home in the pursuit of trade, business or profession;

(Hi) A reasonable allowance for rentals and/or other payments
which are required as a condition for the continued use or possession,
for purposes of the trade, business or profession, of property to which
the taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he has no
equity other than that of a lessee, user or possessor;
(iv) A reasonable allowance for entertainment, amusement
and recreation expenses during the taxable year, that are directly
connected to the development, management and operation of the
trade, business or profession of the taxpayer, or that are directly
related to or in furtherance of the conduct of his or its trade, business
or exercise of a profession not to exceed such ceilings as the
Secretary of Finance may, by rules and regulations prescribe, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, taking into account the needs
as well as the special circumstances, nature and character of the

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

159

industry, trade, business, or profession of the taxpayer: Provided, That
any expense incurred for entertainment, amusement or recreation
that is contrary to law, morals public policy or public order shall in no
case be allowed as a deduction.

(b) Substantiation Requirements. — No deduction from gross income
shall be allowed under Subsection (A) hereof unless the taxpayer shall
substantiate with sufficient evidence, such as official receipts or other
adequate records:
(i)

the amount of the expense being deducted, and

(ii) the direct connection or relation of the expense being
deducted to the development, management, operation and/or conduct
of the trade, business or profession of the taxpayer.

(c) Bribes, Kickbacks and Other Similar Payments. — No deduction
from gross income shall be allowed under Subsection (A) hereof for
any payment made, directly or indirectly, to an official or employee
of the national government, or to an official or employee of any local
government unit, or to an official or employee of a governmentowned or -controlled corporation, or to an official or employee or
representative of a foreign government, or to a private corporation,
general professional partnership, or a similar entity, if the payment
constitutes a bribe or kickback.
(2) Expenses Allowable to Private Educational Institutions.
— In addition to the expenses allowable as deductions under this
Chapter, a private educational institution, referred to under Section
27(B) of this Code, may at its option elect either: (a) to deduct
expenditures otherwise considered as capital outlays of depreciable
assets Incurred during the taxable year for the expansion of school
facilities or (b) to deduct allowance for depreciation thereof under
Subsection (F) hereof.

The codal considers as deductions all ordinary and necessary
expenses In carrying on the development, management,
and operation of a trade, business, or profession, including a
reasonable allowance for:

1.

Salaries, wages, and other forms of compensation including
fringe benefits (provided the tax thereof has been paid)

2.

Travel expenses, here and abroad, in pursuit of trade and
business

3.

Rentals and others which are required for the continued use
of property

4.

Entertainment, amusement and recreation expenses that are
directly connected to the trade, business, or profession (but
should not be contrary to law, morals, etc.)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

160

These are the requirements for deductible claims:
1.

Sufficient evidence (like official receipts or other adequate
records)

2. A direct connection of the expense to the development,
management, operation, and/or conduct of the trade,
business or profession
•

Payments of bribes and kickbacks, whether given
government or a private person, are not deductible.

•

Payment for police protection is illegal as it is compensation given
by the petitioner to the police for the performance by the latter of
the functions required of them to be rendered by law. (Calanoc v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-15922, November 29, 1961)

•

Jurisprudence expounded on the requirements with the following
requisites for the deductibility of ordinary and necessary trade,
business, or professional expenses:

1.

to the

Expense must be ordinary and necessary

Must have been paid or incurred during the taxable year

•

3.

Must have been paid or incurred in carrying on the trade/
business

4.

Must be supported by receipts, records or other pertinent
papers (CIR v. Isabela Cultural Corporation, G.R. No. 172231,
February 12, 2007)

For a taxpayer using the accrual method, the accrual of income
and expense is permitted when the all-events test has been met.
The all-events test requires:

o

The fixing of a right to income or liability to pay; and

o

The availability of the reasonable accurate determination of
such income or liability.
*

"Reasonable accuracy" implies something less than an
exact or completely accurate amount. The propriety of
an accrual must be judged by the facts that a taxpayer
knew, or could reasonably be expected to have known,
at the closing of its books for the taxable year. (CIR v.
Isabela Cultural Corporation)

A taxpayer who is authorized to deduct certain expenses and
other allowable deductions for the current year but failed to do so
cannot deduct the same for the next year.
It is ordinary when it is normal in relation to the business of the
taxpayer. It need not be recurring.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

161

It is necessary when it is appropriate and helpful in the
development of the taxpayer's business. See if it is intended to
minimize losses or to maximize profits.
Regarding advertising expenses (CIR v. General Foods [Phils.],
Inc., G.R. No. 143672, April 24, 2003):
O

Advertising is generally of two kinds:

1.

To stimulate the current sale of merchandise or use of
services

2.

To stimulate the future sale of merchandise or use of
services

o

The second type involves expenditures incurred, in whole or
in part, to create or maintain some form of goodwill for the
taxpayer's trade or business or for the industry or profession
of which the taxpayer is a member.

o

If it is the first kind, it is definitely deductible as a business
expense, the only question to be answered is if it is reasonable
or not.

o

If it is the second kind, normally they should be spread out
over a reasonable time.

■

o

In the case, the amount was not only huge (hence,
unreasonable), but was also used to protect the brand
franchise. The Supreme Court said that it was analogous
to the maintenance of goodwill or title to one's property.
Thus, it was a capital expenditure which should have
been spread out over a reasonable period of time. It was
akin to the acquisition of capital assets and therefore
expenses related thereto were not to be considered as
business expenses but as capital expenditures.

Expenses paid to advertising firms to promote sale of capital
stock for acquisition of additional capital is not deductible from
taxable income. Efforts to establish reputation are akin to
acquisition of capital assets, and therefore, expenses related
thereto are not business expense but capital expenditures.
(Atlas Consolidated Mining & Development Corporation v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-26911, January 27, 1981)

Litigation expenses incurred in defense of title to property are
capital in nature and not deductible. (Atlas Consolidated Mining &
Development Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. L-26911, January 27,
1981)

Bonuses to employees made in good faith and as additional
compensation for the services actually rendered by the employees

J9JC9B0M

162

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

are deductible, provided such payments, when added to the
stipulated salaries, do not exceed a reasonable compensation for
the services rendered. (Kuenzie & Streiff, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No.
L-18840, May 29, 1969)

o

Bgn.us.es given to corporate officers out of the sale of corporate
land are not deductible as an ordinary business expense in
the absence of showing what role said officers performed to
effectuate said sale. The taxpayer must show that personal
services had been rendered and that the amount was
reasonable. (Aguinaldo Industries Corporation v. CIR, G.R.
No. L-29790, February 25, 1982)

O

For income tax purposes, the employer cannot legally claim
bonuses as deductible expenses unless they are shown to
be reasonable. The conditions precedent to the deduction of
bonuses are:

The payment of the bonuses is in fact compensation;
It must be for personal services actually rendered; and

The bonuses, when added to the salaries, are reasonable
when measured by the amount and quality of the services
performed with relation the business of the taxpayer.
(C.M. Hoskins & Co., Inc. v. CIR, G.R. L-24059, November
28, 1969)
•

For cost of materials, taxpayers carrying materials and supplies
on hand should include in expenses the charges of materials and
supplies only to the amount that they are actually consumed and
used in operation during the year for which the return is made,
provided that the cost of such materials and supplies has not
been deducted in determining the net income for any previous
year.

°

If a taxPay.er carries incidental materials or supplies on
hand for which no record of consumption is kept or of which
physical inventories at the beginning and end of the year are
not taken, it will be permissible for the taxpayer to include
in his expenses and deduct from gross income the total cost
of such supplies and materials as were purchased during the
year for which the return is made, provided the net income is
clearly reflected by this method. (Section 67, R.R. 2)

the COSt
Incidenta| repairs which neither materially
add to the value of the property nor appreciably prolong its life,
but keep it in an ordinarily efficient operating condition, may be
deducted as^expense, provided the plant or property account is

i

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

163

Repairs in the nature of replacement, to the extent that they
arrest deterioration and appreciably prolong the life of the
property, should be charged against the depreciation reserves
if such account is kept. (Section 68, R.R. 2)

For lease agreement expenses, the following are allowed
deductions (Section 74, R.R. 2):
o

Where a leasehold is acquired for business purposes for
a specified sum, the purchaser may take deduction in his
return for an aliquot part of such sum each year, based on the
number of years the lease will run;

o

Taxes paid by a tenant to or for a landlord for business
property are additional rent and constitute a deductible item
to the tenant and taxable income to the landlord; the amount
of the tax being deductible by the latter.

o

The cost of leasehold improvements are NOT considered
business expenses since they are capital investments.
In order to return to such taxpayer his investment
of capital, an annual deduction may be made from
gross income of an amount equal to the cost of such
improvements divided by the number of years remaining
of the term of the lease, and such deduction shall be
in lieu of a deduction for depreciation. If the remainder
of the term of lease is greater than the probable life
of the building erected, or of the improvements made,
this deduction shall take the form of an allowance for
depreciation.

•

For professional expenses, the following are allowed deductions
(Section 69, R.R. 2):

o

Cost of supplies

o

Expenses paid in the operation and repair of transportation
equipment used in making professional class

o

Due to professional societies and subscriptions to professional
journals
■

So bar review tuition fees and bar examination fees are
not deductible

o

Rent paid for offices

o

Expenses for utilities on offices

o

Expenses for hiring of office assistants

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

164

O

Books, furniture, and professional instruments and equipment
with a SHORT useful life
■

Those with a permanent character are NOT allowable

Note: Private educational institutions have special deductibles:

•

They are allowed to deduct expenditures otherwise considered as
capital outlays of depreciable assets incurred for the expansion of
school facilities, or

•

They are allowed to capitalize the
deduction by way of depreciation.

expenditure,

and

claim

Representation, amusement, recreation expenses and entertainment
facilities (R.R. 10-2002)

•

Representation expenses are expenses incurred in connection
with the conduct of one's trade, business or profession in:

recreation to, or

o

Entertaining, providing amusement and
meeting with guests

o

At a dining place, place of amusement, country club, theater,
concert, play, sporting event and similar places

If the taxpayer is the registered member of a country/ golf/ °r
sports club, the presumption is that the expenses are fringe
benefits subject to the fringe benefits tax unless the taxpayer
can prove that these are actually representation expenses.
Entertainment facilities refer to a yacht, vacation home or
condominium and similar items of real or personal property used
by the taxpayer primarily for entertainment, amusement, or
recreation of guests or employees.

o

To be considered an entertainment facility, it must be owned
or form part of the taxpayer's trade, business, or profession
for which he claims depreciation or rental expense.

o

A yacht is considered an entertainment facility if its use is not
restricted to specified officers or employees. If the yacht were
restricted to them, it would be a fringe benefit, subject to the
FBT.

The following are not considered entertainment, amusement and
recreation expenses:

1.

Those that are treated as compensation or fringe benefits;

2.

Expenses for charitable and fund-raising events;

3.

Expenses for bona fide meeting of stockholders, partners, or
directors;

J9JC9B0M

165

INCOME TAX

4.

Expenses for attending or sponsoring an employee to a
business league or professional organization meeting;

5.

Expenses for events organized for promotion, marketing
and advertising including concerts, conferences, seminars,
workshops, conventions, etc.;

6.

Other expenses of a similar nature

o

BUT! These may still qualify as deductions under other
provisions of Section 34.

Requisites of deductibility for entertainment, amusement,
and recreational expenses:

1.

Paid or incurred during the taxable year

2.

Must be directly connected to the development, management
and operation of the trade, business or profession of the
taxpayer; or directly related to or in furtherance of, his or its
trade, business or exercise of profession

3.

Not be contrary to law, public morals, etc.

4.

Not been paid to an official of the government or to a private
individual, corporation or GPP, as a bribe or kickback

5.

Must be substantiated by adequate proof (the official receipts,
invoices should be in the name of the taxpayer claiming the
deduction)

6.

Taxes must been withheld, if applicable, and paid to the BIR,
if subject to final tax

Ceiling for Representation, Entertainment
and Amusement Expenses

Taxpayers engaged in sale of goods or properties

0.5% of net sales

Taxpayers engaged in sale of services, including
exercise of profession and use or lease of properties

1% of net revenue

Other business expenses allowed by special laws as deductions
•

Discounts granted by establishments for senior citizens and PWDS
(R.R. 1-2009 and R.R. 7-2010);

•

Expenses incurred by a private health and non-health facility,
establishment, or institution, in complying with the Expanded
Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2009 — up to twice the actual
amount incurred (R.A. 10028);

J9JC9B0M

166

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

•

Expenses incurred in training schemes pursuant to the Jewelry
Industry Development Act of 1998 — additional 50% of actual
amount incurred (R.A. 8502);

•

Expenses incurred for adopting a school based on the Adopta-School program — additional 50% of actual amount incurred
(R.A. 8525);

•

A lawyer or professional partnerships rendering actual free legal
services, as defined by the Supreme Court, shall be entitled
to an allowable deduction from the gross income, the amount
that could have been collected for the actual free legal services
rendered or up to ten percent (10%) of the gross income derived
from the actual performance of the legal profession, whichever is
lower. (R.A. 9999)
Freezy Corporation, a domestic corporation engaged in the
manufacture and sale of ice cream, made payments to an officer
of Frosty Corporation, a competitor in the ice cream business, in
exchange for said officer's revelation of Frosty Corporation's trade
secrets.
May Freezy Corporation claim the payment to the officer as deduction
from its gross income? Explain. (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, it may not, thank you very much. The
payment to an officer of a private corporation to reveal trade secrets
may be considered a bribe. The Tax Code does not allow bribes, even
those to a private corporation, to be considered deductions.
(Just to clarify though, the codal does not list 'payments to an official
or employee of a private corporation' as a possible bribe; it does
list 'payments to private corporations' though. But I humbly submit
that payments to officials or employees of a private corporation be
treated in the same manner.)

I

Peter is the Vice-President for Sales of Golden Dragon Realty
Conglomerate, Inc. (Golden Dragon). A group of five (5) foreign
investors visited the country for possible investment in the
condominium units and subdivision tots of Golden Dragon. After a
tour of the properties for sale, the investors were wined and dined
by Peter at the posh Conrad's Hotel at the cost of P150,000.00.
Afterward, the investors were brought to a party in a videoke dub
which cost the company P200,000.00 for food and drinks, and
the amount of P80,000.00 as tips for business promotion officers.
Expenses at Conrad's Hotel and the videoke club were receipted
and submitted to support the deduction for representation and
entertainment expenses. Decide if all the representation and
entertainment expenses claimed by Golden Dragon are deductible.
Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

167

Suggested answer: I would argue that the dinner and the videoke
party are deductible as entertainment, recreation, and amusement
expenses. The Tax Code and its rules allow businesses to deduct
expenses incurred in connection with one's business in entertaining
and providing amusement to its guests. As long as it is directly
connected to the development of the business, not contrary to law
or morals, and substantiated by proof, then it should be allowed as a
deduction. In this case, it is arguable that the dinner and the videoke
party (assuming it was a real videoke party and not a "videoke"
party in some seedy bar with half-naked women grinding about) are
amusement expenses of Golden Dragon incurred to sell or entice its
would-be buyers to buy some units.

However, the P80,000 tip should not be allowed. These are arguably
bribes. The Tax Code and its rules state that bribes or kickbacks,
whether given to the government or private parties, should not be
allowed as deductions. They weren't substantiated with receipts
either—which is obvious, given the shady nature of the transaction.

(Note: while it can also be argued that these were capital expenses
and therefore not allowed as deductions [given that these were for
possible "investments."], the counterargument would be that the
business of Golden Dragon involves the sale of condo units, hence,
making the expenses used to attract would-be buyers deductible
business expenses.)

i

Calvin Dela Pisa was a Permits and Licensing Officer (rank-and-file)
of Sta. Portia Realty Corporation (SPRC). He invited the Regional
Director of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB)
to lunch at the Sulo Hotel in Quezon City to discuss the approval
of SPRC's application for a development permit in connection with
its subdivision development project in Pasig City. At breakfast the
following day, Calvin met a prospective client interested to enter
into a joint venture with SPRC for the construction of a residential
condominium unit in Cainta, Rizai.
Calvin Incurred expenses for the lunch and breakfast meetings he
had with the Regional Director of HLURB and the prospective client,
respectively. The expenses were duly supported by official receipts
issued In his name. At month's end, he requested the reimbursement
of his expenses, and SPRC granted his request.

a)

Can SPRC claim an allowable deduction for the expenses Incurred
by Calvin? Explain your answer.

b)

Is the reimbursement received by Calvin from SPRC subject to
tax? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

Suggest answer:
a)

The expense for the lunch meeting is not allowed, as this is a
bribe which the Tax Code states are not allowed as deductions,
whether the bribe is direct or indirect. The expense for the

■

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

168

breakfast is also not allowed, as this is arguably a capita!
expenditure.

The reimbursement by Calvin is subject to tax. Generally,
representation and transportation allowance of employees are
generally taxable. The exception is if these are reimbursements
for expenses incurred for the ordinary and necessary pursuit
of trade or business. As the expenses are not ordinary and
necessary (as these were incurred as a bribe and capita!
expenditure), then the exception does not apply. Hence, the
reimbursement is taxable.

b)

Interest
Sec. 34. (B) Interest. —

(1) In General. — The amount of interest paid or incurred within
a taxable year on indebtedness in connection with the taxpayer's
profession, trade or business shall be allowed as deduction from gross
income: Provided, however, That the taxpayer's otherwise allowable
deduction for interest expense shall be reduced by 42% of the interest
income subject to final tax: Provided, That effective January 1, 2009,
the percentage shall be 33%.
(2) Exceptions. — No deduction shall be allowed in respect of
interest under the succeeding subparagraphs:

(a) If within the taxable year an individual taxpayer reporting income
on the cash basis incurs an indebtedness on which an interest is
paid in advance through discount or otherwise: Provided, That such
interest shall be allowed a deduction in the year the indebtedness
is paid: Provided, further, That if the Indebtedness is payable in
periodic amortizations, the amount of interest which corresponds to
the amount of the principal amortized or paid during the year shall be
allowed as deduction in such taxable year;

(b) If both the taxpayer and the person to whom the payment has
been made or is to be made are persons specified under Section
36(B); or
(c) If the indebtedness Is incurred to finance petroleum exploration.

(3) Optional Treatment of Interest Expense. — At the option
of the taxpayer, interest incurred to acquire property used in trade
business or exercise of a profession may be allowed as a deduction or
treated as a capital expenditure.

Interests paid on debts are allowed as deductions but:

o

These must be incurred in connection with the taxpayer's
profession, trade or business

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

169

The allowable deduction is reduced by 33% of the interest
income subject to final tax. (more on this below)

Requisites for deductibility of interest expense (R.R. 13-2000):
1.

There must be an indebtedness

2.

There should be an interest expense paid or incurred upon
the indebtedness (incurred meaning that it was due and
demandable)

3.

The indebtedness must be that of the taxpayer

4.

It must be connected with the taxpayer's trade, business or
profession

5.

The interest expense must have been paid or incurred during
the taxable year

6.

The interest must have been stipulated in writing

7.

The interest must be legally due

8.

The interest payment arrangement must not be between
related taxpayers

9.

The interest must not be incurred to finance petroleum
operations

!

10. In case the interest was incurred to acquire property used
in trade, business or profession, it was not treated as capital
expenditure.
a.

In cases like this, the taxpayer has the option to treat the
interest expenses as either

Interest expense deductible in full or
ii.

As a capital expenditure and claim as deduction only
the periodic amortization/depreciation.
o

But he can only choose one, or else that's double
deduction and that ain't allowed.

The law effectively cancelled out the tax arbitrage advantage.
Corporations before would borrow money and use the interest they
had to pay on the loan as a deduction, even if they reinvested the
money elsewhere and got interest income from their investment.
o

For example, Capitan Ri, a businessman who buys and sells
tomato plants, borrowed money from his favorite local bank,
Banko ng mga Gwapo. It had an interest expense of P8,000.
He then deposited the money that he borrowed with Banko
ng mga Kyot, and it had an interest income on it of P9,000,

i

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

170

the final tax of which had been withheld by the bank. How
much is his deducible interest expense?
Interest expense, unadjusted
Less: Adjustment for interest
Income subject to final tax
(33% of P9,000)
Adjusted balance, deduction for interest
expense

P8,000

2.970

P5,030

But interest paid or accrued on taxes related to business or
practice of profession can be deducted in full (it is not subject to
this rule on downward adjustment).
Note that as long as there is interest expense incurred and interest
income earned (which had been subjected to final withholding
tax), the limitation shall apply regardless of:

o

whether or not a tax arbitrage scheme was entered into by
the taxpayer; or

o

the date when the investment was made.

The limitation will only apply if there is interest income subject to
final tax. If none, then you can deduct in full.
Interest is not deductible if:

o

o

Both the taxpayer and the person to whom interest was paid
are related taxpayers, meaning:

•

Members of a family;

•

An individual and a corporation where more than 50% of
the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned by the
individual;

•

Two corporations where more than 50% of the outstanding
stock of each is owned by the other or by the same
individual;

•

Between grantor and fiduciary of any trust;

■

Between fiduciary of a trust and the fiduciary of another
trust if the same person is a grantor with respect to each
trust; or

■

Between fiduciary of a trust and the beneficiary.

The indebtedness is incurred to finance petroleum operations;
and

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

171

If an individual is on the cash basis of accounting and the
interest is paid in advance, through discount or otherwise.
«

If so, the interest expense shall be allowed as deduction
not in the year that the interest was paid in advance, but
in the year that the indebtedness was paid.

•

But if the indebtedness is payable in periodic amortization,
the amount of the interest which corresponds to the
amount of the principal amortized or paid during the year
shall be allowed as deduction in such taxable year.

Late payment of tax is considered a debt, and therefore interest
on taxes is interest on indebtedness and is thus deductible. (CIR
v. Vda. de Prieto, G.R. No. L-13912, September 30, 1960)
o

But surcharges or penalties are NOT deductible.

Taxes

Sec. 34. (C) Taxes. —
(1) In General. — Taxes paid or incurred within the taxable year in
connection with the taxpayer's profession, trade or business, shall be
allowed as deduction, except

(a) The income tax provided for under this Title;
(b) Income taxes imposed by authority of any foreign
country; but this deduction shall be allowed in the case of a
taxpayer who does not signify in his return his desire to have
to any extent the benefits of paragraph (3) of this subsection
(relating to credits for taxes of foreign countries);

(c) Estate and donor's taxes; and
(d) Taxes assessed against local benefits of a kind tending
to increase the value of the property assessed.
Provided, That taxes allowed under this Subsection, when refunded
or credited, shall be included as part of gross income in the year of
receipt to the extent of the income tax benefit of said deduction.

(2) Limitations on Deductions. — In the case of a nonresident
alien Individual engaged in trade or business in the Philippines and
a resident foreign corporation, the deductions for taxes provided in
paragraph (1) of this Subsection (C) shall be allowed only if and to the
extent that they are connected with income from sources within the
Philippines.
(3) Credit Against Tax for Taxes of Foreign Countries. — If the
taxpayer signifies in his return his desire to have the benefits of this
paragraph, the tax imposed by this Title shall be credited with:

J9JC9B0M

172

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(a) Citizen and Domestic Corporation. — In the case of
a citizen of the Philippines and of a domestic corporation, the
amount of income taxes paid or incurred during the taxable year
to any foreign country; and
(b) Partnerships and Estates. — In the case of any such
individual who is a member of a general professional partnership
or a beneficiary of an estate or trust, his proportionate share of
such taxes of the general professional partnership or the estate
or trust paid or incurred during the taxable year to a foreign
country, if his distributive share of the income of such partnership
or trust is reported for taxation under this Title.

An alien individual and a foreign corporation shall not be allowed the
credits against the tax for the taxes of foreign countries allowed under
this paragraph.

(4) Limitations on Credit. — The amount of the credit taken under
this Section shall be subject to each of the following limitations:
(a) The amount of the credit in respect to the tax paid or
incurred to any country shall not exceed the same proportion of
the tax against which such credit is taken, which the taxpayer's
taxable income from sources within such country under this Title
bears to his entire taxable income for the same taxable year; and
(b) The total amount of the credit shall not exceed the same
proportion of the tax against which such credit is taken, which the
taxpayer's taxable income from sources without the Philippines
taxable under this Title bears to his entire taxable income for the
same taxable year.
(5)Adjustments on Payment of Incurred Taxes. — If accrued
taxes when paid differ from the amounts claimed as credits by the
taxpayer, or if any tax paid is refunded in whole or in part, the taxpayer
shall notify the Commissioner; who shall predetermine the amount of
the tax for the year or years affected, and the amount of tax due upon
such redetermination, if any, shall be paid by the taxpayer upon notice
and demand by the Commissioner, or the amount of tax overpaid, if
any, shall be credited or refunded to the taxpayer. In the case of
such a tax incurred but not paid, the Commissioner as a condition
precedent to the allowance of this credit may require the taxpayer to
give a bond with sureties satisfactory to and to be approved by the
Commissioner in such sum as he may require, conditioned upon the
payment by the taxpayer of any amount of tax found due upon any
such redetermination. The bond herein prescribed shall contain such
further conditions as the Commissioner may require.

6) Year in Which Credit Taken. — The credits provided for in
Subsection (C)(3) of this Section may, at the option of the taxpayer
and irrespective of the method of accounting employed in keeping his
books, be taken in the year which the taxes of the foreign country
were incurred, subject, however, to the conditions prescribed in
Subsection (C)(5) of this Section. If the taxpayer elects to take such

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

173

credits in the year in which the taxes of the foreign country accrued,
the credits for all subsequent years shall be taken upon the same
basis and no portion of any such taxes shall be allowed as a deduction
in the same or any succeeding year.
(7) Proof of Credits. — The credits provided in Subsection (C)
(3) hereof shall be allowed only if the taxpayer establishes to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner the following:

(a) The total amount of income derived from sources
without the Philippines;

(b) The amount of income derived from each country,
the tax paid or incurred to which is claimed as a credit under
said paragraph, such amount to be determined under rules and
regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Finance; and

(c) All other information necessary for the verification and
computation of such credits.
Taxes paid or accrued within the taxable year in connection with
the taxpayer's trade or business or exercise of a profession are
deductible from gross income.
O

EXCEPT: (Sections 82-83, R.R. 2)
■

Philippine income tax (but the grossed-up monetary
value of the fringe benefit tax can be deducted)

•

Estate tax

Donor's tax

Special assessments
Income tax imposed by a foreign country for income
sourced outside the Philippines (but it shall be allowed
if the taxpayer does not signify his desire to enjoy
any benefits of the tax credit for taxes paid to foreign
countries)

Stock transaction tax

VAT
Income, war-profits, and excess-profits taxes imposed
by the authority of a foreign country (including the
United States and possessions thereof) are allowed as
deductions only if the taxpayer does not signify in his
return his desire to have to any extent the benefits of the
provisions of law allowing credits against the tax for taxes
of foreign countries. (Section 82, R.R. 2-1940)

J9JC9B0M

174

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

As to tax credits, only resident citizens and domestic corporations
are affected by this, because they are the only ones taxed
worldwide.
O

Members of the GPP and beneficiaries of estates/trusts can
also avail of tax credits.

O

Alien individuals and foreign corporations are not allowed to
avail of tax credits.

When a taxpayer is qualified for a credit, he has the option of
either:
O

Deducting the foreign income tax from his gross income, or

o

Claiming the tax credit.

How do we determine the amount of tax to be credited? Just
follow the formulas below, and choose which of them is lower.

1.

Net income from foreign country

x Tax Due (Total)

Net income worldwide

2.

Foreign income tax paid

Example:
Seri's Choice, Inc. had taxable income from the Philippines of
P300,000 and from South Korea of P100,000. Income tax of P40,000
was paid to South Korea. If Seri's Choice, Inc. chose to take a tax
credit for the income tax paid to South Korea, how much tax does the
corporation have to pay the Philippine government after the tax credit
would have been computed?

Taxable income before tax credit, Korea
Taxable income before tax credit, Phil.

P100,000
P300.000

Taxable income, worldwide

P400.000

Corporate income tax of 30%

P120,000

Less: Tax credit for foreign tax

Plug in the values!
(100,000/400,000) X 120,000

= P30,000

Foreign income tax paid

= P40,000

Choose what's lower! Allowed tax credit

P 30.000

Philippine income tax still due

P 90,000

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

175

What would Seri's Choice, Inc. bring home if they chose to do
the tax credit?

Taxable income, worldwide

Tax liability in the Philippines
Less: Foreign Tax credit

P400,000

P120,000
P30.000

Tax liability after credit
Income after tax (what Seri's

P 90.000
P310,000

Choice takes home)

If Seri's Choice, Inc. chose to deduct, this is what would have
happened:
Taxable income worldwide

Deduction for foreign income tax paid
Taxable income

Income tax at 30%
Income after tax (what Seri's Choice
takes home)

P400,000
40,000
P360,000
P108.000
P252,000

It is preferred that you should go for a tax credit. You end up with
more cash at the end of the day. For tax credits, you get 100%
benefit, as compared to deductions where all expenses benefit to
the extent only of 30% (for corporations). Tax credit? That's the
right choice. That's Seri's Choice.

Can you deduct fines and penalties paid to the BIR because of
late payment of taxes? No. These are not taxes but penalties.
In 2009, Caruso, a resident Filipino citizen, received dividend
Income from a U.S.-based corporation which owns a chain of Filipino
restaurants In the West Coast, U.S.A. The dividend remitted to
Caruso Is subject to U.S. withholding tax with respect to a nonresident alien like Caruso.
a) What will be your advice to Caruso in order to lessen the impact
of possible double taxation on the same Income?

b) Would your answer in A. be the same if Caruso became a
U.S. Immigrant in 2008 and had become a non-resident Filipino
citizen? Explain the difference in treatment for Philippine income tax
purposes. (2010 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

a) In order to lessen the impact of possible double taxation on the
dividend income, I will advices Caruso that he can either claim the

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

176

taxes which he paid to the US as deduction from his gross income or
claim it as a tax credit. The Tax Code allows resident citizens to claim
taxes paid to a foreign country to be deducted or claimed as a tax
credit. As a resident citizen, Caruso can avail of either.

b) My answer would be different because as a non-resident citizen,
the Philippine taxing authorities can only tax income sources within
the Philippines. As the income is sourced from outside the Philippines,
it cannot be taxed here. Hence, he need not worry about any impact
of double taxation.

Mr. A, a citizen and resident of the Philippines, is a professional
boxer. In a professional boxing match held in 2013, he won prize
money in United States (US) dollars equivalent to P300,000,000.
a) Is the prize money paid to and received by Mr. A in the US
taxable in the Philippines? Why?
b) The US already imposed and withheld income taxes from Mr.
A's prize money. How may Mr. A use or apply the income taxes he
paid on his prize money to the US when he computes his income tax
liability in the Philippines for 2013? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) Yes, the prize money paid to and received by Mr. A in the US is
taxable In the Philippines. As a resident citizen, he is taxable for his
income worldwide.
b) Mr. A has the option of either deducting the tax he paid in the
US or claiming It as a tax credit. Resident citizens, such as Mr. A,
are allowed to either deduct the taxes he paid abroad from his gross
income or claim them as tax credits.

Losses

Sec. 34. (D) Losses. —
(1) In General. — Losses actually sustained during the taxable year
and not compensated for by insurance or other forms of indemnity
shall be allowed as deductions:

(a) If incurred in trade, profession or business;
(b) Of property connected with the trade, business or
profession, if the loss arises from fires, storms, shipwreck, or
other casualties, or from robbery, theft or embezzlement.
The Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner,
is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations prescribing,
among other things, the time and manner by which the taxpayer shall
submit a declaration of loss sustained from casualty or from robbery,

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

177

theft or embezzlement during the taxable year: Provided, however,
That the time limit to be so prescribed in the rules and regulations
shall not be less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90)
days from the date of discovery of the casualty or robbery, theft or
embezzlement giving rise to the loss.
(c) No loss shall be allowed as a deduction under this
Subsection if at the time of the filing of the return, such loss has
been claimed as a deduction for estate tax purposes in the estate
tax return.
(2) Proof of Loss. — In the case of a nonresident alien individual
or foreign corporation, the losses deductible shall be those actually
sustained during the year incurred in business, trade or exercise of
a profession conducted within the Philippines, when such losses are
not compensated for by insurance or other forms of indemnity. The
Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner, is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations prescribing,
among other things, the time and manner by which the taxpayer shall
submit a declaration of loss sustained from casualty or from robbery,
theft or embezzlement during the taxable year: Provided, That the
time to be so prescribed in the rules and regulations shall not be less
than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date
of discovery of the casualty or robbery, theft or embezzlement giving
rise to the loss; and

Losses actually sustained during the taxable year and not
compensated by insurance or other form of indemnity are
deductible from gross income:
O

If incurred in trade, business or profession;

O

Of property connected with trade, business or profession, if
the loss arises from fire, storm, shipwreck or other casualty,
or from robbery, theft or embezzlement.

Declaration of loss is needed within 45 days from time of loss
(R.R. 12-1977, reiterated in RMO 31-2009)
O

If the taxpayer fails to submit a Sworn Declaration of Loss,
the deduction for casualty loss will not be allowed. The SDL
is needed to forewarn the BIR the extent of the loss and to
conduct its own investigation of the incident leading to the
loss. (H. Tambunting Pawnshop v. CIR, G.R. No. 173373, July
29, 2013)
«

If a team blows a 3-28 lead with two minutes left in the
3rd quarter of the Super Bowl, does it need to submit a
sworn declaration of loss? No need, the internet trolls will
handle that. (Patriots v. Falcons, Superbowl LI)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

178

For nonresident individuals and foreign corporations, the losses
should be those actually sustained during the taxable year,
incurred in trade, business or profession conducted within the
Philippines.

If the loss has already been claimed as deduction for estate tax
purposes, it is no longer deductible from gross income.
Casualty means the complete or partial destruction of property
resulting from an identifiable event of a sudden, unexpected or
unusual nature.
It denotes accident, some sudden invasion by hostile agency,
and excludes progressive deterioration through steadily
operating cause.

O

•

Theft means the criminal appropriation of another's property for
the use of the taker.

•

Embezzlement is the fraudulent appropriation of another's
property by a person to whom it has been entrusted or into whose
hands it has lawfully come. (R.R. 12-1977)

•

The taxpayer bears the burden of proof.

•

Special rules on losses:
Voluntary removal of buildings (Section 97, R.R. 2-40):

0

O

•

Loss due to the voluntary removal or demolition of old
buildings, the scrapping of old machinery, equipment,
etc., incident to renewals and replacements will be
deductible from gross income (demolition for practical
reasons life safety).

•

When a taxpayer buys real estate upon which is located
a building, which he proceeds to raze with a view to
erecting thereon another building, It will be considered
that the taxpayer has sustained no deductible expense on
account of the cost of such removal, the value of the real
estate, exclusive of old improvements, being presumably
equal to the purchase price of the land and building plus
the cost of removing the useless building (demolition with
intention to construct a new building).

Loss of useful value of assets (Section 98, R.R. 2-40):
•

When through some change in business conditions, the
usefulness in the business of some or all of the capital
assets is suddenly terminated, so that the taxpayer
discontinues the business or discards such assets
permanently from use of such business, he may claim as
deduction the actual loss sustained.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

179

In determining the amount of the loss, adjustment must
be made, however, for improvements, depreciation and
the salvage value of the property.

This exception to the rule requiring a sale or other
disposition of property in order to establish a loss
requires proof of some unforeseen cause by reason of
which the property has been prematurely discarded, as,
for example, where an increase in the cost or change in
the manufacture of any product makes it necessary to
abandon such manufacture, to which special machinery
is exclusively devoted, or where new legislation directly
or indirectly makes the continued profitable use of the
property impossible.
•

This exception does NOT extend to a case where the
useful life of property terminates solely as a result
of those gradual processes for which depreciation
allowance are authorized. It does not apply to
inventories or to other than capital assets. The
exception applies to buildings only when they are
permanently abandoned or permanently devoted
to a radically different use, and to machinery only
when its use as such is permanently abandoned. Any
loss to be deductible under this exception must be
charged off in the books and fully explained in returns
of income.

A Is a travelling salesman working full time for Nu Skin Products.
He receives a monthly salary plus 3°/o commission on his sales in a
Southern province where he Is based. He regularly uses his own car
to maximize his visits even to far flung areas. One fine day a group
of militants seized his car. He was notified the following day by the
police that the marines and the militants had a bloody encounter and
his car was completely destroyed after a grenade hit it.
A wants to file a claim for casualty loss. Explain the legal basis of
your tax advice. (2010 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: A will not be allowed to claim the loss of the car for
deduction purposes. Deductions are not allowed for taxpayers earning
compensation income under an employer-emp/oyee relationship. As
he works full-time for Nu Skin Products, he is a taxpayer earning
compensation income under an employer-employee relationship.
Hence, he will not be allowed to claim the loss for deductions. There
will be no need to file a claim for casualty loss.

J9JC9B0M

180

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Net Operating Loss Carry Over (NOLCO)

(3) Net Operating Loss Carry-Over. — The net operating loss of
the business or enterprise for any taxable year immediately preceding
the current taxable year, which had not been previously offset as
deduction from gross income shall be carried over as a deduction
from gross income for the next three (3) consecutive taxable years
immediately following the year of such loss: Provided, however, That
any net loss incurred in a taxable year during which the taxpayer was
exempt from income tax shall not be allowed as a deduction under
this Subsection: Provided, further, That a net operating loss carryover shall be allowed only if there has been no substantial change in
the ownership of the business or enterprise in that —
(i) Not less than seventy-five percent (75%) in nominal value
of outstanding issued shares, if the business is in the name of a
corporation, is held by or on behalf of the same persons; or

(ii) Not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the paid up capital
of the corporation, if the business is in the name of a corporation, is
held by or on behalf of the same persons.
For purposes of this subsection, the term "not operating loss" shall
mean the excess of allowable deduction over gross income of the
business in a taxable year.

Provided, That for mines other than oil and gas wells, a net operating
loss without the benefit of incentives provided for under Executive
Order No. 226, as amended, otherwise known as the Omnibus
Investments Code of 1987, incurred in any of the first ten (10) years
of operation may be carried over as a deduction from taxable income
for the next five (5) years immediately following the year of such
loss. The entire amount of the loss shall be carried over to the first
of the five (5) taxable years following the loss, and any portion of
such loss which exceeds, the taxable income of such first year shall
be deducted in like manner from the taxable income of the next
remaining four (4) years.

Net operating loss is the excess of allowable deduction over gross
income of the business in a taxable year.
NOLCO: The net operating loss of the business which has not
been previously offset as deduction shall be carried over as
deduction from gross income for the next three consecutive years
immediately following the year of such loss.

This is allowed if there has been
ownership of the business, meaning
o

no substantial

change in

Where not less than 75% of outstanding shares in the
business is in the name of a corporation held by the same
persons, or

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

181

Where not less than 75% of the paid-up capital of the
corporation is held by the same persons

For mines other than oil and gas wells, a net operating loss
without the benefit of incentives provided for by the Omnibus
Investments Code may be carried over as deduction for the next
five years immediately following the year of loss.

Congress decided to limit the transfer of NOLCO because to allow
the indiscriminate transfer thereof would allow corporations to
simply buy and benefit from the operating losses of another
corporation. (Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines v.
CA, G.R. No. 106949, December 1, 1995)

In case the transfer or assignment of NOLCO arises from a merger,
consolidation, or combination with another person, the transferee
or assignee shall not be entitled to claim the same as deduction.

o

EXCEPT when as a result of the said merger, consolidation,
or combination, the shareholders of the transferor/assignor
gains control of

■

at least 75% or more of the outstanding issued shares or
paid up capital of the transferee/assignee, or

■

75% or more interest in the business of the transferee/
assignee. (R.R. 14-2001)

An individual who claims the 40% optional standard deduction
cannot claim deduction of NOLCO simultaneously. Even if the
NOLCO was not claimed, the three-year period shall continue to
run. (R.R. 14-2001)
O

If the taxpayer paid its income tax under the MCIT
computation, the three-year period still runs. (R.R. 14-2001)

NOLCO shall be availed of on a "first-in, first-out" basis. (R.R. 142001)

Who are not qualified to NOLCO?

1.

OBUs for a foreign banking corporation and FCDU of a
domestic banking corporations

2.

Enterprise registered with the BOI enjoying the Income Tax
Holiday Incentive

3.

PEZA-registered enterprise

4.
5.

SBMA-registered enterprise

6.

Foreign corporations engaged in international shipping or air
carriage business in the Philippines
Any person, natural or juridical, enjoying exemption from
income tax (R.R. 14-2001)

J9JC9B0M

182

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Example of NOLCO

Gross Income

Less: deductions

Net loss

2016
300
900
600

2017
700
600
100

Net income

2018
800
850
50

2019
800
720

2020
800
450

80

350

Less:
Nolco

100

From 2016

80

From 2018

Taxable income

0

0

0

0

300

Capital Losses

(4) Capital Losses. —

(a) Limitation. — Loss from sales or Exchanges of capital assets
shall be allowed only to the extent provided in Section 39.
(b) Securities Becoming Worthless. — If securities as defined in
Section 22(T) become worthless during the taxable year and are
capital assets, the loss resulting therefrom shall, for purposes of this
Title, be considered as a loss from the sale or exchange, on the last
day of such taxable year, of capital assets.

See discussion on Section 39.

Losses from Wash Sales of Stocks or Securities

(5) Losses From Wash Sales of Stock or Securities. — Losses
from "wash sales" of stock or securities as provided in Section 38.
Sec. 38. Losses from Wash Sales of Stock or Securities. —

(A) In the case of any loss claimed to have been sustained from
any sale or other disposition of shares of stock or securities where
it appears that within a period beginning thirty (30) days before the
date of such sale or disposition and ending thirty (30) days after
such date, the taxpayer has acquired (by purchase or by exchange
upon which the entire amount of gain or loss was recognized by law),
or has entered into a contact or option so to acquire, substantially
identical stock or securities, then no deduction for the loss shall be
allowed under Section 34 unless the claim is made by a dealer in
stock or securities and with respect to a transaction made in the
ordinary course of the business of such dealer.

j

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

183

(B) If the amount of stock or securities acquired (or covered by the
contract or option to acquire) is less than the amount of stock or
securities sold or otherwise disposed of, then the particular shares of
stock or securities, the loss form the sale or other disposition of which
is not deductible, shall be determined under rules and regulations
prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner.

(C) If the amount of stock or securities acquired (or covered by the
contract or option to acquire which) resulted in the non-deductibility
of the loss, shall be determined under rules and regulations
prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner.
Losses are not allowed to be claimed in sales of stock or securities
if
O

Within a period of 30 days before the sale, and 30 days after
the sale (61 days total)

O

The taxpayer acquires or enters into an option to purchase
substantially the same/identical stocks or securities.

Losses are allowed only if the taxpayer is a stockbroker and the
sale/purchase was made in the regular course of business.

The important thing to remember is the 61-day period. (Section
131, R.R. 2)
O

Example: Laseng Gera Ajumma buys shares in Seri's Choice,
Inc. She sells the shares at a loss. Twenty days from the sale,
she buys shares in Seri's Choice, Inc. again. The loss will not
be allowed as a deduction.

Wagering Losses
Sec. 34. (D) (6) Wagering Losses. — Losses from wagering
transactions shall be allowed only to the extent of the gains from such
transactions.

Wagering losses are allowed only to the extent of gains from such
transactions.
Abandonment Losses

(7) Abandonment Losses. —

(a) In the event a contract area where petroleum operations
are undertaken is partially or wholly abandoned, all accumulated
exploration and development expenditures pertaining thereto shall

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

184

be allowed as a deduction: Provided, That accumulated expenditures
incurred in that area prior to January 1, 1979 shall be allowed as
a deduction only from any income derived from the same contract
area. In all cases, notices of abandonment shall be filed with the
Commissioner.
(b) In case a producing well is subsequently abandoned, the
unamortized costs thereof, as well as the undepreciated costs of
equipment directly used therein, shall be allowed as a deduction in the
year such well, equipment or facility is abandoned by the contractor:
Provided, That if such abandoned well is reentered and production
is resumed, or if such equipment or facility is restored into service,
the said costs shall be included as part of gross income in the year of
resumption or restoration and shall be amortized or depreciated, as
the case may be.

•

When a petroleum operation is partially or wholly abandoned,
all accumulated exploration and development expenses shall be
allowed as a deduction

Forex losses
•

When foreign currency is acquired in connection with the
regular course of business, ordinary gain or loss results from
the fluctuations, such loss is deductible only in the year that it
is sustained. But if the loans have not vet actually been paid,
the losses therefrom have not yet been realized and are not
deductible yet. (BIR Ruling 206-90)

•

Foreign exchange losses sustained as a result of devaluation of the
peso, but which remittance of scheduled amortization consisting
of principal and interests payments on a foreign loan has not
actually been made are not deductible because the increase has
not yet been realized (no closed and completed transaction yet).
(BIR Ruling 144-85)

Bad debts
Sec. 34. (E) Bad Debts. —
(1) In General. — Debts due to the taxpayer actually ascertained to
be worthless and charged off within the taxable year except those not
connected with profession, trade or business and those sustained in
a transaction entered into between parties mentioned under Section
36(B) of this Code: Provided, That recovery of bad debts previously
allowed as deduction In the preceding years shall be included as
part of the gross Income in the year of recovery to the extent of the
income tax benefit of said deduction.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

185

(2) Securities Becoming Worthless. — If securities, as defined in
Section 22(T), are ascertained to be worthless and charged off within
the taxable year and are capital assets, the loss resulting therefrom
shall, in the case of a taxpayer other than a bank or trust company
incorporated under the laws of the Philippines a substantial part of
whose business is the receipt of deposits, for the purpose of this
Title, be considered as a loss from the sale or exchange, on the last
day of such taxable year, of capital assets.

Bad debts are amounts borrowed from the taxpayer which have
become worthless or uncollectible.
O

These receivables may come from money actually extended
as a loan or from uncollectible payments of goods sold or
services rendered by the taxpayer.

Bad debts are deductible provided that:
O

There is an existing indebtedness due to the taxpayer
which is valid and legally demandable (and not losses from
investments, as in Philex Mining Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No.
148187, April 16, 2008);

O

They are connected with trade, business or profession of the
taxpayer;

O

They are actually ascertained to be worthless, uncollectible,
and charged off within the taxable year;

o

The taxpayer must show that it its uncollectible even in the
future (Phil. Refining Company v. CTA, G.R. No. 118794, May
8, 1996);

o

They are not sustained between related parties; and

o

If they are recovered, they should be included as part of gross
income in the year of recovery (this is the tax benefit rule).

•

Losses or bad debts must be ascertained to be so and written off
during the taxable year. They are therefore deductible in full or
not at all. There's no partial deductions. (Hermanos v. CIR, G.R.
No. L-21551, September 30, 1969)

•

Its worthlessness depends on the particular facts of each case. It
can't be considered worthless just because of its doubtful value
or difficulty to collect.

•

To prove worthlessness, the taxpayer must prove that he exerted
diligent efforts to collect, such as:
o

Sending of statement of accounts;

o

Sending of collection letters;

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

186

O

Giving the account to a lawyer for collection;

O

Filing a collection case. (Phil. Refining Company v. CTA, G.R.
No. 118794, May 8, 1996)

Illustration of the tax benefit rule for bad debts
2019 taxable income before bad debts:

Bad debts in 2020:
Bad debts recovered in 2019:

P100,000
P170,000
P130,000

How much do I report in 2020 as gross income, i.e., how much
did I benefit from the bad debt I recorded as a deduction in 2019?
P100,000. That's how much I benefited from the debts being
written off. I benefited from it because I didn't have to pay the
P100,000 since the bad debt as a deduction covered it fully. (It
would be a different amount if the bad debts were less than the
taxable income before bad debts.) So, I have to include this
amount in the computation in the gross income.
What happens to the P30,000? (Uh-oh. Recit question.)

In case of banks, the BSP will ascertain the worthlessness and
uncollectibility of the bad debts and it shall approve the writingoff of the said debt from the bank's books of accounts at the end
of the taxable year. (R.R. 5-1999)
For an insurance or surety company, a receivable may be written
off from the taxpayer's books of accounts and claimed as bad
debt only if such company has been closed due to insolvency or
for any such similar reason by the Insurance Commissioner. (R.R.
5-1999)
Worthless debts arising from unpaid wages, salaries, rents, and
similar items of TAXABLE INCOME can only be deducted if these
amounts were included in the ITR as INCOME for the year when
such bad debt was sought, or the previous year.

Rakham operates the tending company that made a loan to Alfonso In
the amount of P20,000.00 subject of a promissory note which is due
within one (1) year from the note's issuance. Three years after the
loan became due and upon information that Alfonso is nowhere to
be found, Rakham asks you for advice on how to treat the obligation
as "bad debt. "Discuss the requisites for deductibility of a "bad debt"
(2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: For bad debts to be considered deductible, the
following must concur:
•

There is an existing debt due to the taxpayer which is valid and
legally demandable;

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

187

The debts are connected to the trade, business or profession of
the taxpayer;

They are actually ascertained to be worthless, uncollectible and
charged off within the taxable year;
The taxpayer must show that it is uncollectible even in the
future;
The debts are not between related parties; and

If ever these are recovered, they should be included in the year
of recovery.
Securities becoming worthless
•

Securities becoming worthless are considered to be a loss from
sale of capital assets on the last day of the taxable year except
for a bank or trust company.

•

Feelings becoming worthless are considered to be a loss that may
or may not be recovered from on the last day of the taxable year.

Depreciation

Sec. 34. (F) Depreciation. —
(1) General Rule. — There shall be allowed as a depreciation
deduction a reasonable allowance for the exhaustion, wear and
tear (including reasonable allowance for obsolescence) of property
used in the trade or business. In the case of property held by one
person for life with remainder to another person, the deduction
shall be computed as if the life tenant were the absolute owner of
the property and shall be allowed to the life tenant. In the case of
property held in trust, the allowable deduction shall be apportioned
between the Income beneficiaries and the trustees in accordance with
the pertinent provisions of the instrument creating the trust, or in the
absence of such provisions, on the basis of the trust income allowable
to each.

(2) Use of Certain Methods and Rates. — The term "reasonable
allowance" as used in the preceding paragraph shall include, but
not limited to, an allowance computed in accordance with rules
and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, under any of the following
methods:

(a) The straight-line method;

(b) Declining-balance method, using a rate not exceeding
twice the rate which would have been used had the annual
allowance been computed under the method described In
Subsection (F)(1);

J9JC9B0M

188

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(c) The sum-of-the-years-digit method; and
(d) any other method which may be prescribed by the
Secretary of Finance upon recommendation of the Commissioner.

(3) Agreement as to Useful Life on Which Depreciation Rate
is Based. — Where under rules and regulations prescribed by the
Secretary of Finance upon recommendation of the Commissioner, the
taxpayer and the Commissioner have entered into an agreement in
writing specifically dealing with the useful life and rate of depreciation
of any property, the rate so agreed upon shall be binding on both
the taxpayer and the national Government in the absence of facts
and circumstances not taken into consideration during the adoption
of such agreement. The responsibility of establishing the existence
of such facts and circumstances shall rest with the party initiating
the modification. Any change in the agreed rate and useful life of
the depreciable property as specified in the agreement shall not be
effective for taxable years prior to the taxable year in which notice
in writing by certified mail or registered mail is served by the party
initiating such change to the other party to the agreement:
Provided, however, That where the taxpayer has adopted such
useful life and depreciation rate for any depreciable and claimed the
depreciation expenses as deduction from his gross income, without
any written objection on the part of the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representatives, the aforesaid useful life and depreciation
rate so adopted by the taxpayer for the aforesaid depreciable asset
shall be considered binding for purposes of this Subsection.

(4) Depreciation of Properties Used in Petroleum Operations.
— An allowance for depreciation in respect of all properties directly
related to production of petroleum initially placed in service in a
taxable year shall be allowed under the straight-line or decliningbalance method of depreciation at the option of the service contractor.
However, if the service contractor initially elects the declining-balance
method, it may at any subsequent date, shift to the straight-line
method.
The useful life of properties used In or related to production of
petroleum shall be ten (10) years of such shorter life as may be
permitted by the Commissioner.
Properties not used directly in the production of petroleum shall
be depreciated under the straight-line method on the basis of an
estimated useful life of five (5) years.
(5) Depreciation of Properties Used in Mining Operations. — An
allowance for depreciation in respect of all properties used in mining
operations other than petroleum operations, shall be computed as
follows:
(a) At the normal rate of depreciation if the expected life is
ten (10) years or less; or

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

189

(b) Depreciated over any number of years between five
(5) years and the expected life if the latter is more than ten
(10) years, and the depreciation thereon allowed as deduction
from taxable income: Provided, That the contractor notifies the
Commissioner at the beginning of the depreciation period which
depreciation rate allowed by this Section will be used.
(6) Depreciation Deductible by Nonresident Aliens Engaged
in Trade or Business or Resident Foreign Corporations. —
In the case of a nonresident alien individual engaged in trade or
business or resident foreign corporation, a reasonable allowance for
the deterioration of property arising out of its use or employment or
its non-use in the business trade or profession shall be permitted only
when such property is located in the Philippines.

Depreciation is the gradual diminution in the useful value of
tangible property resulting from wear and tear and normal
obsolescence.
A reasonable allowance for depreciation is deductible.

Some methods to determine reasonable allowance are seen in
the codal.
O

If the taxpayer and the CIR come to an agreement of the
useful life on which depreciation will be based, this agreement
will be considered binding.

Depreciation is allowed on tangible property and intangible
property.
A company has the right to claim depreciation, but the law
does not allow depreciation beyond its acquisition cost. (Basilan
Estates, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-22492, Septembers, 1967)

For vehicles, only one vehicle for land transport is allowed for
the use of an official or employee, the value of which should
not exceed P2,400,000. No deduction shall be allowed unless the
taxpayer substantiates the purchase with sufficient evidence.
(R.R. 12-2012)
O

No depreciation shall be allowed for yachts, helicopters,
airplanes and/or aircrafts, and land vehicles which exceed the
threshold amount, UNLESS the taxpayer's line of business
is transport operations or lease of transportation equipment
and the vehicles purchased are use in said operations. (R.R.
12-2012)

Amortization of intangibles is the periodic process of allocating
cost of an intangible (goodwill, right of lease, patent, trademark,
zombie rights) and is deductible.

J9JC9B0M

1

190

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Certain cases of depreciation
Properties used directly in production
of petroleum

10 years (straight-line/declining
method)

Properties used indirectly in production
of petroleum

5 years (straight-line)

Properties used in mining operations

If expected life is 10 years or
less, normal rate of depreciation
If expected life is more than 10
years, notify the CIR

For nonresident aliens engaged in
trade, or business here, or resident
foreign corporations

A reasonable rate is allowed
only on properties located in the
Philippines

Depletion

Sec. 34. (G) Depletion of OH and Gas Wells and Mines. —
(1) In General. — In the case of oil and gas wells or mines, a
reasonable allowance for depletion or amortization computed in
accordance with the cost-depletion method shall be granted under
rules and regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of finance,
upon recommendation of the Commissioner: Provided, That when
the allowance for depletion shall equal the capital invested no further
allowance shall be granted: Provided, further, That after production in
commercial quantities has commenced, certain intangible exploration
and development drilling costs: (a) shall be deductible in the year
incurred if such expenditures are incurred for non-producing wells
and/or mines, or (b) shall be deductible in full in the year paid or
incurred or at the election of the taxpayer, may be capitalized and
amortized if such expenditures incurred are for producing wells and/
or mines in the same contract area.

"Intangible costs in petroleum operations" refers to any cost incurred
in petroleum operations which in itself has no salvage value and which
is incidental to and necessary for the drilling of wells and preparation
of wells for the production of petroleum: Provided, That said costs
shall not pertain to the acquisition or improvement of property of
a character subject to the allowance for depreciation except that
the allowances for depreciation on such property shall be deductible
under this Subsection.
Any intangible exploration, drilling and development expenses allowed
as a deduction in computing taxable income during the year shall not
be taken into consideration in computing the adjusted cost basis for
the purpose of computing allowable cost depletion.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

191

(2) Election to Deduct Exploration and Development Expenditures. — In computing taxable income from mining operations,
the taxpayer may at his option, deduct exploration and development
expenditures accumulated as cost or adjusted basis for cost depletion
as of date of prospecting, as well as exploration and development
expenditures paid or incurred during the taxable year: Provided, That
the amount deductible for exploration and development expenditures
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the net income from
mining operations computed without the benefit of any tax incentives
under existing laws. The actual exploration and development
expenditures minus twenty-five percent (25%) of the net income
from mining shall be carried forward to the succeeding years until
fully deducted.
The election by the taxpayer to deduct the exploration and development
expenditures is irrevocable and shall be binding in succeeding taxable
years.

"Net income from mining operations," as used in this Subsection,
shall mean gross income from operations less "allowable deductions"
which are necessary or related to mining operations. "Allowable
deductions" shall include mining, milling and marketing expenses,
and depreciation of properties directly used in the mining operations.
This paragraph shall not apply to expenditures for the acquisition
or improvement of property of a character which is subject to the
allowance for depreciation.
In no case shall this paragraph apply with respect to amounts paid or
incurred for the exploration and development of oil and gas.

The term "exploration expenditures" means expenditures paid or
Incurred for the purpose of ascertaining the existence, location, extent
or quality of any deposit of ore or other mineral, and paid or incurred
before the beginning of the development stage of the mine or deposit.
The term "development expenditures" means expenditures paid or
incurred during the development stage of the mine or other natural
deposits. The development stage of a mine or other natural deposit
shall begin at the time when deposits of ore or other minerals are
shown to exist in sufficient commercial quantity and quality and shall
end upon commencement of actual commercial extraction.

(3) Depletion of Oil and Gas Wells and Mines Deductible by a
Nonresident Alien individual or Foreign Corporation. — In the
case of a nonresident alien individual engaged in trade or business
in the Philippines or a resident foreign corporation, allowance for
depletion of oil and gas wells or mines under paragraph (1) of this
Subsection shall be authorized only in respect to oil and gas wells or
mines located within the Philippines.
•

Oil and gas wells or mines are allowed a reasonable allowance
for depletion or amortization computed using the cost-depletion

method.

J9JC9B0M

1

192

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
When the allowance for depletion equals the capital invested, no
further allowance shall be granted.

After production in commercial quantities has started, certain
intangible exploration and drilling costs will be deducted in the
year incurred if such were incurred for non-producing wells or
mines, or these may be capitalized and amortized if such were
incurred for producing wells or mines in same contract area.
If it was a nonresident alien or a resident foreign corporation,
the allowance for depletion is limited to oil wells and mines in the
Philippines.
The formula for rate of depletion is (cost of mine property)/
(estimated ore deposit) (Consolidated Mines, Inc. v. CTA, G.R.
No. L-18843, August 29, 1974)

Buzzword: cost of a WASTING ASSET
Charitable and Other Contributions

(H) Charitable and Other Contributions. —
(I) In General. — Contributions or gifts actually paid or made
within the taxable year to, or for the use of the Government of the
Philippines or any of its agencies or any political subdivision thereof
exclusively for public purposes, or to accredited domestic corporation
or associations organized and operated exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, youth and sports development, cultural or
educational purposes or for the rehabilitation of veterans, or to
social welfare institutions, or to non-government organizations, in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary
of finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner, no part of the
net income of which inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
individual in an amount not in excess often percent (10%) in the case
of an individual, and five percent (5%) in the case of a corporation,
of the taxpayer's taxable income derived from trade, business or
profession as computed without the benefit of this and the following
subparagraphs.

(2) Contributions Deductible in Full. — Notwithstanding the
provisions of the preceding subparagraph, donations to the following
institutions or entities shall be deductible in full;
(a) Donations to the Government. — Donations to the Government
of the Philippines or to any of its agencies or political subdivisions,
including fully-owned government corporations, exclusively to finance,
to provide for, or to be used in undertaking priority activities in
education, health, youth and sports development, human settlements,
science and culture, and in economic development according to
a National Priority Plan determined by the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), in consultation with appropriate

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

193

government agencies, including its regional development councils and
private philanthrophic persons and institutions: Provided, That any
donation which is made to the Government or to any of its agencies
or political subdivisions not in accordance with the said annual priority
plan shall be subject to the limitations prescribed in paragraph (1) of
this Subsection;

(b) Donations to Certain Foreign Institutions or International
Organizations. — Donations to foreign institutions or international
organizations which are fully deductible in pursuance of or in
compliance with agreements, treaties, or commitments entered into
by the Government of the Philippines and the foreign institutions or
international organizations or in pursuance of special laws;
(c) Donations to Accredited Nongovernment Organizations. — The
term "nongovernment organization" means a non profit domestic
corporation:
(1) Organized and operated exclusively for scientific,
research, educational, character-building and youth and sports
development, health, social welfare, cultural or charitable
purposes, or a combination thereof, no part of the net income
of which inures to the benefit of any private individual;
(2) Which, not later than the 15th day of the third month
after the close of the accredited nongovernment organizations
taxable year in which contributions are received, makes utilization
directly for the active conduct of the activities constituting the
purpose or function for which it is organized and operated, unless
an extended period is granted by the Secretary of Finance in
accordance with the rules and regulations to be promulgated,
upon recommendation of the Commissioner;
(3) The level of administrative expense of which shall, on
an annual basis, conform with the rules and regulations to be
prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner, but in no case to exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the total expenses; and

(4) The assets of which, in the even of dissolution, would be
distributed to another nonprofit domestic corporation organized
for similar purpose or purposes, or to the state for public purpose,
or would be distributed by a court to another organization to
be used In such manner as in the judgment of said court shall
best accomplish the general purpose for which the dissolved
organization was organized.
Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the
Secretary of Finance, the term "utilization" means:

(I) Any amount in cash or in kind (including administrative
expenses) paid or utilized to accomplish one or more purposes for
which the accredited nongovernment organization was created or
organized.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

194

(ii) Any amount paid to acquire an asset used (or held for
use) directly in carrying out one or more purposes for which
the accredited nongovernment organization was created or
organized.
An amount set aside for a specific project which comes within one or
more purposes of the accredited nongovernment organization may
be treated as a utilization, but only if at the time such amount is set
aside, the accredited nongovernment organization has established to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the amount will be paid
for the specific project within a period to be prescribed in rules and
regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, but not to exceed five (5)
years, and the project is one which can be better accomplished by
setting aside such amount than by immediate payment of funds.
(3) Valuation. — The amount of any charitable contribution of
property other than money shall be based on the acquisition cost of
said property.
(4) Proof of Deductions. — Contributions or gifts shall be allowable
as deductions only if verified under the rules and regulations
prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner.

Donations to the following are partially deductible:
1.

To the government, exclusively for public purposes
•

Contributions to a government entity is deductible
when used exclusively for public purposes. Hence, the
contributions to the Christmas funds of the various
city police were held not to be deductible because the
Christmas funds were not spent for public purposes but
as Christmas gifts to the families of the members of the
different police. (Roxas v. CTA, G.R. No. L-25O43, April
26, 1968)

2.

To accredited domestic corporations or associations which are
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable,
scientific, youth and sports development, cultural or
educational purposes, or for the rehabilitation of veterans, no
part of the net income of which inures to the benefit of any
private stockholder or individual

3.

To social welfare institutions

4.

To non-accredited NGOs
o

The amount that can be deducted should not exceed:

10% (individuals), or

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

■

195

5% (corporations)
•

of the taxpayer's taxable income derived from
trade, business or profession before the deduction
for contributions and donations.

So, look at two things: 1. your charitable contributions; and 2.
10% or 5% (as the case may be) of your taxable income, and
then see what is lower. That amount is what you're allowed to
deduct.
Donations to the following are fully deductible:

1.

To the government, exclusively to finance activities in
education, youth, health, sports development, human
settlements, science and culture, and in economic
development according to the NEDA Plan (in other words,
government priority activities)

2.

To certain foreign institutions or international organizations
(treaty-based, etc.)

3.

To accredited NGOs

4.

Via special laws

NGOs are non-profit domestic corporations organized and operated
exclusively for scientific research, educational, character-building
and youth and sports development, etc., where no part of the
net income inures to the benefit of any private individual or
stockholder.
o

Their level of admin expenses cannot exceed 30% of the total
expenses, and they must utilize contributions not later than
15th day of the 3rd month after the close of the taxable year
when the donations were received.

O

It is the Philippine Council for NGO Certification which
accredits NGOs.

Note: In order to be I) exempt from donor's tax, and ii) to claim
full deduction of the donation given to qualified donee institutions
duly accredited by the PCNC, the donor engaged in business shall
give a notice of donation on every donation worth at least P50,000
to the Revenue District Office (RDO) which has jurisdiction over
his place of business within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
qualified donee institution's duly issued Certificate of Donation,
which shall be attached to the said Notice of Donation, stating
that not more than thirty percent (30%) of the said donation/
gifts for the taxable year shall be used by such accredited nonstock, non-profit corporation/NGO institution (qualified-donee
institution) for administration purposes. (R.R. 12-2018)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

196

Special laws

•

Gifts and donations to the University of the Philippines shall be
exempt from donor's tax and the same shall be allowable as a
deduction up to 150% of the value of the donation. (R.A. 9500)

•

Contributions to the National Book Trust Fund shall likewise be
exempt from donor's tax and the same shall be allowable as a
deduction up to 150% of the value of the donation. (R.A. 9521)

•

Donations to foster child agencies are allowed as deductions to
the extent of the amount donated. (R.A. 10165)
Dr. Taimtim is an alumnus of the College of Medicine of Universal
University (UU), a privately-owned center for learning which grants
yearly dividends to its stockholders.

UU has a famous chape! located within the campus where the old
folks used to say that anyone who wanted to pass the medical
board examinations should offer a dozen roses on all the Sundays of
October. This was what Dr. Taimtim did when he was still reviewing
for the board examinations. In his case, the folk saying proved to
be true because he is now a successful cardiologist. Wanting to give
back to the chapel and help defray the costs of its maintenance, Dr.
Taimtim donated P50,000.00 to the caretakers of the chapel which
was evidenced by an acknowledgment receipt.
In computing his net taxable Income, can Dr. Taimtim use his
donation to the chapel as an allowable deduction from his gross
income under the National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC)? (2014
Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, the good doctor may not use the donation as
a deduction. A charitable donation to a domestic corporation can be
used as a deduction from gross income if the domestic corporation is
organized and operated exclusively for educational purposes and no
part of its net income inures to the benefit of any private stockholder
or individual. In this case, the donee grants yearly dividends to its
stockholders. Hence, donations to it are not allowable deductions.
(Congratulations to him though for being a successful cardiologist!)

Years ago, Krisanto bought a parcel of land in Muntlnlupa for only
PhP65,000. He donated the land to his son, Kornelio, in 1980 when
the property had a fair market value of PhP75,000, and paid the
corresponding donor's tax.
Kornelio, in turn, sold the property in 2000 to Katrina for PhP 6.5
million and paid the capital gains tax, documentary stamp tax, local
transfer tax, and other fees and charges. Katrina, in turn, donated
the land to Klaret Schoo! last August 30, 2017 to be used as the site
for additional classrooms. No donor's tax was paid, because Katrina
claimed that the donation was exempt from taxation. At the time of
the donation to Klaret School, the land had a fair market value of
PhP 65 million.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

197

How much in deduction from gross income may Katrina claim on
account of the said donation? (2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Katrina may claim the value of the donation
but only up to 10% of her taxable income. Under the Tax Code,
donations to accredited domestic corporations organized and
operated exclusively for educational purposes can be deducted
from gross income, but the deduction should not exceed 10% of an
individual's taxable income before the deduction.

Research and Development (R&D)
Sec. 34. (I) Research and Development. —
(1) In General. — a taxpayer may treat research or development
expenditures which are paid or incurred by him during the taxable
year in connection with his trade, business or profession as ordinary
and necessary expenses which are not chargeable to capital account.
The expenditures so treated shall be allowed as deduction during the
taxable year when paid or incurred.

(2) Amortization of Certain Research and Development
Expenditures. — At the election of the taxpayer and in accordance
with the rules and regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of
Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner, the following
research and development expenditures may be treated as deferred
expenses:

(a) Paid or incurred by the taxpayer in connection with his trade,
business or profession;
(b) Not treated as expenses under paragraph (1) hereof; and

(c) Chargeable to capital account but not chargeable to property of a
character which is subject to depreciation or depletion.
In computing taxable Income, such deferred expenses shall be
allowed as deduction ratably distributed over a period of not less
than sixty (60) months as may be elected by the taxpayer (beginning
with the month in which the taxpayer first realizes benefits from such
expenditures).

The election provided by paragraph (2) hereof may be made for any
taxable year beginning after the effectivity of this Code, but only if
made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return
for such taxable year. The method so elected, and the period selected
by the taxpayer, shall be adhered to in computing taxable income for
the taxable year for which the election is made and for all subsequent
taxable years unless with the approval of the Commissioner, a change
to a different method is authorized with respect to a part or all of such
expenditures. The election shall not apply to any expenditure paid or
incurred during any taxable year for which the taxpayer makes the
election.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

198

(3) Limitations on Deduction. — This Subsection shall not apply
to:
(a) Any expenditure for the acquisition or improvement of land, or for
the improvement of property to be used in connection with research
and development of a character which is subject to depreciation and
depletion; and

(b) Any expenditure paid or incurred for the purpose of ascertaining
the existence, location, extent, or quality of any deposit of ore or
other mineral, including oil or gas.
Expenses for R&D can be treated as ordinary and necessary
expenses provided that:
O

It is incurred during the taxable year; and

o

It is incurred in connection with his trade or business.

The taxpayer can either fully deduct it or amortize the deductions.
This is not applicable to the expenses:
O

for the acquisition or improvement of land or property to be
used in connection with R&D (these are subject to depreciation
or depletion)

O

incurred for the purpose of ascertaining the existence,
location, extent or quality of any deposit of minerals and oil.

Pension trusts
(J) Pension Trusts. — An employer establishing or maintaining a
pension trust to provide for the payment of reasonable pensions to
his employees shall be allowed as a deduction (in addition to the
contributions to such trust during the taxable year to cover the
pension liability accruing during the year, allowed as a deduction
under Subsection (A)(1) of this Section) a reasonable amount
transferred or paid into such trust during the taxable year In excess
of such contributions, but only if such amount (1) has not theretofore
been allowed as a deduction, and (2) is apportioned in equal parts
over a period often (10) consecutive years beginning with the year in
which the transfer or payment is made.

Two kinds of deduction for employer:
o

Under Subsection (A)(1): contributions to such trust to cover
the pension liability during the year

o

Under this Section: reasonable amount paid to the trust in
excess of such contributions

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

•

199

The employer who established the pension trust for his employee's
benefit can deduct it but:
O

The amount paid to the trust is reasonable

O

It must not have been previously allowed for deduction
(double deduction)

O

Must be apportioned in equal parts over a period of 10
consecutive years, beginning with the year in which the
payment is made.

When an employer makes a contribution to his employee's
Personal Equity and Retirement Account (PERA), the employer
can claim this amount as a deduction but only to the extent of
the employer's contribution that would complete the maximum
allowable PERA contribution of an employee. (R.R. 2011-17, with
R.A. 9505)
Additional requirements for deductibility
(K) Additional Requirements for Deductibility of Certain
Payments. — Any amount paid or payable which is otherwise
deductible from, or taken into account in computing gross income
or for which depreciation or amortization may be allowed under this
Section, shall be allowed as a deduction only if it is shown that the tax
required to be deducted and withheld therefrom has been paid to the
Bureau of Internal Revenue in accordance with this Sections 58 and
81 of this Code.

Taxpayers who claim deductions for expenses, the amounts
of which are subject to withholding tax, must prove that said
deductions were in fact subjected to proper withholding.
o

If no withholding was made, then the claimed deductions will
not be allowed.
•

o

For example, Dosan, a real estate lessor, can claim the
broker's fees he paid to Mr. Han as a deduction. However,
since broker's fees are subject to withholding tax, Dosan
must show that he previously withheld the taxes on the
broker's fees.

Even if no withholding was made, the deductions may still be
allowed in a few exceptional cases:

■

The payee reported the income and pays the tax due
thereon and the withholding agent pays the tax including
the interest and surcharges at the time of the audit/
investigation or reinvestigation/reconsideration,

J9JC9B0M

200

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
The recipient/payee failed to report the income on the
due date, but the withholding agent/taxpayer pays the
tax (with the interest and surcharges) at the time of the
audit/investigation or reinvestigation/reconsideration,
The withholding agent erroneously underwithheld the
tax but pays the difference between the correct amount
and the amount of tax withheld (with the interest and
surcharges) at the time of the audit/investigation or
reinvestigation/reconsideration. (R.R.. 06-2018)

Henry, a U.S. naturalized citizen, went home to the Philippines to
reacquire Philippine citizenship under RA 9225. His mother left him
a lot and building in Makati City and he wants to make use of it
in his trading business. Considering that he needs money for the
business, he wants to sell his lot and building and make use of the
consideration. However, the lot has sentimental value and he wants
to reacquire it in the future. A friend of Henry told him of the "saleleaseback transaction" commonly used in the U.S., which is also
used for tax reduction. Under said transaction, the lot owner sells his
property to a buyer on the condition that he leases it back from the
buyer. At the same time, the property owner is granted an option to
repurchase the lot on or before an agreed date. Henry approaches
you as a tax lawyer for advice.

Explain what tax benefits, If any, can be obtained by Henry and the
buyer from the sale-leaseback transaction? (2016 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Henry can use the rental expense on the lease
as a deduction. If he went a different route and got a mortgage to
get funds for his business, he will only be able to deduct interest
payments and depreciation for the property—which will most likely
be less than his rental expenses. Obtaining a mortgage on the
property would also give him less cash, as banks normally loan out
up to 70°/o of the value of the mortgaged property. With the saleleaseback, he gets more money for his business (the consideration
minus capita! gains tax which is just 6°/o) with the added bonus of
having a higher amount to deduct.

The buyer will have a higher return In leasing the property to Henry
than offering him a loan. Instead of interest payments on the loan
(which Is subject to restrictions on conscionability), he gets the full
amount of rent as income. He can also deduct depreciation expense
as he would now own the property.

Optional Standard Deduction
Sec. 34. (L) Optional Standard Deduction (OSD). — In lieu of the
deductions allowed under the preceding Subsections, an individual
subject to tax under Section 24, other than a nonresident alien, may
elect a standard deduction in an amount not exceeding forty percent

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

201

(40%) of his gross sales or gross receipts, as the case may be.
In the case of a corporation subject to tax under Sections 27(A)
and 28(A)(1), it may elect a standard deduction in an amount not
exceeding forty percent (40%) of its gross income as defined in
Section 32 of this Code. Unless the taxpayer signifies in his return
his intention to elect the optional standard deduction, he shall be
considered as having availed himself of the deductions allowed in
the preceding Subsections. Such election when made in the return
shall be irrevocable for the taxable year for which the return is made:
Provided, That an individual who is entitled to and claimed for the
optional standard deduction shall not be required to submit with his
tax return such financial statements otherwise required under this
Code: Provided, further, That a general professional partnership and
the partners comprising such partnership may avail of the optional
standard deduction only once, either by the general professional
partnership or the partners comprising the partnership: Provided,
finally, That except when the Commissioner otherwise permits,
the said individual shall keep such records pertaining to his gross
sales or gross receipts, or the said corporation shall keep such
records pertaining to his gross income as defined in Section 32 of
this Code during the taxable year, as may be required by the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner. (As amended by TRAIN)

Again, individuals, except nonresident aliens, can elect a standard
deduction not exceeding 40% of gross sales or gross receipts.

Corporations, except nonresident foreign corporations, can elect
a stand deduction not exceeding 40% of its gross income.
The OSD may be availed of by:
O
O

A citizen, whether resident or nonresident
Resident alien,

O

Domestic corporation,

O

Resident foreign corporation, (R.R. 16-08)

O

Partnerships, and

O

Taxable estate and trust.
■

•

Nonresident aliens and nonresident foreign corporations
cannot claim OSD.

The OSD allowed to individual taxpayer shall be a maximum of
40% of gross sales or gross receipts during the taxable year.
O

If one uses the accrual basis of accounting for his income and
deductions, the OSD shall be based on the gross sales during
the taxable year.

O

If one uses the cash basis, the OSD shall be based on his
gross receipts during the taxable year.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

202

O

The law is specific that for individual taxpayers the basis of
the 40% OSD shall be gross sales or gross receipts, not gross
income, for which reason the "cost of sales" and the "cost
of services" are not allowed to be deducted for purposes of
determining the basis of the OSD.

O

For other individual taxpayers allowed by law to report
their income and deductions under a different method
of accounting, the gross sales or gross receipts shall be
determined in accordance with the said acceptable method of
accounting. (R.R. 16-2008)

No need to substantiate with receipts.

The OSD allowed to corporate taxpayers shall be a maximum of
40% of the gross income during the taxable year.
Gross income shall mean the gross sales less sales returns,
discounts, and allowances and cost of goods sold.

O

•

O

Cost of goods sold includes the purchase price or cost
to produce the merchandise and all expenses directly
incurred in bringing them to their present location and
use.

In case of sellers of services, gross income means gross
receipts less sales returns, allowances, discounts and cost of
services. Cost of services include all direct costs and expenses
necessarily incurred to provide the services required by
customers and clients. (R.R. 16-2008)

The following are not allowed to use OSD and must use itemized
deductions:
O

O

For corporations, partnerships, and other non-individuals:
■

Those exempt under the Tax Code (like those in Section
30 and the exempt GOCCs in Section 27[C]) and other
special laws, with no other taxable income;

*

Those with income subject to special/preferential tax
rates; and

■

Those with income subject to income tax under Sections
27(A) and 28(A)(1) and also with income subject to
special/preferential tax rates.

For Individuals
Those exempt under the Tax Code and other special laws
with no other taxable income (like Barangay Micro Biz
Enterprises);

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

203

•

Those with income subject to special/preferential tax
rates; and

•

Those with income subject to income tax under Section
24 and also with income subject to special/preferential
tax rates (R.R. 2-2014)

Example:
Suppose Park Saeroyi Santos, an individual engaged in selling
soju and whose accounting method is under the accrual basis has
gross sales of P1M with a cost of sales amounting to P800k, the
computation of the OSD shall be determined as follows,

Gross Sales

Pl,000,000

Less: CoGS

Basis of the OSD
x OSD Rate (max)

OSD Amount

Pl,000,000
.40

P400,000

If Park opts to use the OSD in lieu of the itemized deductions
allowed under Section 34 of the Tax Code, his net taxable income
shall be as follows:
Gross Sales

Pl,000,000

Less: CoGS

Gross Sales/Gross Income

i

Pl,000,000

Less: OSD (max)

400,000

Taxable Income

P600,000

In 2012, Dr. K decided to return to his hometown to start his own
practice. At the end of 2012, Dr. K found that he earned gross
professional Income In the amount of Pl,000,000.00; while he
Incurred expenses amounting to P560,000.00 constituting mostly of
his office space rent, utilities, and miscellaneous expenses related to
his medical practice. However, to Dr. K's dismay, only P320,000.00
of his expenses were duly covered by receipts. What are the options
available for Dr. K so he could maximize the deductions from his
gross income? (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Dr. K can just opt to use the optional standard
deduction of 40%. The Tax Code allows Individual taxpayers to
deduct up to 40% of their gross sales or gross receipts. He will be
allowed to deduct P400,000.00 from his gross receipts, which Is
more than his substantiated and documented expenses

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

204

Special Rule on GPPs and the choice of deductions (itemized or OSD)
•

A general professional partnership (like a law firm) and the
partners comprising such partnership may only use OSD once,
either by the GPP itself or the partners comprising the partnership.

•

So, if the GPP avails of OSD, then the partners may not. In fact, the
partners cannot claim further deductions from their distributive
share as the BIR considers the share already net of costs and
expenses, regardless if the GPP chooses itemized deductions or
OSD. (R.R. 8-2018)

Imposition of Ceilings by the Secretary of Finance

Notwithstanding the provision of the preceding Subsections, the
Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner,
after a public hearing shall have been held for this purpose, may
prescribe by rules and regulations, limitations or ceilings for
any of the itemized deductions under Subsections (A) to (J) of
this Section: Provided, That for purposes of determining such
ceilings or limitations, the Secretary of Finance shall consider the
following factors: (1) adequacy of the prescribed limits on the
actual expenditure requirements of each particular industry; and
(2) effects of inflation on expenditure levels: Provided, further,
That no ceilings shall further be imposed on items of expense
already subject to ceilings under present law.

The Secretary of Finance can impose ceilings on the deductions
after a public hearing
o

The ceiling won't apply to OSD since it is under (L).

Non-deductibte expenses

Sec. 36. Items Not Deductible. —

(A) Genera! Rule. — In computing net income, no deduction shall In
any case be allowed in respect to —
(1) Personal, living or family expenses;

(2) Any amount paid out for new buildings or for permanent
improvements, or betterments made to increase the value of any
property or estate;

This Subsection shall not apply to intangible drilling and development
costs incurred in petroleum operations which are deductible under
Subsection (G)(1) of Section 34 of this Code.
(3) Any amount expended In restoring property or in making good
the exhaustion thereof for which an allowance is or has been made; or

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

205

(4) Premiums paid on any life insurance policy covering the life of
any officer or employee, or of any person financially interested in any
trade or business carried on by the taxpayer, individual or corporate,
when the taxpayer is directly or indirectly a beneficiary under such
policy.
(B) Losses from Sales or Exchanges of Property. — In computing
net income, no deductions shall in any case be allowed in respect of
losses from sales or exchanges of property directly or indirectly —

(1) Between members of a family. For purposes of this paragraph,
the family of an individual shall include only his brothers and sisters
(whether by the whole or half-blood), spouse, ancestors, and lineal
descendants; or
(2) Except in the case of distributions in liquidation, between an
individual and corporation more than fifty percent (50%) in value of
the outstanding stock of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by or
for such individual; or

(3) Except in the case of distributions in liquidation, between
two corporations more than fifty percent (50%) in value of the
outstanding stock of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by or for
the same individual if either one of such corporations, with respect
to the taxable year of the corporation preceding the date of the sale
of exchange was under the law applicable to such taxable year, a
personal holding company or a foreign personal holding company;

(4) Between the grantor and a fiduciary of any trust; or
(5) Between the fiduciary of and the fiduciary of a trust and the
fiduciary of another trust if the same person is a grantor with respect
to each trust; or

(6) Between a fiduciary of a trust and beneficiary of such trust.
The following are not deductible:

1.

Personal, living or family expenses

2.

Any amount paid for new buildings or for permanent
improvements made to increase the value of any property or
estate

3.

Any amount spent in restoring property or in making good
the exhaustion thereof for which an allowance has been made

4.

Premiums paid on any life Insurance policy covering the life of
any officer, or employee if the taxpayer is directly or indirectly
a beneficiary under the policy

No deductions shall be allowed for:

1.

Losses from sales or exchanges of property (Section 122,
R.R. 2-1940); or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

206

2.

Interest expense; or

3.

Bad debts
O

Where the transaction (either of 1, 2 or 3) is between
related taxpayers.

The following personal expenses are not deductible either:

1.

Insurance paid on a dwelling owned and occupied by the
taxpayer;

2.

Premiums paid for life insurance;

3.

When a professional man rents a property for residential
purposes but receives clients in connection with his work, no
part of the rent is allowable as business expense; (But if he
uses part of his house as an office, that portion is considered
business expense, thus deductible)

4.

Allowance given by daddy to kids;

5.

Alimony or allowance paid under a separation agreement.
(Section 119, R.R. 2-1940)

The following capital expenses are not deductible:
1.

New buildings, permanent improvements, or any amount
spent in restoring property;

2.

Cost of defending or perfecting title to property;

3.

Architect's services;

4.

Expense for administration of estate, court costs, attorney's
fees and executor's commissions;

5.

Amount assessed and paid under an agreement between
bondholders and shareholders of a corporation, to be used
in the reorganization of the corporation. (Section 120, R.R.
2-1940)

Premiums for life insurance of employees or of any person
financially interested in the business of the taxpayer when the
taxpayer is directly or indirectly a beneficiary under such policy
are not deductible. (Section 121, R.R. 2-1940)
L.

Capital Gains and Losses (Sale or Exchange of Property)

Capital gains and losses from the sale or exchange of property
also affect the taxable income of the taxpayer. Unlike the normal
rules on recognizing income and deductions, the sale or exchange
of capital assets has special rules (/.e., holding period, losses only to
the extent of gains, net capital loss carry-over) which will determine

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

207

how much the income or deductions can be claimed by the taxpayer.
It is important to know that capital gains and losses from the sale or
exchange of property enter the taxpayer's taxable income.
Note that these rules on capital gains and losses do not apply
to the sale or exchange of: i) shares of stock not traded in the stock
market, and ii) real property held as capital assets; the sale or
exchange of either is subject to final tax.
Capital gains and losses
•

Net capital gain is the excess of the gains from such sales or
exchanges of capital assets over the losses from such sales or
exchanges.
O

Net capital loss is the opposite.

Net capital gain shall be reported in the taxpayer's income tax
return and shall be subject to the graduated income tax rates in
addition to the net income from other sources.

o

EXCEPT:

Capital gains from the sale of real property held as capital
assets (subject to final tax);
Capital gains from sale of shares of stock that are not
traded at the stock exchange (subject to final tax); and

Percentage tax on the sale or exchange of shares of stock
that are listed and traded at the stock exchange (based
on gross selling price).
Sec. 39. Capital Gains and Losses. —
(A) Definitions. — As used in this Title —
(1) Capita! Assets. — The term "capital assets" means property
held by the taxpayer (whether or not connected with his trade or
business), but does not include stock in trade of the taxpayer or
other property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the taxable year,
or property held by the taxpayer primarily for sale to customers in
the ordinary course of his trade or business, or property used in the
trade or business, of a character which is subject to the allowance for
depreciation provided in Subsection (F) of Section 34; or real property
used in trade or business of the taxpayer.

(B) Percentage Taken Into Account. — In the case of a taxpayer,
other than a corporation, only the following percentages of the gain
or loss recognized upon the sale or exchange of a capital asset shall
be taken into account in computing net capital gain, net capital loss,
and net income:

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

208

(1) One hundred percent (100%) if the capital asset has been held
for not more than twelve (12) months; and
(2) Fifty percent (50%) if the capital asset has been held for more
than twelve (12) months;
(C) Limitation on Capita! Losses. — Losses from sales or
exchanges of capital assets shall be allowed only to the extent of
the gains from such sales or exchanges. If a bank or trust company
incorporated under the laws of the Philippines, a substantial part of
whose business is the receipt of deposits, sells any bond, debenture,
note, or certificate or other evidence of indebtedness issued by
any corporation (including one issued by a government or political
subdivision thereof), with interest coupons or in registered form, any
loss resulting from such sale shall not be subject to the foregoing
limitation and shall not be included in determining the applicability of
such limitation to other losses.

(D) Net Capita! Loss Carry-over. — If any taxpayer, other than a
corporation, sustains in any taxable year a net capital loss, such loss
(in an amount not in excess of the net income for such year) shall
be treated in the succeeding taxable year as a loss from the sale
or exchange of a capital asset held for not more than twelve (12)
months.
(E) Retirement of Bonds, Etc. — For purposes of this Title, amounts
received by the holder upon the retirement of bonds, debentures,
notes or certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued by
any corporation (including those issued by a government or political
subdivision thereof) with interest coupons or in registered form, shall
be considered as amounts received in exchange therefor.

(F) Gains or Losses From Short Sales, Etc. — For purposes of this
Title (1) Gains or losses from short sales of property shall be considered
as gains or losses from sales or exchanges of capital assets; and

(2) Gains or losses attributable to the failure to exercise privileges or
options to buy or sell property shall be considered as capital gains or
losses.

•

What is a sale or exchange?

O

There is a sale or exchange of property when there is an
effective and actual transfer of ownership of the property
to another as would divest the transferors of the benefits
accruing from the ownership of the property for a valuable
consideration.

O

What is important is when
consummated, not perfected.
*

Thus, it includes:

the

sale

or

exchange

is

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

•

Forced sales

•

Distribution in complete liquidation

209

The following are not considered sales or exchanges:

O

•

The conveyance of a trustee to a beneficiary of trust
property is treated as a continuation and confirmation of
title, not an exchange or sale. (BIR Ruling 329-12)

•

Conveyance of the common areas of a condominium
from the developer to the condominium corporation
(since no consideration and conveyance is merely for the
management of the common areas)

Capita! Assets

•

It is important to know whether the asset sold or exchanged was
held as ordinary asset or capital asset because of the different
rules which apply to each.

•

So, what are capital assets? Well, we know what they AREN'T.
The codal enumerates assets which are not considered capital
assets.

•

The codal enumerates what ordinary assets are. All assets other
than ordinary assets are capital assets.
O

So what if it is considered an ordinary asset?

■

If it is an ordinary asset, then the rules on capital assets
(7.e., holding period, losses only to the extent of gains,
net capital loss carry-over) will not apply.

Capital assets are property held by the taxpayer (whether or not
connected with his trade or business) but does NOT include:

1.

Stock in trade of the taxpayer;

2.

Other property of a kind which would properly be included in
the inventory of the taxpayer If on hand at the close of the
year;

3.

Property held by the taxpayer primarily for sale to customers
in the ordinary course of his trade or business;

4.

Property used in trade or business of a character which is
subject to allowance for depreciation; and

5.

Real property used in trade or business.

Examples of properties classified as capital assets:
o

Personal property not used in trade or business

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

210

O

Movable properties in one's residence, vehicles, appliances,
furniture, jewelry, sculpture of a zombie, securities held by
one by way of investment

O

Real property not used in trade or business

O

Residential house and lot, idle land not used in business
operations

Property initially classified as capital asset may later become
an ordinary asset and vice versa. (Calasanz v. CIR, G.R. No.
L-26284, October9, 1986, wherein inherited land was developed
into a subdivision, changing it from capital to ordinary asset; and
Tuason v. Lingad, G.R. No. L-24248, July 31, 1974)

Shares of stock would be ordinary assets only to a dealer in
securities or a person engaged in the purchase and sale of, or
an active trader in, securities. (China Banking Corporation v. CA,
G.R. No. L-125508, July 19, 2000)
In the hands, however, of another who holds the shares of
stock by way of an investment, the shares to him would be
capital assets. When the shares held by such investor become
worthless, the loss is deemed to be a loss from the sale or
exchange of capital assets.

O

Let's have some guidelines in determining whether real property
is a capital or ordinary asset: (R.R. 7-2003)
For those engaged in real estate business, the following are
ordinary assets:

o

O

■

All real properties acquired by the real estate dealer;

■

All real properties acquired by the real estate developer,
whether developed or undeveloped;

■

All real properties held for sale or lease in the ordinary
course of business or which would be properly be included
in the inventory;

•

All real properties acquired for lease/rent;

-

All real properties acquired in the ordinary course of
business by a taxpayer habitually engaged in the sale of
real estate.

Can the nature of the property change from ordinary to
capital asset?

■

Changing from real estate business to a non-real estate
business: NO

•

Ceasing operations of the real estate business: NO

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

■

The properties acquired by the real estate business are
abandoned: NO

■

The properties acquired by the real estate business
become idle: NO

•

Real estate business transfers the property to an ordinary
person: YES

•

The nature of the property CAN change in the hands of
the buyer/transferee. Hence, if Pedro buys a lot from a
real estate dealer, the lot becomes a capital asset (from
ordinary) in the hands of Pedro.

•

In case of involuntary transfer (like expropriation or
foreclosure), the involuntary nature shall have NO effect
on the classification in the hands of the involuntary seller.

For those NOT engaged in the real estate business, real
property being used or have been used in the trade or
business are considered ordinary assets.

Can the nature of these change into capital assets?

■

•

O

211

YES, provided they show proof that the same have
not been used in business for more than two years
(prior to the taxable transaction).

For EXEMPT corporations, real property used in exempt
transactions shall not be considered for business purposes,
and thus are CAPITAL assets.

Rules on capital gains and losses
•

The rules on capital gains and losses are the following:

1.

First, determine if the asset is a capital asset or an ordinary
asset.
a.

2.

If it Is an ordinary asset, then the rules below don't apply.
Whatever gain or loss enters the taxpayer's Income,
without benefit of the rules.

Second, keep in mind that these rules do not apply to:
a.

Real property with a capital gain tax, and

b.

Shares of stock of a domestic corporation not traded in
the stock exchange with a capital gain tax,

I.

These two kinds of capital assets have their own rates.
(Remember the capital gains tax? The whole 6%,
5%/10% rates. Any capital gain subject to the capital
gains tax shall not be included in the computation of

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

212

the taxable income and income tax at the end of the
year because these are subject to final tax already.)
3.

Next, the transaction on the capital asset should be a sale or
exchange.

4.

In the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation (for
individuals only), the following percentages of the gain or
loss shall be taken into account in computing net capital gain,
net capital loss and net income (percentage into account):

o
5.

6.

a.

100% of the gain/loss, if the asset has been held for
not more than 12 months;

b.

50% of the gain/loss, if the asset has been held for
more than 12 months.

For corporations, capital gains and losses are always
considered at 100%.

Losses from sales or exchanges of capital assets shall be
allowed only to the extent of the gains from such sales or
exchanges (limitation on capital loss) (see example below),
o

If the taxpayer incurs net capital loss, such loss cannot be
deducted from his ordinary income because the loss can
be deducted only to the extent of capital gains.

o

Note that the limitation on capital loss does not apply to
a bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of
the Philippines, a substantial part of whose business is
the receipt of deposits, sells any bond, debenture, note,
or certificate or other evidence of indebtedness issued by
any corporation (including one issued by a government or
political subdivision thereof), with interest coupons or in
registered form.

If any taxpayer, other than a corporation, sustains in any
taxable year a net capital loss, such loss, in an amount not
in excess of the net income (taxable income) of such year,
shall be treated in the succeeding year as a loss from a sale
or exchange of a capital asset held for not more than twelve
months (meaning, 100% of the loss). This is what you call
the net capital loss carry over.
o

Corporations don't have net capital loss carry-over. (But
that's ok, because corporations don't have feelings.)

Example:
Sung Bo-ra Cay is in the business of graphic design. She had
ordinary income of P25,000, capital gains of P6,000 (from the sale
of her collection of vintage basketball cards, which she held for four

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

213

years), and capital losses of P4,000 (from the sale of her diamondencrusted rice cooker, which she held for two years).

Ordinary net income
Gains from sale of capital asset

P25,000
P6,000

But held for four years, so 50%

Loss from sale of capital asset

P3,000
P4,000

But held for two years, so 50%

P2,000

Net taxable gain

Pl.000
P26,000

Taxable Income

Same facts, but Sung Bo-ra Cay had capital gains of P3,000,
and capital losses of P10,000.

Ordinary net income
Gains from sale of capital asset

P25,000
P3,000

50% only!
Loss from sale of capital asset

Pl,500

P10,000

50% only!

Net capital loss

P5,000

(P3.500'i

Taxable income

P25,000

You cannot deduct the capital loss of P3,500. Because you
can only deduct to the extent of vour capital gains.
Note that for corporations, the following are not applicable:

O

Holding period (so it is always 100%); and

o

Net capital loss carry-over.

Ordinary income
Sec. 22. (Z) The term “ordinary Income" includes any gain from the
sale or exchange of property which is not a capital asset or property
described in Section 39(A)(1). Any gain from the sale or exchange of
property which is treated or considered, under other provisions of this
Title, as 'ordinary income' shall be treated as gain from the sale or
exchange of property which is not a capital asset as defined in Section
39(A)(1). The term 'ordinary loss' includes any loss from the sale or
exchange of property which is not a capital asset. Any loss from the
sale or exchange of property which is treated or considered, under
other provisions of this Title, as 'ordinary loss' shall be treated as loss
from the sale or exchange of property which is not a capital asset.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

214

Ordinary income is any gain from sale or exchange of property
which is not a capital asset.
Ordinary loss is the opposite.
Note: there is no limit for ordinary gains or losses (compare with
capital gains)

Is it better for real property to be considered capital or ordinary
asset?

Depends.

O

•

For example, the corporation you're counsel for sells a
piece of land for P100,000. Do you want to consider it as
capital or ordinary?

•

If it were considered a capital asset, you'd get taxed
6% of P100,000 (capital gains tax since real property
classified as capital asset is subject to final capital gains
tax); that's P6,000. The corporation goes home with
P94,000. (Hopefully, as counsel, you get something out
of it as well.)

■

If it were ordinary, it'll be included in the corporation's
gross income, which will be taxed 30% after all the
deductions have been accounted for. The question is,
do you have enough deductions (and proof) which will
enable you to get a better deal (/.e.z more money after
all the taxes are paid out)?

Real estate transactions

•

BIR Ruling 27-02 gives some steps to determine the tax in real
estate transactions
First, determine the character of property being sold,
o

If property is not used in business of seller, then It is a capital
asset and the gain of the seller is subject to 6% capital gains
tax based on gross selling price or fair market value.

O

If the property is used in the business of the seller, it is
treated as ordinary asset, so the withholding tax rates below
shall apply. These rates will depend on:
-

Whether the seller is exempt or taxable

-

Whether the seller is engaged in real estate business or
not

If the seller is engaged in real estate business, what was
the gross selling price?

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

215

Different Scenarios of Sale of Real Property (assumes that i. the
seller not exempt and ii. the real property is an ORDINARY asset)

Seller

Buyer

Tax Treatment

Corporation
engaged in real
estate business
(sells 6 parcels of
land within a year)

Corporation engaged
in real estate business

Creditable withholding
tax based on gross
selling price or fair
market value is
deducted by the buyer
(to be credited to the
seller)

If selling price is
P500,000 or less —
1.5%
If it's P500,000 to P2M
— 3%

If it is above P2M — 5%

Corporation
engaged in real
estate business
Corporation NOT
engaged in real
estate business

Same as above

Corporation engaged
in real estate business

If property considered
ordinary asset — 6%
creditable withholding
(R.R. 6-2001)
If property considered
capital asset — 6% final
tax

Corporation
engaged in real
estate business

Individual NOT
engaged in trade or
business

If on installment basis,
no withholding tax on
periodic installments, it
will be withheld on the
last payment
If on cash basis or
deferred payment,
buyer withholds the tax
on the first installment

Corporation
engaged in real
estate business

Individual engaged in
trade or business

If on installment, tax
withheld by the buyer
on EVERY installment

If it was on cash or
deferred payment,
buyer withholds the tax
on the first installment

J9JC9B0M

216

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
Installment plan: where the total payment in the year of sale
DOES NOT exceed 25% of the total selling price
Deferred payment plan: where the total payment in the year of
sale exceeds 25% of the total selling price

Remember the conditions for exemption from capital gains tax
from the sale or exchange of the principal residence (See Section
24[D][2], all the way near the start of this reviewer)

Mr. Pedro Aguirre, a resident citizen, is working fora targe real estate
development company in the country and in 2010, he was promoted
to Vice-President of the company. With more responsibilities comes
higher pay. In 2011, he decided to buy a new car worth P2 Million
and he traded-in his old car with a market value of P800,000 and
paid the difference of Pl.2 Million to the car company. The old car,
which was bought three (3) years ago by the father of Mr. Pedro
Aguirre at price of P700,000 was donated by him and registered in
the name of his son. The corresponding donor's tax thereon was duly
paid by the father.

a) How much is the cost basis of the old car to Mr. Aguirre? Explain
your answer.
b) What is the nature of the old car — capital asset or ordinary
asset? Explain your answer.
c) Is Mr. Aguirre liable to pay income tax on the gain from the sale
of his old car? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answers:
a) The cost basis of the old car is P700,000. The Tax Code states
that If the property was acquired by gift, the basis shall be the same
as if it would be in the hands of the donor or the last preceding
owner by whom it was not acquired by gift, except that if such basis
is greater than the fair market value of the property at the time of
the gift then, for the purpose of determining loss, the basis shall be
such fair market value. In this case, the cost was P700,000, which Is
lower than the FMV of P800,000; hence the cost basis of the old car
is P700,000.

b) The old car Is a capita! asset. A capita! asset Is property held by
the taxpayer (whether or not connected with his trade or business),
but does not Include stock in trade of the taxpayer or other property
of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the
taxpayer if on hand at the close of the taxable year, or property held
by the taxpayer primarily for sale to customers In the ordinary course
of his trade or business, or property used in the trade or business, of
a character which is subject to the allowance for depreciation; or real
property used in trade or business of the taxpayer. The car is neither
of the property enumerated as ordinary assets; hence, it is a capita!
asset.

i

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

217

c) Yes, he is liable to pay income tax from the gain of his old car.
The cost of the car was P700,000; but he was able to sell or transfer
it for P800,000. Hence, there were capital gains in the amount of
Pl00,000.

GHI, Inc. is a corporation authorized to engage in the business of
manufacturing ultra-high density microprocessor unit packages.
After its registration on July 5, 2005, GHI, Inc. constructed buildings
and purchased machineries and equipment. As of December 31,
2005, the total cost of the machineries and equipment amounted
to P250,000,000.00. However, GHI, Inc. failed to commence
operations. Its factory was temporarily closed effective September
15, 2010. On October 1, 2010, it sold its machineries and equipment
to JKL Integrated for P300,000,000.00. Thereafter, GHI, Inc. was
dissolved on November 30, 2010.
i

a) Is the sale of the machineries and equipment to JKL Integrated
subject to normal corporate income tax or capital gains tax? Explain.

■

b) Distinguish an ordinary asset from a capital asset. (2019 Bar
Exam)
Suggested answer:

a)

The sale of the machineries and equipment is subject to normal
corporate income tax because these are ordinary assets. The
Tax Code states that ordinary assets include property used in
trade or business of a character which is subject to allowance
for depreciation. The machineries and equipment are subject
to depreciation and were presumably used between 2005 and
2010. Hence, these are ordinary assets, and their sale is subject
to normal corporate income tax.

b)

Capital assets are property held by the taxpayer (whether or
not connected with his trade or business) but does NOT include
stock In trade of the taxpayer, other property of a kind which
would properly be included in the Inventory of the taxpayer if
on hand at the close of the year, property held by the taxpayer
primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course of his trade
or business, property used in trade or business of a character
which is subject to allowance for depreciation and real property
used in trade or business. The rest are ordinary assets. Capital
assets are subject to capital gains and losses. Ordinary assets
are subject to ordinary income.

i

M. Determination of Gain or Loss from Sale or Transfer of
Property

Section 40 is chopped up in three parts. Keep this in mind for a
better understanding of the provision.

1.

Section 40(A) tells us how to arrive at the gain (or loss).

J9JC9B0M

218

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

2.

Section 40(C)(l-2) tells us the general rule and the exceptions
(tax-free exchanges)

3.

Section 40(C)(5) gives us the substituted basis; i.e., the basis for
tax-free exchanges when the transferor later sells the stock he
got in the tax-free exchange.

Sec. 40. Determination of Amount and Recognition of Gain or
Loss. —
(A) Computation of Gain or Loss. — The gain from the sale or
other disposition of property shall be the excess of the amount
realized therefrom over the basis or adjusted basis for determining
gain, and the loss shall be the excess of the basis or adjusted basis
for determining loss over the amount realized. The amount realized
from the sale or other disposition of property shall be the sum of
money received plus the fair market value of the property (other than
money) received;
Gain is the excess amount realized over the basis for determining
gain

Loss is the opposite
The amount realized is the sum of money received plus the fair
market value of the property (other than money) received

What is the basis of determining gain or loss?
(B) Basis for Determining Gain or Loss from Sale or Disposition
of Property. — The basis of property shall be —
(1) The cost thereof In the case of property acquired on or after
March 1, 1913, if such property was acquired by purchase; or

(2) The fair market price or value as of the date of acquisition, if the
same was acquired by inheritance; or

(3) If the property was acquired by gift, the basis shall be the same
as if it would be In the hands of the donor or the last preceding owner
by whom it was not acquired by gift, except that if such basis is
greater than the fair market value of the property at the time of the
gift then, for the purpose of determining loss, the basis shall be such
fair market value; or
(4) If the property was acquired for less than an adequate
consideration in money or money's worth, the basis of such property
is the amount paid by the transferee for the property; or
(5) The basis as defined in paragraph (C)(5) of this Section, if the
property was acquired in a transaction where gain or loss is not
recognized under paragraph (C)(2) of this Section.

J9JC9B0M

219

INCOME TAX

Basis for Determining Gain or Loss from Sale or Disposition of
Property (R..R. 8-2001)
Mode of acquisition

Cost basis

1.

Acquired by purchase

The actual cost

2.

By inheritance

Fair market value

3.

By gift

The same as if it would be in the
hands of the donor or the last
preceding owner,

BUT if the basis is greater than the
FMV, then the basis shall be the FMV
(so, whatever's lower)

an
in

4.

Acquired for less than
adequate
consideration
money or its worth

5.

If acquisition cost is increased
by the amount of improvements
that materially added to the
value of the property or prolong
accumulated
its
less
life
depreciation

Adjusted basis of 1 to 4

6.

Acquired under a previous taxfree exchange

Substituted basis

Amount paid by the transferee for
the property

Example:

Jung-hwan the Torpe sold a car worth P100 to Friend Zone, Inc.
in exchange for Pl 10 worth of Friend Zone, Inc. stock, PIO cash,
and P20 property. How much is the gain for Jung-hwan the Torpe?
What about the loss for Friend Zone, Inc.?

Get the amount realized first:

P140 (cash + stock + property)

Deduct the basis:

P100 (value of car)

Gain:

P 40 (gain for Jung-hwan), loss
of P40 for Friend Zone, Inc.

How do you make the transaction a tax-free exchange? Check the
codal below.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

220

Tax-free Exchanges

(C) Exchange of Property. —
(1) General Rule. — Except as herein provided, upon the sale or
exchange or property, the entire amount of the gain or loss, as the
case may be, shall be recognized.
(2) Exception. — No gain or loss shall be recognized if in pursuance
of a plan of merger or consolidation —

(a) A corporation, which is a party to a merger or
consolidation, exchanges property solely for stock in a corporation,
which is a party to the merger or consolidation; or
(b) A shareholder exchanges stock in a corporation, which
is a party to the merger or consolidation, solely for the stock of
another corporation also a party to the merger or consolidation;
or

(c) A security holder of a corporation, which is a party to
the merger or consolidation, exchanges his securities in such
corporation, solely for stock or securities in such corporation, a
party to the merger or consolidation.
No gain or loss shall also be recognized if property is transferred to a
corporation by a person in exchange for stock or unit of participation in
such a corporation of which as a result of such exchange said person,
alone or together with others, not exceeding four (4) persons, gains
control of said corporation: Provided, That stocks issued for services
shall not be considered as issued in return for property.

General rule: in a sale or exchange of property, the entire amount
of gain or loss is recognized
o

EXCEPT (no gain or loss is realized):
•

In a merger/consolidation (m/c), where a corporation
exchanges property solely for stock in another corporation,
which is also a party to the m/c

■

In a m/c, where a shareholder exchanges stock In a
corporation for the stock of another corporation, also a
party to the m/c

•

In a m/c, where a security holder of a corporation
exchanges his securities in such corporation solely for
stock or securities in another corporation also a party to
the m/c
Where property is transferred to a corporation by a
person in exchange for stock in the corporation, and the
result of such exchange is that the person (and up to 4
other persons) gains control of the corporation, but the

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

221

stocks issued for services are not considered as issued in
return for property

Definitions
(6) Definitions. —

(a) The term "securities" means bonds and debentures but not
"notes" of whatever class or duration.

(b) The term "merger" or "consolidation'!,] when used in this Section,
shall be understood to mean: (i) the ordinary merger or consolidation,
or (ii) the acquisition by one corporation of all or substantially all the
properties of another corporation solely for stock: Provided, That for
a transaction to be regarded as a merger or consolidation within the
purview of this Section, it must be undertaken for a bona fide business
purpose and not solely for the purpose of escaping the burden of
taxation: Provided, further, That in determining whether a bona fide
business purpose exists, each and every step of the transaction shall
be considered and the whole transaction or series of transaction shall
be treated as a single unit: Provided, finally, That in determining
whether the property transferred constitutes a substantial portion of
the property of the transferor, the term 'property' shall be taken to
include the cash assets of the transferor.

(c) The term "control'!,] when used in this Section, shall mean
ownership of stocks in a corporation possessing at least fifty-one
percent (51%) of the total voting power of all classes of stocks entitled
to vote.
(d) The Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner, is hereby authorized to issue rules and regulations for
the purpose "substantially all" and for the proper implementation of
this Section.

Securities mean bonds and debentures, but not notes of whatever
class or duration.
Merger or consolidation

•

•

Merger or consolidation means:

o

The ordinary merger or consolidation; or

o

The acquisition by one corporation of all or almost all the
properties of another corporation solely for stock (de facto
merger)

"Transfer of substantially 'all' the assets" means the acquisition
by one corporation of at least 80% of the assets, including cash,
of another corporation, which has the element of permanence
and not merely momentary holding. (RMR 1-2002)

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

222

A corporate merger where the new corporation continued to
operate the business of the old corporation is not subject to
capital gains tax. The merger, however, must be undertaken for
a bona fide business purpose and not solely for the purpose of
escaping the burden of taxation. (CIR v. Rufino, G.R. No. L-33665,
February 27, 1987, where the merger was done to extend the life
of the corporation, this was legitimate)

How does a statutory merger work?
O

Jhan Snuh, Inc. acquires all the assets of Dany's Dragons,
Inc. Dany's Dragons, Inc. gets Jhan Snuh, Inc. shares in
exchange. Dany's Dragons, Inc. then dissolves and distributes
these shares to its stockholders.

Difference between a de facto merger v. a statutory merger
O

In a de facto merger, the transferor is not automatically
dissolved. Likewise, there is no automatic transfer to the
transferee of all the rights, privileges and liabilities of the
transferor. (Revenue Memorandum Ruling [RMR] 1-2002)

Difference between a de facto merger v. a transfer to a controlled
corporation
O

In a de facto merger, the transferor is a corporation; while in
the latter, the transferor may be an individual or a corporation.

O

In a de facto merger, there is no requirement that the
transferor gains control (7.e.z 51% of the total voting powers
of all classes of stocks of the Transferee entitled to vote).

O

What is essential in a de facto merger is that the transferee
acquires all or substantially all of the properties of the
transferor.

Transfer for control

•

"Control" means ownership of stocks in a corporation possessing
at least 51% of the total voting power of all classes of stocks
entitled to vote
Transfer of property for shares of stock: no gain or loss Is
recognized when a person transfers property (not services) to a
corporation in exchange for shares of stock (alone or with four
others), where such person gains control of the corporation (at
least 51% of the total voting power)
o

No gain or loss is recognized even when the transferor already
has control of the corporation at the time of the exchange.
(CIR v. FHinvest Development Corporation, G.R. No. 163653,
July 19, 2011)

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

223

The transfer of assets by one corporation to another must likewise
have a business purpose. (Gregory v. Helving, 293 U.S. 465,
January 7, 1935)
O

It must not be a mere device to evade taxes masquerading as
corporate reorganization.

Administrative requirements for tax-free exchanges

•

You have to submit the following to the BIR:
O

Sworn certificate on the basis of property to be transferred;

O

Certified true copies (CTC) of the Transfer Certificate of Title
and/or Condominium Certificates of Title;

O

CTC of the corresponding tax declaration of the real properties
to be transferred;

O

CTC of the certificates of stock evidencing shares of stock to
be transferred; and

O

CTC of the inventory of the property to be transferred (R.R.
18-2001)

Karlito, a Filipino businessman, is engaged in the business of
metal fabrication and repair of LPG cylinder tanks. He conducts
business under the name and style of "Karlito's Enterprises," a
single proprietorship. Started only five (5) years ago, the business
has grown so enormously that Karlito decided to incorporate it by
transferring all the assets of the business, particularly the inventory
of goods on hand, machineries and equipment, supplies, parts,
raw materials, office furniture and furnishings, delivery trucks and
other vehicles, buildings, and tools to the new corporation, Karlito's
Enterprises, Inc., In exchange for 100% of the capital stock of the
new corporation, the stock subscription to which shall be deemed
fully paid in the form of the assets transferred to the corporation by
Karlito.

As a result, Karlito's Enterprises, the sole proprietorship, ceased
to do business and applied for cancellation of its BIR Certificate of
Registration. The BIR, however, assessed Karlito VAT on account of
the cessation of business based on the current market price of the
assets transferred to Karlito's Enterprises, Inc.
Is the transfer subject to Income tax? (2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The transfer Is not subject to income tax. The Tax
Code states that no gain is recognized when property is transferred
to a corporation by a person in exchange for stock, the result of which
Is that said person, alone or together with others, not exceeding four
(4) persons, gains control of said corporation. This is exactly what
happened in this case. Karlito transferred all his assets in exchange
for all the shares in a corporation. It is a tax-free exchange.

J9JC9B0M

224

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

B transferred his ownership over a 1,000-square meter commercial
land and three-door apartment to ABC Corp., a family corporation
of which B is a stockholder. The transfer was in exchange of 10,000
shares of stock of ABC Corp. As a result, B acquired 51 % ownership
of ABC Corp., with all the shares of stock having the right to vote. B
paid no tax on the exchange, maintaining that it is a tax avoidance
scheme allowed under the law. The Bureau of Interna! Revenue, on
the other hand, insisted that B's alleged scheme amounted to tax
evasion.

Should B pay taxes on the exchange? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: B shouldn't pay taxes on the exchange. The Tax
Code states that no gain is recognized when property is transferred
to a corporation by a person in exchange for stock, the result of which
is that said person, alone or together with others, not exceeding four
(4) persons, gains control of said corporation. This is exactly what
happened in this case. B transferred all his assets in exchange for all
the shares in a corporation. It is a tax-free exchange.
Exchange Not Solely in Kind

(3) Exchange Not Solely in Kind. —
(a) If, in connection with an exchange described in the above
exceptions, an individual, a shareholder, a security holder or a
corporation receives not only stock or securities permitted to be
received without the recognition of gain or loss, but also money and/
or property, the gain, if any, but not the loss, shall be recognized
but in an amount not in excess of the sum of the money and fair
market value of such other property received: Provided, That as to
the shareholder, if the money and/or other property received has the
effect of a distribution of a taxable dividend, there shall be taxed as
dividend to the shareholder an amount of the gain recognized not
in excess of his proportionate share of the undistributed earnings
and profits of the corporation; the remainder, if any, of the gain
recognized shall be treated as a capital gain.
(b) If, In connection with the exchange described in the above
exceptions, the transferor corporation receives not only stock
permitted to be received without the recognition of gain or loss but
also money and/or other property, then (I) if the corporation receiving
such money and/or other property distributes it in pursuance of the
plan of merger or consolidation, no gain to the corporation shall be
recognized from the exchange, but (ii) if the corporation receiving
such other property and/or money does not distribute it in pursuance
of the plan of merger or consolidation, the gain, if any, but not the
loss to the corporation shall be recognized but in an amount not in
excess of the sum of such money and the fair market value of such
other property so received, which is not distributed.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

225

Explain an exchange not solely in kind in a merger or consolidation.
O

It involves an exchange of property NOT solely for stocks.

O

In other words, the absorbed corporation receives stocks
PLUS other property (cash or non-cash) in exchange for its
property.

O

In a merger, Seo Dan, Inc. transfers all its property costing
P15M in favor of Jo Cheol Philippines, Corp, (absorbing) in
exchange for the latter's shares of stock worth P15M plus
P1M cash.

•

The P1M gain resulting from the merger is taxable.
•

■

But if the plan of merger or consolidation expressly
provides that the amount shall be distributed to the
shareholders of Seo Dan, Inc., the gain shall not be
subject to income tax.

What if instead of P15M stock plus P1M cash, Seo Dan,
Inc. is given P8M stock plus P7M cash?
•

No gain, since none was realized anyway.

Assumption of Liability in Tax-Free Exchanges
(4) Assumption of Liability. —

(a) If the taxpayer, in connection with the exchanges described in
the foregoing exceptions, receives stock or securities which would be
permitted to be received without the recognition of the gain if it were
the sole consideration, and as part of the consideration, another party
to the exchange assumes a liability of the taxpayer, or acquires from
the taxpayer property, subject to a liability, then such assumption or
acquisition shall not be treated as money and/or other property, and
shall not prevent the exchange from being within the exceptions.

(b) If the amount of the liabilities assumed plus the amount of the
liabilities to which the property is subject exceed the total of the
adjusted basis of the property transferred pursuant to such exchange,
then such excess shall be considered as a gain from the sale or
exchange of a capital asset or of property which is not a capital asset,
as the case may be.
If the transferor receives stock or securities in a transfer of
property, and as part of the consideration, the other party also
assumes the liability of the transferor or that the property he
assumes has a liability, then the property/liability acquired will
NOT be treated as money or other property, so that it still falls
under the exception of the Section 40(C) and no gain or loss is
recognized.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

226

But if the amount of the liability assumed exceeds the total of
the adjusted basis of the property transferred, then the excess
is considered a gain from sale of either a capital asset or an
ordinary asset, as the case may be.
Example:
Tomas Junjun Brady transfers property to Tampa Bay Piratas,
Inc. with an adjusted basis of P15M in exchange for Tampa Bay
Piratas, Inc.'s stock plus Tampa Bay Piratas, Inc. assumes Tomas
Junjun's liability of P10M. Tomas Junjun Brady gets control of
Tampa Bay Piratas, Inc. The exchange is considered tax-free.

But if the liability of Tomas Junjun is P20M, then this will exceed
the adjusted basis of P15M. So the P5M will be considered a gain
and it will be taxable. (Huhu, why'd you leave us, Tommy)
Cost or basis in tax-free exchanges

(5) Basis —

(a) The basis of the stock or securities received by the transferor
upon the exchange specified in the above exception shall be the same
as the basis of the property, stock or securities exchanged, decreased
by (1) the money received, and (2) the fair market value of the
other property received, and increased by (a) the amount treated as
dividend of the shareholder and (b) the amount of any gain that was
recognized on the exchange: Provided, That the property received
as “boot" shall have as basis its fair market value: Provided, further,
That if as part of the consideration to the transferor, the transferee
of property assumes a liability of the transferor or acquires from the
latter property subject to a liability, such assumption or acquisition
(in the amount of the liability) shall, for purposes of this paragraph,
be treated as money received by the transferor on the exchange:
Provided, finally, That if the transferor receives several kinds of stock
or securities, the Commissioner is hereby authorized to allocate the
basis among the several classes of stocks or securities.
(b) The basis of the property transferred in the hands of the transferee
shall be the same as it would be in the hands of the transferor
increased by the amount of the gain recognized to the transferor on
the transfer.

Remember that tax-free exchanges merely defers the recognition
of gain or loss.

o

When the transferor later on sells or exchanges the stock he
got tax-free, the basis for determining the gain or loss is the
substituted basis. This will also be the cost basis when the
transferee later on sells the property acquired.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

227

•

The term "boot" refers to the money received and other property
received in excess of the stock or securities received by the
transferor on a tax-free exchange. (R.R. 18-2001)

•

How to compute the substituted basis:

1.

Take the original basis of the property

2.

Subtract any money or the FMV of any property that may
have been received aside from the shares of stock

3.

Add the amount treated as dividend by the shareholder and
any gain that was recognized on the exchange (if any)

Example:

Jungbong Jonas transfers property to Soju For Days, Inc. for
shares of stock. The property's sale value was P5M and Jungbong
Jonas received an extra P1M from stock of inventory.
If he later sells his shares of stock to Madonna Jinju, the
substituted basis will be computed as (P5M - P1M) = P4M.
If he sells the shares to Madonna Jinju for P6M, his gain will be
(P6M - P4M) = P2M and it will be subject to capital gains tax.

N.

Fringe Benefits Tax
Sec. 33. Special Treatment of Fringe Benefit. —

(A) Imposition of Tax. — Effective January 1, 2018 and onwards,
a final tax of thirty-fix percent (35%) is hereby imposed on the
grossed-up monetary value of fringe benefit furnished or granted
to the employee (except rank and file employees as defined herein)
by the employer, whether an individual or a corporation (unless the
fringe benefit is required by the nature of, or necessary to the trade,
business or profession of the employer, or when the fringe benefit is
for the convenience or advantage of the employer). The tax herein
Imposed is payable by the employer which tax shall be paid in the
same manner as provided for under Section 57(A) of this Code. The
grossed-up monetary value of the fringe benefit shall be determined
by dividing the actual monetary value of the fringe benefit by sixtyfive percent (65%) effective January 1, 2018 and onwards: Provided,
however, That fringe benefit furnished to employees and taxable
under Subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of Section 25 shall be taxed
at the applicable rates imposed thereat: Provided, further, That the
grossed-up value of the fringe benefit shall be determined by dividing
the actual monetary value of the fringe benefit by the difference
between one hundred percent (100%) and the applicable rates of
income tax under Subsections (B), (C), (D), and (E) of Section 25. (As
amended by TRAIN)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

228

(B) Fringe Benefit defined. — For purposes of this Section, the term
"fringe benefit" means any good, service or other benefit furnished or
granted in cash or in kind by an employer to an individual employee
(except rank and file employees as defined herein) such as, but not
limited to, the following:

(1) Housing;
(2) Expense account;
(3) Vehicle of any kind;

(4) Household personnel, such as maid, driver and others;
(5) Interest on loan at less than market rate to the extent of the
difference between the market rate and actual rate granted;
(6) Membership fees, dues and other expenses borne by the
employer for the employee in social and athletic clubs or other similar
organizations;

(7) Expenses for foreign travel;
(8) Holiday and vacation expenses;
(9) Educational assistance to the employee or his dependents; and
(10)Life or health insurance and other non-life insurance premiums or
similar amounts in excess of what the law allows.
(C) Fringe Benefits Not Taxable. — The following fringe benefits
are not taxable under this Section:
(1) fringe benefits which are authorized and exempted from tax
under special laws;
(2) Contributions of the employer for the benefit of the employee to
retirement, insurance and hospitalization benefit plans;

(3) Benefits given to the rank and file employees, whether granted
under a collective bargaining agreement or not; and
(4) De minimis benefits as defined in the rules and regulations to be
promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner.
The Secretary of Finance is hereby authorized to promulgate, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, such rules and regulations as
are necessary to carry out efficiently and fairly the provisions of this
Section, taking into account the peculiar nature and special need of
the trade, business or profession of the employer.

Fringe Benefits Tax (FBT) is a final income tax:

O

Imposed on the managerial/supervisory employee,

O

Withheld by the employer who files the return and remits the
tax within 25 days from close of each calendar quarter

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

229

Fringe benefit is any good, service, or other benefit granted in
cash or in kind by an employer to an employee (except rank and
file) such as:
1.

Housing

2.

Expense account

3.

Vehicle of any kind

4.

Household personnel, like maids and driver

5.

Interest on loan at less than market rate, to the extent of
the difference between the market rate and the actual rate
granted

6.

Membership fees, dues and other expenses in social and
athletic clubs or similar organizations

7.

Expenses for foreign travel

8.

Holiday and vacation expenses

9.

Educational assistance to the employee or his dependents

10. Life or health insurance and other non-life premiums in excess
of what the law allows.
This list is not exclusive.

How do you compute for the FBT? Remember that FBT is a final
tax of 35% on the grossed up monetary value of fringe benefits.
The fringe benefit tax on the taxable fringe benefit is computed
as follows:

o

Determine the grossed-up monetary value of the fringe
benefit, f.e., the monetary value of the benefit divided bv
65%
Compute the fringe benefit tax by multiplying the
grossed-up monetary value of the fringe benefit by 35%

Actual Monetary Value/65% = Grossed-up Monetary Value
Grossed-up Monetary Value x 35% = FBT
TRAIN increased the FBT rate to 35%.

o

The grossed-up monetary value of the fringed benefit is now
divided by 65%.

For nonresident aliens not engaged in business in the Philippines,
the FBT rate is 25%. (R.R. 11-2018)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

230

O

For special aliens, as the preferential treatment has been
removed, then the FBT rate now seems to be the regular rate
of 35%.

The fringe benefit is also an expense which is deductible from the
employer's gross income.
O

The deduction for the employer is the grossed-up monetary
value of the fringe benefit.

The following benefits are not subject to the FBT:

1.

Fringe benefits which are authorized and exempted from
income tax under the NIR.C or under special law. Separation
benefits which are given to employees who are involuntarily
separated from work are not subject to FBT.

2.

Contributions of the employer for the benefit of the employee
to retirement, insurance, and hospitalization benefit plans;

3.

Benefits given to rank and file employees, whether granted
under a CBA or not;

4.

De minimis benefits (more on this later);

5.

Benefits granted to employees as required by the nature
of, or necessary to the trade, business or profession of the
employer

6.

Benefits granted for the convenience of the employer
a.

Housing privilege of military officers inside or near the
military camps;

b.

A housing unit situated inside or at most 50 meters from
the perimeter of the business premises;
Temporary housing of an employee for three months or
less;

d.

e.

Expenses of the employee which are reimbursed by the
employer which are:

i.

Receipted under the name of the employer and

ii.

Not personal expenses of the employee;

Business expenses which are paid for by the employer
for the foreign travel of his employees in connection with
business meetings or conventions. (R.R. 3-1998)

•

NOTE: While the benefits above may be exempt from
FBT, it may still form part of the employee's gross
compensation income which is subject to income tax.
(R.R. 3-1998)

J9JC9B0M

231

INCOME TAX

O

However, note that de
exempt from income tax.

minimis

benefits

are

Some tidbits from R..R. 13-1998
On housing privileges

Monetary Value

If employer leases a residential
property for the use of the employee
and the property is the usual place
of residence of the employee

50% of the monthly rental paid

purchases a
employer
If the
residential property on installment
basis and allows the employee to
use it as his usual place of residence

(Acquisition x 5%) x 50%

If the
a
employer purchases
residential property and transfers
ownership to the employee

Acquisition cost or FMV, whichever is
higher. If less than ER's cost: FMVEE's acquisition cost

Housing of military officials

Exempt

Housing which is situated inside
or adjacent to the premises of
a business or factory (within 50
meters)

Exempt

Temporary housing for employee
who stays for not more than 3
months

Exempt

If the property
employer

(Market value or zonal value x 5%)
x 50%

belongs

to

the

Expense Account

Subject to FBT or not?

If the expense was duly receipted
for and in the name of the employer,
and the expense is not in the nature
of a personal expense attributable
to the employee

No

If these are personal expenses such
as groceries, paid for or reimbursed
by the employer, even if these are
duly receipted for in the name of the
employer

Yes

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

232

Monetary Value

Motor Vehicles
If employer purchases vehicle in the
name of the employee, regardless of
usage of the vehicle

100% of the value (acquisition cost)

If employer shoulders a portion of
the amount of the purchase price of
a vehicle owned by the employee

Amount shouldered by the employer

If employer owns and maintains a
fleet of vehicles for the use of the
business and the employees

50% of the value

Use of aircraft owned and maintained
by the employer

Exempt

Use of yacht

Value based on depreciation

Expenses for Foreign Travel

Monetary Value

If it is reasonable for the purpose
of attending business meetings or
conventions

Exempt

Cost of plane ticket if economy or
business class

Exempt

Cost of plane ticket if first class

30% of the value

Travel expense of family members
of the employee

100% of the value

Monetary Value

Educational Assistance

If the employee was granted a
scholarship by the employer and
the education or study is directly
connected to the trade or business
of the employer, and there is a
written contract that the employee
must remain in employ for a period
of time

Exempt

If the assistance was extended to
the employee's dependents and
was provided through a scholarship
program of the company

Exempt

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

Premiums for Insurance

233

Monetary Value

If the contribution is pursuant to
existing law such as to the GSIS or
SSS

Exempt

If it is for the group insurance of the
employees

Exempt

Life or health insurance and other
non-life insurance

100%

For the others (household expenses, membership fees and
other expenses in social and athletic clubs, holiday and vacation
expenses), the monetary value will be 100% of the value of the
benefit received.

De minimis benefits
•

De minimis benefits are facilities and privileges of relatively small
value furnished or offered by an employer to his employees.

o

These are not considered compensation subject to income
tax (and consequently withholding tax) if these are offered
or furnished by the employer as means of promoting health,
goodwill, contentment, or efficiency of the employees. (R.R.
8-2000)
•

•

Is love a de minimis benefit? Doesn't matter, because
love can't be quantified in pesos—unless you're a gold
digger.

The following are considered de minimis benefits of ALL types of
employees. These are exempt from tax. (R.R. 8-2000)

1.

Monetized unused vacation leave credits of private employees,
not exceeding 10 days per year.

2.

Monetized value of vacation and sick leave credits paid to
government officials and employees. (R.R. 5-2011)

3.

Medical cash allowance to dependents of employees not
exceeding Pl,500/employee per sem or P250/month. (R.R.
11-2018)

4.

Rice subsidy of P2,000 or 1 sack of 50 kg rice per month
amounting to not more than P2,000. (R.R. 11-2018)

5.

Uniforms and clothing allowance not exceeding P6,000/
month. (R.R. 11-2018)

6.

Actual yearly medical benefits not exceeding P10,000/month.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

234

7.

Laundry allowance not exceeding P300/month.

8.

Employee achievement awards for length of service or safety
achievement in the form of tangible property (other than
cash or gift certificate) with value not exceeding PIO,000.

9.

Gifts given during Christmas and major anniversaries not
exceeding P5,000/year.

10.

Daily meal allowance for overtime work, not exceeding 25%
of the basic minimum wage.

11.

Benefits received by an employee by virtue of a collective
bargaining agreement and productivity incentive schemes
provided the total annual monetary value from both CBA and
productivity schemes combined do not exceed PIO,000. (R.R.
1-2015)

All other benefits given by employers which are not included in
the enumeration shall not be considered "de minimis" benefits,
and hence, shall be subject to income tax and withholding tax on
compensation income. (R.R. 5-2011)

The amount of de minimis benefits is not computed in determining
the P90,000 ceiling of "other benefits" excluded from gross
income under Section 32(B)(7)(e) of the Tax Code.
o

o

BUT, the excess of the de minimis benefits over their respective
ceilings shall be considered part of "other benefits" and the
employee receiving it will be subject to tax only on the excess
over the P90,000 ceiling. (R.R. 10-2008, read with the ceiling
change by TRAIN.J

In other words, when a benefit is de minimis with a ceiling, the
benefit is exempt from FBT up to the ceiling. Any excess over the
ceiling shall be part of the "other benefits" exempt up to P90,000.
Anything in excess of P90,000 will be taxable. (Think of it as
water spilling over past multiple barriers, one barrier higher than
the last. The barriers are your ceilings—the de minimis ceiling
and the P90,000 ceiling. Anything past those barriers is taxable.)

Any amount given by the employer as benefits, whether de
minimis or others, shall be deductible as business expense. (R.R.
10-2008)

To recap:
o

Fringe benefit given to rank and file employee is not subject
to the fringe benefit tax.

o

Fringe benefit given to a supervisory or managerial employee
is subject to the fringe benefit tax.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

235

De minimis benefit, whether given to rank and file employee
or to supervisory or managerial employee, is not subject to
the fringe benefit tax.

What are de minimis benefits and how are these taxed? Give three
(3) examples of de minimis benefits. (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: De minimis benefits are facilities and privileges of
relatively small value offered by an employer to his or her employees.
These are not subject to income tax if such facilities are offered by the
employer to promote the goodwill, health, contentment or efficiency
of the employees. Three examples would be 1) yearly medical
benefits not exceeding PIO,000, 2) laundry allowance not exceeding
P300/month, and 3) Christmas gifts not exceeding P5,000/year.

Mapagbigay Corporation grants all its employees (rank and file,
supervisors, and managers) 5% discount of the purchase price of
its products. During an audit investigation, the BIR assessed the
company the corresponding tax on the amount equivalent to the
courtesy discount received by all the employees, contending that
the courtesy discount is considered as additional compensation for
the rank and file employees and additional fringe benefit for the
supervisors and managers. In its defense, the company argues that
the discount given to the rank and file employees is a de minimis
benefit and not subject to tax. As to its managerial employees, it
contends that the discount is nothing more than a privilege and its
availment is restricted.
Is the BIR assessment correct? Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The BIR assessment Is correct. As to its rank
and file employees, the 5% discount given cannot be considered a
de minimis benefit. The list of de minimis benefits in the BIR rules is
exclusive. Hence, any benefit not in the list is taxable. In this case,
employee discounts are not in the list of de minimis benefits, and are
therefore taxable.
As to the supervisors and managers, these are subject to fringe benefit
tax. FBT is a final tax on any good, service, or benefit granted to
non-rank and file employees, like supervisors and managers. In this
case, the discounts are benefits granted to Mapagbigay's supervisors
and managers and are therefore subject to FBT. However, the FBT
shall be based on the grossed up monetary value of the benefits, not
the amount equivalent to the courtesy discount.

As a way to augment the Income of the employees of DEF, Inc.,
a private corporation, the management decided to grant a special
stipend of P50,000.00 for the first vacation leave that any employee
takes during a given calendar year. In addition, the senior engineers
were also given housing Inside the factory compound for the purpose
of ensuring that there are available engineers within the premises

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

236

every time there is a breakdown in the factory machineries and
equipment.

Is the cash equivalent value of the housing facilities received by the
senior engineers subject to fringe benefits tax? Explain. (2019 Bar
Exam)

Suggested answer: The cash equivalent value is not subject to fringe
benefits tax. The Tax Code and its rules state that housing for the
convenience of the employer are not subject to fringe benefits tax.
Here, the housing is within the premises of the compound and is
provided in order to help the employer deal with factory breakdowns.
Hence, it is not subject to fringe benefits tax.
O. Withholding Tax
•

In dealing with withholding tax, two things must be kept in mind
as not to be confused:

O

First, the withholding tax system is embedded in the income
tax system in the Philippines to ease the administration
and collection of taxes. It is not a "separate" kind of tax, as
withholding tax is simply a way of collecting tax (be it income
tax or VAT as we will discuss later) from the source.

O

There are two kinds of withholding tax for income tax —
creditable and final withholding tax. It is important to know
the difference between the two.

Difference between
withholding tax

o

withholding

tax

from

final

Income subject to creditable withholding tax shall form part
of the gross income to be reported in the ITR of the recipient.

■

o

creditable

Tax already withheld shall then be claimed as a tax credit,
i.e., to be deducted from the amount of income tax
computed according to the graduated income tax rates.

Final withholding tax shall no longer form part of the gross
income to be reported in the ITR.

■

The tax withheld, being a final tax, represents the true
and actual tax due on the income.

■

Generally, passive income are subjected to final taxes.

Before we proceed, let us first discuss what a withholding agent is.

Sec. 22. (K) The term "withholding agent"means any person required
to deduct and withhold any tax under the provisions of Section 57.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

237

A withholding agent is the person required to deduct and withhold
any tax.
A withholding agent also has the legal interest to file a claim for
refund for two reasons:
O

He is considered a taxpayer under the NIRC as he is personally
liable for the withholding tax (as well as for deficiency
assessments, surcharges, and penalties) should the amount
of tax withheld is less than what is required by law; and

O

As an agent of the taxpayer, his authority to file the necessary
income tax return and to remit the tax withheld to the
government impliedly includes the authority to file a claim for
refund and to bring an action for recovery of such claim. (CIR
v. Smart Communications, Inc., G.R. No. 179045, August 25,
2010)

■

However, if ever the withholding agent does get the
refund, the withholding agent has the obligation to remit
the same to the principal taxpayer. As a mere agent of
the taxpayer, he has the duty to return what he has
recovered; otherwise, he would be unjustly enriching
himself.

Is a person who withholds love a withholding agent?
O

No. He or she might just not be ready to commit yet.

Final Withholding Tax at Source
Sec. 57. Withholding of Tax at Source. —
(A) Withholding of Final Tax on Certain Incomes. — Subject
to rules and regulations the Secretary of Finance may promulgate,
upon the recommendation of the Commissioner, requiring the filing
of income tax return by certain income payees, the tax imposed or
prescribed by Sections 24(B)(1), 24(B)(2), 24(C), 24(D)(1); 25(A)
(2) , 25(A)(3), 25(B), 25(C), 25(D), 25(E); 27(D)(1), 27(D)(2), 27(D)
(3) , 27(D)(5); 28 (A)(4), 28(A)(5), 28(A)(7)(a), 28(A)(7)(b), 28(A)
(7)(c), 28(B)(1), 28(B)(2), 28(B)(3), 28(B)(4), 28(B)(5)(a), 28(B)
(5)(b), 28(B)(5)(c); 33; and 282 of this Code on specified items of
income shall be withheld by payor-corporation and/or person and paid
In the same manner and subject to the same conditions as provided In
Section 58 of this Code.

•

Income subject to final tax refers to income wherein the tax due
is fully collected through the withholding tax system, wherein the
payor of the income withholds the tax and then remits it to the
government.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

238

Once full payment has been withheld and remitted, there is no
more tax obligation.
Principles of Final Withholding Tax (Section 2.57[A], R.R. 2-1998)
O

The amount of tax withheld is full and final.

O

The liability for payment of the tax rests primarily on the
withholding agent as payor.

O

In case he fails to withhold (or underwithholds),
withholding agent will be liable for the deficiency.

O

The payee is not required to file any income tax return for the
particular income.

O

The finality of the withheld tax is limited on that particular
income and will not extend to the payees' other tax liability
on said income.
•

the

For example a bank received income subject to final
withholding tax, the same income can still be subject to a
percentage tax.

Basically, items under passive income are subject to FINAL TAX.
And then you have other FINAL TAXES here and there (like the
FBT, BPRT, Capital Gains Tax, etc.). Anyway, here's a rundown.
Income Subject to Final Withholding Tax of
CITIZENS and RESIDENT ALIENS

Final Tax

1.

Interest under the expanded foreign currency
deposit system

15%

2.

Royalties from books, literary works, and musical
compositions

10%

3.

Royalties other than above

20%

4.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust
fund and similar arrangement

20%

5.

Prize exceeding P10,000

20%

6.

Other winnings (except Phil. Charity Sweepstakes
and Lotto winnings amounting to P10,000 or less
which shall be exempt)

20%

Dividend from a domestic corp., or from a
joint stock company, insurance or mutual fund
company, and regional operating headquarters of
multinational company or share in the distributive
net income after tax of a partnership (except a
general professional partnership), joint stock or
joint venture or consortium taxable as a corporation

10%

J9JC9B0M

239

INCOME TAX

8.

Capital gains from REAL PROPERTY located here
classified as CAPITAL assets

6%

9.

Capital gains from sale of shares of stock of a
domestic corporation, not traded through a local
stock exchange

15%

Nonresident Alien engaged in trade or business

1.

Interest under the expanded foreign currency
deposit system

Exempt

2.

Royalty from books, literary works, and musical
compositions

10%

3.

Royalty other than above

20%

4.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust
fund and similar arrangement

20%

5.

Prize exceeding PIO,000

20%

6.

Other winnings, except Phil. Charity Sweepstakes
& Lotto

20%

7.

Dividend from a domestic corp, or from a joint stock
company, insurance or mutual fund company, and
regional operating headquarters of multinational
company or share in the distributive net income
after tax of a partnership (except a general
professional partnership), joint stock or joint
venture or consortium taxable as a corporation

20%

8.

Capital gains from REAL PROPERTY located here
classified as CAPITAL assets

6%

9.

Capital gains from sale of shares of stock of a
domestic corporation, not traded through a local
stock exchange

15%

Nonresident Alien NOT engaged in trade or business
On income from ALL sources within the Philippines
(important!)

25%

Capital gains from REAL
classified as CAPITAL assets

here

6%

Capital gains from sale of shares of stock of a domestic
corporation, not traded through a local stock exchange

15%

PROPERTY

located

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

240

Domestic Corporations

Final Tax

15%

1.

Interest under the expanded
deposit system

2.

Royalty of all types within the Philippines

o

Royalty from abroad, enters the taxable income
30% tax rate

3.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust
fund and similar arrangement

20%

4.

Income BY A DEPOSITORY BANK under the FCDU

10%

Capital gains from REAL PROPERTY located here
classified as CAPITAL assets (only applies to lands
and/or buildings)

6%

Capital gains from sale of shares of stock of a
domestic corporation, not traded through a local
stock exchange

15%

6.

foreign

currency

20%

Foreign Resident Corporations

1.

Interest under
deposit system

2.

Royalty of all types within the Philippines

o

Royalty from abroad, exempted (remember, only
taxed from sources within the Philippines)

3.

Interest on any current bank deposit, yield or other
monetary benefits from deposit substitute, trust
fund and similar arrangement

20%

4.

Capital gains from sale of shares of stock of a
domestic corporation, not traded through a local
stock exchange

5%/10%

6.

the

expanded

foreign

currency

7.5%
20%

Branch Profit Remittances

15%

Offshore Banking Unit

10%

Foreign Nonresident Corp.

1.

Income from ALL SOURCES within the Philippines

30%

2.

Nonresident
distributor

cinematographic

owner/

25%

3.

Gross rentals, lease and charter fees by a
nonresident owner or lessor of vessels to Filipino
citizens or corporations

4.5%

film

J9JC9B0M

241

INCOME TAX

4.

Dividends from a domestic corporation (subject to
mutual tax credit)

15%

5.

Interest on foreign loans

20%

Others
Fringe Benefits Taxes

35% on grossed
up monetary
value

25% on grossed
up monetary
value for
nonresident
aliens not
engaged in trade
or business

Informer's reward

10%

Creditable Withholding Tax

(B) Withholding of Creditable Tax at Source. — The Secretary of
Finance may, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner, require
the withholding of a tax on the items of income payable to natural or
juridical persons, residing in the Philippines, by payor-corporation/
persons as provided for by law, at the rate of not less than one percent
(1%) but not more than thirty-two percent (32%) thereof, which shall
be credited against the income tax liability of the taxpayer for the
taxable year: Provided, That, beginning January 1, 2019, the rate
of withholding shall not be less than one percent (1%) but not more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the income payment. (As amended by
TRAIN)

Under the creditable withholding tax system, taxes withheld
on certain income payments are intended to equal or at least
approximate the tax due of the payee on said income.

Creditable tax must be withheld AT SOURCE, but should still be
Included in the tax return of the recipient.
o

Any excess shall be refunded to and any deficiency shall be
paid by the taxpayer.

The liability to withhold tax arises upon the accrual, not upon
actual remittance. The purpose of the withholding tax is to compel
the agent to withhold under all circumstances.
o

Thus, it is when the right to receive income arises that
determines when to include that income as gross income,

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

242

and when to apply withholding tax. (FUipinas Synthetic Fiber
Corporation v. CA, G.R. No. 118498, October 12, 1999)

The obligation of the payor to deduct and withhold the tax
under Section 2.57 of these regulations arises at the time
an income is paid or payable, whichever comes first, the
term "payable" refers to the date the obligation become due,
demandable or legally enforceable.

O

Creditable withholding tax intends to approximate the tax on the
payee.
O

The subsequent remittal does not remove the burden on the
income recipient. He still has to file for the credit.

o

Simply, the payor withholds, and the payee gets credit.

Three types of creditable withholding taxes:
O

Expanded withholding tax on certain income payments made
by private persons to resident taxpayers

O

Withholding tax on compensation income in the Philippines

O

Withholding tax on money payments of the government

When expanded withholding tax will apply:
O

Expense is paid by the taxpayer, which is income to the
recipient thereof subject to income tax;

O

Income is fixed or determinable at the time of payment;

O

Income is one of the income payments listed in the regulations;
and

O

Income recipient is a resident of the Philippines liable to
income tax
*

What if the recipient is a nonresident taxpayer?

•
O

Then income payment is subject to final withholding
tax, not creditable.

Payor-withholding agent is also a resident of the Philippines
■

So foreign embassies in the Philippines and nonresident
foreign corporations cannot be compelled to act as
withholding agents (since government cannot enforce its
tax laws on them)

The withholding of creditable withholding tax shall not apply to
income payments made to the following:
o

National government and its instrumentalities and public
municipal corporations

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

243

EXCEPT GOCCs
O

Those enjoying exemption from payment of income taxes
pursuant to law

Who are required to deduct and withhold for the creditable
withholding taxes? (R.R. 2-1998)

O

Any juridical person, whether or not engaged in trade or
business

O

An individual, with respect to payments made in connection
with his trade or business
•

O

But for the disposition of real property, even those not
engaged in trade or business are withholding agents

All government offices including government-owned or
controlled corporations, as well as provincial, city and
municipal governments.

Examples of Income Subject to CREDITABLE Withholding Tax
(R.R. 2-1998, as amended)
(Note: This is not an exhaustive list and is provided for illustration and
reference. If you want the OG list, check the relevant R.R.s.)

Professional fees, promotional and talent fees,
rendered by individuals, entertainers, and athletes
(R.R. 11-2018)
Individual payee:
If gross Income for the current year is more than
P3,000,000 or VAT-registered regardless of amount

10%

If gross income for the current year did not exceed
P3,000,000 (R.R. 14-2018)

5%

Non-indivldual payee:
If gross Income exceeds P720,000

15%

If gross income is equal to or does not exceed P720,000

10%

Rentals for continued use or possession of real
properties used in business, which the payor has not
taken title

5%

Also applies to rentals of personal property (in excess
of PIO,000 annually), billboards, transmission facilities
Cinematographic film rentals and other payments

5%

Income payments to certain contractors, general
engineering, general building, specialty and other
contractors

2%

J9JC9B0M

244

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Income distributed to the beneficiaries of estates and
trusts (except if already subject to final withhold or
tax-exempt)

15%

Income payment to certain brokers and agents,
customs, insurance, real estate and commercial
brokers and fees of agents of pro entertainers

10%

Real property which are NOT capital assets sold by a
person engaged in the real estate business

1.5%/3%/5%

If NOT engaged in real estate business

6%

On additional payments by importers, shipping
and airline companies to government personnel for
overtime services

15%

On the amount paid by any credit card company to any
business entity representing the sale of goods, services
made by them to cardholders

1% of 1/2 of the
gross amounts

Payments made by any of the top withholding agents
to their local supplier of goods or services (R.R. 112018, as amended by R.R. 07-19)

1% (goods)

Payments by the government to local supplier of goods
(except if below PIO,000) (R.R. 11-2018)

2% (services)

1% (goods)
2% (services)

Income payments to partners of GPPs
If gross income exceeds P720,000

15%

If gross income is equal to or does not exceed P720,000
(R.R. 30-2003)_________________________________________

10%

Income payments made by political parties and
candidates for all purchases of goods and services
as campaign expenditures, as well as income
payments made by Individuals and juridical entities
for all purchases intended to be given as campaign
contribution (R.R. 10-2009)

5%

Interest income from other instruments (/.e., not
deposit substitutes or from banks, FCDUS, or OBUs)
(R.R. 01-2019)

15%

Return and Payment of Tax
Sec. SB. Returns and Payment of Taxes Withheld at Source. —
(A) Quarterly Returns and Payments of Taxes Withheld. —
Taxes deducted and withheld under Section 57 by withholding agents

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

245

shall be covered by a return and paid to, except in cases where the
Commissioner otherwise permits, an authorized Treasurer of the city
or municipality where the withholding agent has his legal residence
or principal place of business, or where the withholding agent is a
corporation, where the principal office is located.
The taxes deducted and withheld by the withholding agent shall be
held as a special fund in trust for the government until paid to the
collecting officers.
The return for final and creditable withholding taxes shall be filed and
the payment made not later than the last day of the month following
the close of the quarter during which the withholding was made. (As
amended by TRAIN)

(B) Statement of Income Payments Made and Taxes Withheld.
— Every withholding agent required to deduct and withhold taxes under
Section 57 shall furnish each recipient, in respect to his or its receipts
during the calendar quarter or year, a written statement showing the
income or other payments made by the withholding agent during such
quarter or year, and the amount of the tax deducted and withheld
therefrom, simultaneously upon payment at the request of the payee,
but not later than the twentieth (20th) day following the close of
the quarter in the case of corporate payee, or not later than March
1 of the following year in the case of individual payee for creditable
withholding taxes. For final withholding taxes, the statement should
be given to the payee on or before January 31 of the succeeding year.
(C) Annual Information Return. — Every withholding agent
required to deduct and withhold taxes under Section 57 shall submit
to the Commissioner an annual information return containing the list
of payees and income payments, amount of taxes withheld from each
payee and such other pertinent information as may be required by
the Commissioner. In the case of final withholding taxes, the return
shall be filed on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, and
for creditable withholding taxes, not later than March 1 of the year
following the year for which the annual report is being submitted. This
return, if made and filed in accordance with the rules and regulations
approved by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner, shall be sufficient compliance with the requirements of
Section 68 of this Title in respect to the income payments.

The Commissioner may, by rules and regulations, grant to any
withholding agent a reasonable extension of time to furnish and
submit the return required In this Subsection.

(D) Income of Recipient. — Income upon which any creditable tax
Is required to be withheld at source under Section 57 shall be included
in the return of its recipient but the excess of the amount of tax so
withheld over the tax due on his return shall be refunded to him
subject to the provisions of Section 204; if the income tax collected at
source is less than the tax due on his return, the difference shall be
paid in accordance with the provisions of Section 56.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

246

Ail taxes withheld pursuant to the provisions of this Code and its
implementing rules and regulations are hereby considered trust funds
and shall be maintained in a separate account and not commingled
with any other funds of the withholding agent.
(E) Registration with Register of Deeds. — No registration of any
document transferring real property shall be effected by the Register of
Deeds unless the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative
has certified that such transfer has been reported, and the capital gains
or creditable withholding tax, if any, has been paid: Provided, however.
That the information as may be required by rules and regulations to
be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner, shall be annotated by the Register of Deeds in
the Transfer Certificate of Title or Condominium Certificate of Title:
Provided, further, That in cases of transfer of property to a corporation,
pursuant to a merger, consolidation or reorganization, and where the
law allows deferred recognition of income in accordance with Section
40, the information as may be required by rules and regulations to
be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner, shall be annotated by the Register of Deeds at the
back of the Transfer Certificate of Title or Condominium Certificate of
Title of the real property involved: Provided, finally, That any violation
of this provision by the Register of Deeds shall be subject to the
penalties imposed under Section 269 of this Code.

Withholding agents must file a return and pay to:
O

An authorized agent bank

O

Revenue district officer

O

Collection agent

O

Duly authorized treasure of the city or municipality where he
resides or has his place of business

These taxes must be maintained in a separate account and NOT
commingled with any other funds of the withholding agent.
TRAIN has amended when to file and pay taxes withheld at
source.
O

The returns must be filed and the taxes paid not later than
the last day of the month following the close of the quarter
during which the withholding was made.
-

For example:

•

Withholding was made in February (which is in the
first quarter of the year), then the deadline for filing
the return and paying the taxes is on the last day of
April (which is the month following the close of the
quarter).

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

247

If there is any excess, it shall be either credited or refunded.

If there is deficiency, then it shall be paid by the taxpayer.
XYZ Corp, is listed as a top 20,000 Philippine corporation by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue. It secured a loan from ABC Bank with a
6°/o per annum interest. All interest payments made by XYZ Corp, to
ABC Bank is subject to a 2°/o creditable withholding tax. At the same
time, XYZ Corp, has a trust deposit with ABC Bank in the amount of
Pl 00,000,000.00, which earns 2°/o interest per annum, but is subject
to a 20% final withholding tax on the interest income received by
XYZ Corp.

Who are the withholding agents in the case of: 1. the 20% final
withholding tax; and 2. the 2°/o creditable withholding tax? Explain.
(2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Under the withholding tax system, the income
payor must withhold. Hence, for the 20% final withholding tax, the
withholding agent is ABC Bank as the income payor for the interest
on the trust deposit. For the 2% CWT, the withholding agent is XYZ
Corp as the income payor for the interest payments on the loan.

Withholding on Wages
•

Applies to ALL EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS whether citizens or aliens
(except nonresident aliens not engaged in trade or business)
deriving income from compensation for services rendered in the
Philippines. (R.R. 11-2018)

0

The withholding of wages applies to government employees
as well. (COURAGE v. CIR, G.R. No. 213446, July 3, 2018)

The employer is considered the withholding agent. (R.R. 2-1998)
O

The term "employer" also refers to the person having control
of the payment of the compensation in cases where the
services are or were performed for a person who does not
exercise such control, such as when the compensation is paid
by a trust. (RMC 39-2012)

Sec. 78. Definitions. — As used In this Chapter:
(A) Wages. — The term 'wages' means all remuneration (other than
fees paid to a public official) for services performed by an employee
for his employer, including the cash value of all remuneration paid in
any medium other than cash, except that such term shall not include
remuneration paid:

(1) For agricultural labor paid entirely in products of the farm where
the labor is performed, or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

248

(2) For domestic service in a private home, or

(3) For casual labor not in the course of the employer's trade or
business, or
(4) For services by a citizen or resident of the Philippines for a foreign
government or an international organization.

If the remuneration paid by an employer to an employee for services
performed during one-half (1/2) or more of any payroll period of not
more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days constitutes wages, all
the remuneration paid by such employer to such employee for such
period shall be deemed to be wages; but if the remuneration paid
by an employer to an employee for services performed during more
than one-half (1/2) of any such payroll period does not constitute
wages, then none of the remuneration paid by such employer to such
employee for such period shall be deemed to be wages.
(B) Payroll Period. — The term 'payroll period' means a period
for which payment of wages is ordinarily made to the employee by
his employer, and the term "miscellaneous payroll period" means a
payroll period other than, a daily, weekly, biweekly, semi-monthly,
monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual period.
(C) Employee. — The term ‘employee' refers to any individual
who is the recipient of wages and includes an officer, employee or
elected official of the Government of the Philippines or any political
subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof. The term "employee"
also includes an officer of a corporation.

(D) Employer. — The term "employer" means the person for whom
an individual performs or performed any service, of whatever nature,
as the employee of such person, except that:
(1) If the person for whom the individual performs or performed any
service does not have control of the payment of the wages for such
services, the term "employer" (except for the purpose of Subsection
[A]) means the person having control of the payment of such wages;
and

(2) In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a nonresident
alien individual, foreign partnership or foreign corporation not engaged
in trade or business within the Philippines, the term "employer"
(except for the purpose of Subsection [A]) means such person.

Wages are all remuneration other than fees paid to a public official
for services performed by an employee for his employer (cash or
kind).

O

EXCEPT

Agricultural labor paid entirely in products of the farm
where the labor is performed

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

249

Domestic service in a private home

Casual labor not in the course of the employer's trade or
business
-

Services by a citizen or resident of the Philippines for a
foreign government or international organization2

Backwages, allowances, and benefits awarded in a labor dispute
are considered income of the employee and are therefore subject
to withholding tax on wages. (RMC 39-2012)

Sec. 79. Income Tax Collected at Source. —
(A) Requirement of Withholding. — Except in the case of a
minimum wage earner as defined in Section 22(HH) of this code,
every employer making payment of wages shall deduct and withhold
upon such wages a tax determined in accordance with the rules
and regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner.

(B) Tax Paid by Recipient. — If the employer, in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, fails to deduct and withhold the tax as
required under this Chapter, and thereafter the tax against which such
tax may be credited is paid, the tax so required to be deducted and
withheld shall not be collected from the employer; but this Subsection
shall in no case relieve the employer from liability for any penalty or
addition to the tax otherwise applicable in respect of such failure to
deduct and withhold.
(C) Refunds or Credits. —
(1) Employer. — When there has been an overpayment of tax under
this Section, refund or credit shall be made to the employer only to
the extent that the amount of such overpayment was not deducted
and withheld hereunder by the employer.

(2) Employees. — The amount deducted and withheld under this
Chapter during any calendar year shall be allowed as a credit to the of
this Title. Refunds and credits in cases of excessive withholding shall
be granted under rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary
of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.
Any excess of the taxes withheld over the tax due from the taxpayer
shall be returned or credited within three (3) months from the
fifteenth (15th) day of April. Refunds or credits made after such time
shall earn interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, starting
after the lapse of the three-month period to the date the refund of
credit is made.

2See also Section 2.78.1(B), R.R. 2-1998 for more income payments which
are exempt from the requirement of withholding tax on compensation.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

250

Refunds shall be made upon warrants drawn by the Commissioner or
by his duly authorized representative without the necessity of countersignature by the Chairman, Commission on Audit or the latter's
duly authorized representative as an exception to the requirement
prescribed by Section 49, Chapter 8, Subtitle B, Title 1 of Book V of
Executive Order No. 292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code
of 1987.

(D) - repealed by TRAIN
(E) Withholding on Basis ofAverage Wages. — The Commissioner
may, under rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of
Finance, authorize employers to:

(1) estimate the wages which will be paid to an employee in any
quarter of the calendar year;
(2) determine the amount to be deducted and withheld upon each
payment of wages to such employee during such quarter as if the
appropriate average of the wages so estimated constituted the actual
wages paid; and
(3) deduct and withhold upon any payment of wages to such
employee during such quarter such amount as may be required to
be deducted and withheld during such quarter without regard to this
Subsection.
(F) - repealed by TRAIN

(G) Nonresident Aliens. — Wages paid to nonresident alien
individuals engaged in trade or business in the Philippines shall be
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(H) Year-End Adjustment. — On or before the end of the calendar
year but prior to the payment of the compensation for the last
payroll period, the employer shall determine the tax due from each
employee on taxable compensation income for the entire taxable year
in accordance with Section 24(A). The difference between the tax due
from the employee for the entire year and the sum of taxes withheld
from January to November shall either be withheld from his salary In
December of the current calendar year or refunded to the employee
not later than January 25 of the succeeding year.

General rule: Every employer making payment of wages shall
deduct and withhold from wages.

O

Except for Minimum Wage Earners

Refunds or credits
O

To the employer: when there was an overpayment but only to
the extent that the amount of overpayment was not withheld
by the employer.

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

O

251

To the employee: any excess of taxes withheld shall be
returned or credited within three months from April 15, these
refunds will earn interest at 6% per annum after the lapse of
the three month period.

Sec. 80. Liability for Tax. —
(A) Employer. — The employer shall be liable for the withholding
and remittance of the correct amount of tax required to be deducted
and withheld under this Chapter. If the employer fails to withhold
and remit the correct amount of tax as required to be withheld under
the provision of this Chapter, such tax shall be collected from the
employer together with the penalties or additions to the tax otherwise
applicable in respect to such failure to withhold and remit.

(B) Employee. — Where an employee fails or refuses to file
the withholding exemption certificate or willfully supplies false or
inaccurate information thereunder, the tax otherwise required to
be withheld by the employer shall be collected from him including
penalties or additions to the tax from the due date of remittance until
the date of payment. On the other hand, excess taxes withheld made
by the employer due to:
(1) failure or refusal to file the withholding exemption
certificate; or
(2) false and inaccurate information shall not be refunded to
the employee but shall be forfeited in favor of the Government.

Employer shall be liable if he fails to withhold and remit. It shall
be collected from him with penalties.
Employee shall be liable if he fails to file the withholding exemption
certificate. The tax withheld by the employer shall be collected
from the employee including penalties. Excess taxes withheld
because of his refusal to file the exemption certificate or giving
false information shall be forfeited to the government.

Sec. 81. Filing of Return and Payment of Taxes Withheld. —
Except as the Commissioner otherwise permits, taxes deducted and
withheld by the employer on wages of employees shall be covered
by a return and paid to an authorized agent bank; Collection Agent,
or the duly authorized Treasurer of the city or municipality where
the employer has his legal residence or principal place of business,
or in case the employer is a corporation, where the principal office is
located.

The return shall be filed and the payment made within twenty-five
(25) days from the close of each calendar quarter: Provided, however,
That the Commissioner may, with the approval of the Secretary

J9JC9B0M

252

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

of Finance, require the employers to pay or deposit the taxes
deducted and withheld at more frequent intervals, in cases where
such requirement is deemed necessary to protect the interest of the
Government.
The taxes deducted and withheld by employers shall be held in a
special fund in trust for the Government until the same are paid to the
said collecting officers.
Should be filed and paid within 25 days from the close of each
calendar quarter.

Sec. 82. Return and Payment in Case of Government Employees.
— If the employer is the Government of the Philippines or any political
subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, the return of the
amount deducted and withheld upon any wage shall be made by the
officer or employee having control of the payment of such wage, or by
any officer or employee duly designated for the purpose.

A section in an RMO making the governor, mayor, barangay
captain, or officials holding the highest positions in GOCCs or
agencies the withholding agents for the wages of government
employees Is invalid. These positions do not have control of
the payment of wages. The proper withholding agents are the
treasurers or accountants. (COURAGE v. CIR, G.R. No. 213446,
July 3, 2018)

Sec. 83. Statements and Returns. —

(A) Requirements. — Every employer required to deduct and
withhold a tax shall furnish to each such employee in respect of his
employment during the calendar year, on or before January thirtyfirst (31st) of the succeeding year, or if his employment is terminated
before the close of such calendar year, on the same day of which
the last payment of wages is made, a written statement confirming
the wages paid by the employer to such employee during the
calendar year, and the amount of tax deducted and withheld under
this Chapter in respect of such wages. The statement required to be
furnished by this Section in respect of any wage shall contain such
other information, and shall be furnished at such other time and in
such form as the Secretary of Finance, upon the recommendation of
the Commissioner, may, by rules and regulation, prescribe.
(B) Annual Information Returns. — Every employer required to
deduct and withhold the taxes in respect of the wages of his employees
shall, on or before January thirty-first (31st) of the succeeding year,
submit to the Commissioner an annual information return containing
a list of employees, the total amount of compensation income of

j

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

253

each employee, the total amount of taxes withheld therefrom during
the year, accompanied by copies of the statement referred to in the
preceding paragraph, and such other information as may be deemed
necessary. This return, if made and filed in accordance with rules
and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, shall be sufficient compliance
with the requirements of Section 68 of this Title in respect of such
wages.
(C) Extension of time. — The Commissioner, under such rules and
regulations as may be promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, may
grant to any employer a reasonable extension of time to furnish and
submit the statements and returns required under this Section.

Employees must submit annual return on or before January 31 of
the succeeding year containing all relevant employee information.
P.

Returns and Payments of Tax

Individual Return
Sec. 51. Individual Return. —
(A) Requirements. —

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this Subsection, the
following individuals are required to file an income tax return:
(a) Every Filipino citizen residing in the Philippines;

(b) Every Filipino citizen residing outside the Philippines, on his
income from sources within the Philippines;
(c) Every alien residing in the Philippines, on income derived
from sources within the Philippines; and
(d) Every nonresident alien engaged in trade or business or in the
exercise of profession in the Philippines.

Who are required to file?

1.

Resident citizen, on income within and without the Philippines

2.

Nonresident citizen, on income within only

3.

Resident alien, on income within only

4.

Nonresident alien (engaged in business here), on income
within only

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

254

Sec. 51. (A)

(2) The following individuals shall not be required to file an income
tax return;
(a) An individual whose taxable income does not exceed
two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250,000) under Section
24(A)(2)(a): Provided, That a citizen of the Philippines and any
alien individual engaged in business or practice of profession
within the Philippines shall file an income tax return, regardless
of the amount of gross income; (As amended by TRAIN)

(b) An individual with respect to pure compensation
income, as defined in Section 32(A)(1), derived from such
sources within the Philippines, the income tax on which has been
correctly withheld under the provisions of Section 79 of this Code:
Provided, That an individual deriving compensation concurrently
from two or more employers at any time during the taxable year
shall file an income tax return;
(c) An individual whose sole income has been subjected to
final withholding tax pursuant to Section 57(A) of this Code; and

(d) A minimum wage earner as defined in Section 22(HH)
of this Code or an individual who is exempt from income tax
pursuant to the provisions of this Code and other laws, general or
special.

(3) The foregoing notwithstanding, any individual not required to
file an income tax return may nevertheless be required to file an
information return pursuant to rules and regulations prescribed by
the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.
(As amended by TRAIN)

TRAIN has amended those who are not required to file income tax
returns:

O

Those whose taxable income does not exceed P250,000
*

O

But those engaged in business or practice a profession
must still file, regardless of their gross income

Purely compensation income earners
*

But those with two or more employers at any time during
the taxable year must still file their income tax return
(RMC 50-2018)

O

Those whose sole income has already been subjected to final
withholding tax

O

Minimum wage earners

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

255

Indicate whether each of the following individuals Is required or not
required to file an income tax return:

a) Filipino citizen residing outside the Philippines on his Income
from sources outside the Philippines.
b) Resident alien on income derived from sources within the
Philippines.

c) Resident citizen earning purely compensation income from two
employers within the Philippines, whose income taxes have been
correctly withheld.

d) Resident citizen who falls under the classification of minimum
wage earners.
*•
e) An individual whose sole income has been subjected to final
withholding tax. (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) He need not file. A Filipino citizen residing abroad only has to file
an income tax return on income from sources within the Philippines.
b) He is required to file. A resident alien must file an Income tax
return on income from sources within the Philippines.
c) He is required to file. Generally, a resident citizen earning purely
compensation income need not file an ITR. However, if a resident
citizen derives income from two or more employers (as is the case
here) at any time during the taxable year, he must file an income tax
return.
d) He need not file. Minimum wage earners are not required to file
ITRs, as per the Tax Code.

e) He need not file. Individuals whose sole Income has been
subjected to final tax need not file an ITR as well, as per the Tax Code.

Kronge Konsult, Inc. (KKI) is a Philippine corporation engaged in
architectural design, engineering, and construction work. Its principal
office Is located In Makati City, but It has various infrastructure
projects In the country and abroad. Thus, KKI employs both local
and foreign workers. The company has adopted a policy that the
employees' salaries are paid in the currency of the country where
they are assigned or detailed.
Below are some of the employees of KKI. Determine whether the
compensation they received from KKI in 2017 is taxable under
Philippine laws and whether they are required to file tax returns with
the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR).

a)

Kris Konejero, a Filipino accountant In KKI's Tax Department in
the Makati office, and married to a Filipino engineer also working
in KKI;

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

256

i

I

b)

Klaus Kloner, a German national who heads KKI's Design
Department in its Makati office;

c)

Krisanto Konde, a Filipino engineer in KKI's Design Department
who was hired to work at the principal office last January 2017.
In April 2017, he was assigned and detailed in the company's
project in Jakarta, Indonesia, which project is expected to be
completed in April 2019;

d)

Kamilo Konde, Krisanto's brother, also an engineer assigned to
KKI's project in Taipei, Taiwan. Since KKI provides for housing
and other basic needs, Kamilo requested that all his salaries,
paid in Taiwanese dollars, be paid to his wife in Manila in its
Philippine Peso equivalent; and

e)

Karen Karenina, a Filipino architect in KKI's Design Department
who reported back to KKI's Makati office in June 2017 after KKi's
projectin Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia was completed. (2018BarExam)

Suggested answers:

I

a)

Kris Konejero's 2017 compensation is taxable, as Kris is a
resident citizen and resident citizens are taxable for their income
from worldwide sources. Kris does not have to file a tax return,
as Kris qualifies for substitute filing as he (or she) is an employee
receiving purely compensation income from only one employer
for the calendar year.

b)

Klaus'2017 compensation is taxable, as Klaus is a resident alien
and resident aliens are taxable for their income from Philippine
sources. Klaus does not have to file a tax return, as Klaus
qualifies for substitute filing as he is an employee receiving
purely compensation income from only one employer for the
calendar year.

c)

Kristanto's 2017 compensation is taxable, as Kristanto is still
a resident citizen and is taxable for income from worldwide
sources. He does not seem to qualify as a non-resident citizen,
as non-resident citizens are those who work and derive Income
from abroad and whose "employment thereat" require him to be
physically present for more than 183 days. He Is still employed
by a local company, hence the requirement of being "employed
thereat" is not met. In any case, he does not have to file a tax
return, as he qualifies for substitute filing as he is an employee
receiving purely compensation Income from only one employer
for the calendar year.

d)

Kamilo's 2017 compensation is taxable, similar to Kristanto's. He
is still a resident citizen and is taxable for Income from worldwide
sources. He does not seem to qualify as a non-resident citizen,
as non-resident citizens are those who work and derive income
from abroad and whose "employment thereat" require him to be
physically present for more than 183 days. He is still employed
by a local company, hence the requirement of being "employed

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

257

thereat" is not met. In any case, he does not have to file a tax
return, as he qualifies for substitute filing as he is an employee
receiving purely compensation income from only one employer
for the calendar year.
e)

Karen's 2017 compensation is taxable, similar to Krisanto and
Kamilo. She is still a resident citizen and is taxable for income
from worldwide sources. She does not seem to qualify as a nonresident citizen, as non-resident citizens are those who work and
derive income from abroad and whose "employment thereat"
require him to be physically present for more than 183 days.
She is still employed by a local company, hence the requirement
of being "employed thereat" is not met. In any case, she does
not have to file a tax return, as she qualifies for substitute filing
as she is an employee receiving purely compensation income
from only one employer for the calendar year.

(4) The income tax return shall be filed in duplicate by the following
persons:
(a) A resident citizen — on his income from all sources;
(b) A nonresident citizen — on his income derived from
sources within the Philippines;

(c) A resident alien — on his income derived from sources
within the Philippines; and
(d) A nonresident alien engaged in trade or business in
the Philippines — on his income derived from sources within the
Philippines.

Sec. 51. (A) (S) - The income tax return (ITR) shall consist of a
maximum of four (4) pages in paper form or electronic form, and shall
only contain the following information:

(A) Personal profile and information;
(B) Total gross sales, receipts or Income from compensation for
services rendered, conduct of trade or business or the exercise of a
profession, except income subject to final tax as provided under this
Code;
(C) Allowable deductions under this Code;

(D) Taxable income as defined in Section 31 of this Code; and
(E) Income tax due and payable. (As amended by TRAIN)

SEC. 51-A. Substituted Filing of Income Tax Returns by
Employees Receiving Purely Compensation Income. —
Individual taxpayers receiving purely compensation income,
regardless of amount, from only one employer in the Philippines for
the calendar year, the income tax of which has been withheld

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

258

correctly by the said employer (tax due equals tax withheld) shall
not be required to file an annual income tax return. The certificate
of withholding filed by the respective employers, duly stamped
'received' by the BIR, shall be tantamount to the substituted filing
of income tax returns by said employees. (As amended by TRAIN)

Employees receiving purely compensation income from one
employer during the calendar year do not have to file an annual
ITR. The certificate of withholding by their employers would, in
the words of Eliza Hamilton, be enough. (Substituted filing)
On April 30, 2015, Dary! resigned as the production manager of
52nd Avenue, a television studio owned by SSS Entertainment
Corporation. 52nd Avenue issued to her a Certificate of Withholding
Tax on Compensation (BIR Form No. 2316), which showed that
the tax withheld from her compensation was equal to her income
tax due for the period from January 2015 to April 30, 2015.

A month after her resignation, Dary! put up her own studio and started
producing short films. She was able to earn a meager income from
her short films but did not keep record of her production expenses.

Is Dary! qualified for substituted filing for taxable year 2015? Explain
your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

I

Suggested answer: Daryl Is not qualified for substituted filing.
Substituted filing is only applicable to employees receiving purely
compensation income from only one employer for the calendar year.
Daryl is not a purely compensation earner because she also earns
income from her studio.

Mr. C is employed as a Chief Executive Officer of MNO Company,
receiving an annual compensation of PIO,000,000.00, while Mr.
S is a security guard in the same company earning an annual
compensation of P200,000.00. Both of them source their income
only from their employment with MNO Company.
•

a) At the end of the year, is Mr. C personally required to file an
annual income tax return? Explain.
b) How about Mr. S? Is he personally required to file an annual
income tax return? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

Mr. C is not personally required to file an annual income tax
return. Employees receiving purely compensation income from
one employer during the calendar year do not have to file an
annual ITR. This applies to Mr. C, hence he need not file an
annual ITR.

1

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

b)

259

Mr. S is also not personally required to file an annual income
tax return. Employees receiving purely compensation income
from one employer during the calendar year do not have to file
an annual ITR. This applies to Mr. S, hence he need not file an
annual TTR. In any case, Mr. S earns below the P250,000.00
threshold and is therefore also not required to file an annual
income tax returns.

Where and when to file

(B) Where to File. — Except in cases where the Commissioner
otherwise permits, the return shall be filed with an authorized agent
bank, Revenue District Officer, Collection Agent or duly authorized
Treasurer of the city or municipality in which such person has his legal
residence or principal place of business in the Philippines, or if there
be no legal residence or place of business in the Philippines, with the
Office of the Commissioner.
(C) When to File. —
(1) The return of any individual specified above shall be filed on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of April of each year covering income
for the preceding taxable year.

(2) Individuals subject to tax on capital gains;
(a) From the sale or exchange of shares of stock not traded through
a local stock exchange as prescribed under Section 24(C) shall file
a return within thirty (30) days after each transaction and a final
consolidated return on or before April 15 of each year covering all
stock transactions of the preceding taxable year; and
(b) From the sale or disposition of real property under Section 24(D)
shall file a return within thirty (30) days following each sale or other
disposition.

(D) Husband and Wife. — Married individuals, whether citizens,
resident or nonresident aliens, who do not derive income purely
from compensation, shall file a return for the taxable year to Include
the Income of both spouses, but where It is impracticable for the
spouses to file one return, each spouse may file a separate return of
income but the returns so filed shall be consolidated by the Bureau for
purposes of verification for the taxable year.

(E) Return of Parent to Include Income of Children. — The
income of unmarried minors derived from properly received from a
living parent shall be included in the return of the parent, except (1)
when the donor's tax has been paid on such property, or (2) when the
transfer of such property is exempt from donor's tax.
(F) Persons Under Disability. — If the taxpayer Is unable to make
his own return, the return may be made by his duly authorized agent

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

260

or representative or by the guardian or other person charged with the
care of his person or property, the principal and his representative
or guardian assuming the responsibility of making the return and
incurring penalties provided for erroneous, false or fraudulent returns.

(G) Signature Presumed Correct. — The fact that an individual's
name is signed to a filed return shall be prima facie evidence for all
purposes that the return was actually signed by him.

Where to file?
1.

Authorized agent bank

2.

Revenue district officer

3.

Collection agent

4.

Duly authorized city treasurer where he is legally residing

5.

Office of the commissioner

When to file?

On or before April 15 of each year
What if husband and wife?
Those married individuals who do not derive income purely from
compensation shall file a return to include income from both
spouses. But if impractical, then they may file separate returns.

How about parents and kids?

•

Parents must include the income of unmarried minors derived
from property received from a living parent.
o

EXCEPT

When the donor's tax has already been paid on such
property
ii.

When the transfer of such property is exempt from
donor's tax

When to pay (applies to both individuals and corporations)
Sec. 56. Payment and Assessment ofIncome Tax for Individuals
and Corporation. —
(A) Payment of Tax. —
(1) In General. — The total amount of tax imposed by this Title shall
be paid by the person subject thereto at the time the return is filed. In

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

261

the case of tramp vessels, the shipping agents and/or the husbanding
agents, and in their absence, the captains thereof are required to file
the return herein provided and pay the tax due thereon before their
departure. Upon failure of the said agents or captains to file the return
and pay the tax, the Bureau of Customs is hereby authorized to hold
the vessel and prevent its departure until proof of payment of the tax
is presented or a sufficient bond is filed to answer for the tax due.
(2) Installment of Payment. — When a tax due is in excess of Two
thousand pesos (P2,000), the taxpayer other than a corporation, may
elect to pay the tax in two (2) equal installments, in which case, the
first installment shall be paid at the time the return is filed and the
second installment on or before October 15 following the close of the
calendar year, if any installment is not paid on or before the date fixed
for its payment, the whole amount of the tax unpaid becomes due
and payable together with the delinquency penalties. (As amended by
TRAIN)
(3) Payment of Capita! Gains Tax. — The total amount of tax
imposed and prescribed under Section 24(c), 24(D), 27(E)(2), 28(A)
(8)(c) and 28(B)(5)(c) shall be paid on the date the return prescribed
therefor is filed by the person liable thereto: Provided, That if the
seller submits proof of his intention to avail himself of the benefit
of exemption of capital gains under existing special laws, no such
payments shall be required: Provided, further, That in case of failure
to qualify for exemption under such special laws and implementing
rules and regulations, the tax due on the gains realized from the
original transaction shall immediately become due and payable,
subject to the penalties prescribed under applicable provisions of this
Code: Provided, finally, That if the seller, having paid the tax, submits
such proof of intent within six (6) months from the registration of
the document transferring the real property, he shall be entitled to
a refund of such tax upon verification of his compliance with the
requirements for such exemption.

In case the taxpayer elects and Is qualified to report the gain by
installments under Section 49 of this Code, the tax due from each
Installment payment shall be paid within (30) days from the receipt
of such payments.
No registration of any document transferring real property shall be
effected by the Register of Deeds unless the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative has certified that such transfer has been
reported, and the tax herein imposed, If any, has been paid.
(B) Assessment and Payment of Deficiency Tax. — After the
return is filed, the Commissioner shall examine it and assess the correct
amount of the tax. The tax or deficiency income tax so discovered
shall be paid upon notice and demand from the Commissioner.

As used in this Chapter, in respect of a tax imposed by this Title, the
term "deficiency" means:

J9JC9B0M

262

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(1) The amount by which the tax imposed by this Title exceeds the
amount shown as the tax by the taxpayer upon his return; but the
amount so shown on the return shall be increased by the amounts
previously assessed (or collected without assessment) as a deficiency,
and decreased by the amount previously abated, credited, returned
or otherwise repaid in respect of such tax; or (2) If no amount is
shown as the tax by the taxpayer upon this return, or if no return is
made by the taxpayer, then the amount by which the tax exceeds the
amounts previously assessed (or collected without assessment) as a
deficiency; but such amounts previously assessed or collected without
assessment shall first be decreased by the amounts previously abated,
credited returned or otherwise repaid in respect of such tax.

GR: It is "pay-as-you-file" and "pay-where-you-file."
A person may pay in installments if the tax due exceeds P2,000,
the second installment of which is due on October 15.

Filing of Return covering Capital Gains
Sale or exchange of stock NOT
traded through the local stock
exchange

Within 30 days after each transaction and final consolidated return on
or before April 15

Sale or disposition of real property

Within 30 days following each sale
or other disposition

Gains received by installment

Within 30 days from receipt of each
installment

Annual Declaration of income tax for individuals
Sec. 74. Declaration of Income Tax for Individuals. —

(A) In General. — Except as otherwise provided In this Section,
every individual subject to income tax under Sections 24 and 25(A)
of this Title, who is receiving self-employment income, whether it
constitutes the sole source of his income or in combination with
salaries, wages and other fixed or determinable Income, shall make
and file a declaration of his estimated income for the current taxable
year on or before May 15 of the same taxable year. In general, selfemployment income consists of the earnings derived by the individual
from the practice of profession or conduct of trade or business carried
on by him as a sole proprietor or by a partnership of which he is a
member. Nonresident Filipino citizens, with respect to income from
without the Philippines, and nonresident aliens not engaged in trade
or business in the Philippines, are not required to render a declaration
of estimated income tax. The declaration shall contain such pertinent

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

263

information as the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner, may, by rules and regulations prescribe. An individual
may make amendments of a declaration filed during the taxable
year under the rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of
Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner. (As amended
by TRAIN)

(B) Return and Payment of Estimated Income Tax by
Individuals. — The amount of estimated income as defined in
Subsection (C) with respect to which a declaration is required
under Subsection (A) shall be paid in four (4) installments. The first
installment shall be paid at the time of the declaration and the second
and third shall be paid on August 15 and November 15 of the current
year, respectively. The fourth installment shall be paid on or before
May 15 of the following calendar year when the final adjusted income
tax return is due to be filed. (As amended by TRAIN)
(C) Definition of Estimated Tax. — In the case of an individual, the
term "estimated tax" means the amount which the individual declared
as income tax in his final adjusted and annual income tax return for
the preceding taxable year minus the sum of the credits allowed under
this Title against the said tax. If, during the current taxable year, the
taxpayer reasonable expects to pay a bigger income tax, he shall file
an amended declaration during any interval of installment payment
dates.

Individuals who receive self-employment income must make and
file a declaration of his estimated income for the current year on
or before May 15
O

Remember this because as lawyers we will go under this
provision

Self-employed people do not need to file a new ITR on declaration
of estimated income tax since the annual ITR for the preceding
year may serve as the declaration.

Self-employment income consists of earnings from the practice of
a profession or conduct of trade or business carried on as the sole
proprietor or a partnership of which he is a member.
Quarterly payment of income tax, in four installments
O

First

at time of declaration

O

Second

August 15

O

Third

November 15

O

Fourth

On or before April 15

J9JC9B0M

1

264

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Corporate returns

Sec. 52. Corporation Returns. —

(A) Requirements. — Every corporation subject to the tax herein
imposed, except foreign corporations not engaged in trade or
business in the Philippines, shall render, in duplicate, a true and
accurate quarterly income tax return and final or adjustment return
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII of this Title. The
income tax return shall consist of a maximum of four (4) pages
in paper form or electronic form, be filed by the president, vicepresident or other principal officer, shall be sworn to by such officer
and by the treasurer or assistant treasurer, and shall only contain the
following information:
(1) Corporate profile and information;

(2) Gross sales, receipts or income from services rendered, or
conduct of trade or business, except income subject to final tax as
provided under this Code;

(3) Allowable deductions under this Code;

(4) Taxable income as defined in Section 31 of this Code; and
(5) Income tax due and payable.
Provided, That the foregoing provisions shall not affect the
implementation of Republic Act No. 10708 or TIMTA. (As amended
by TRAIN)
(B) Taxable Year of Corporation. — A corporation may employ
either calendar year or fiscal year as a basis for filing its annual
income tax return: Provided, That the corporation shall not change
the accounting period employed without prior approval from the
Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of Section 47 of this
Code.
(C) Return of Corporation Contemplating Dissolution or
Reorganization. — Every corporation shall, within thirty (30)
days after the adoption by the corporation of a resolution or plan
for its dissolution, or for the liquidation of the whole or any part
of its capital stock, including a corporation which has been notified
of possible involuntary dissolution by the Securities and Exchange
Commission, or for its reorganization, render a correct return to the
Commissioner, verified under oath, setting forth the terms of such
resolution or plan and such other information as the Secretary of
Finance, upon recommendation of the commissioner, shall, by rules
and regulations, prescribe.

The dissolving or reorganizing corporation shall, prior to the
Issuance by the Securities and Exchange Commission of the
Certificate of Dissolution or Reorganization, as may be defined by
rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

265

recommendation of the Commissioner, secure a certificate of tax
clearance from the Bureau of Internal Revenue which certificate shall
be submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission.

(D) Return on Capital Gains Realized from Sale of Shares
of Stock not Traded in the Local Stock Exchange. — Every
corporation deriving capital gains from the sale or exchange of shares
of stock not traded through a local stock exchange as prescribed
under Sections 24(c), 25(A)(3), 27(E)(2), 28(A)(8)(c) and 28(B)(5)
(c), shall file a return within thirty (30) days after each transactions
and a final consolidated return of all transactions during the taxable
year on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth (4th) month
following the close of the taxable year.

Sec. 53. Extension of Time to File Returns. — The Commissioner
may, in meritorious cases, grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing returns of income (or final and adjustment returns in case of
corporations), subject to the provisions of Section 56 of this Code.

All corporations, except foreign corporations not engaged in
trade or business in Philippines (because they are subject to final
withholding tax already), are required to file:

o

Quarterly income tax return, on a cumulative basis for the
preceding quarters

o

A final or adjustment return, on or before April 15

A corporation may use either calendar year or fiscal year basis for
filing.
Quarterly Income tax return
Sec. 75. Declaration of Quarterly Corporate Income Tax.
— Every corporation shall file in duplicate a quarterly summary
declaration of its gross income and deductions on a cumulative basis
for the preceding quarter or quarters upon which the income tax, as
provided in Title II of this Code, shall be levied, collected and paid. The
tax so computed shall be decreased by the amount of tax previously
paid or assessed during the preceding quarters and shall be paid not
later than sixty (60) days from the close of each of the first three (3)
quarters of the taxable year, whether calendar or fiscal year.

•

A corporation must file tax return for preceding quarter within 60
days following the close of each quarter.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

266

Final adjustment return

Sec. 76. Final Adjustment Return. — Every corporation liable to
tax under Section 27 shall file a final adjustment return covering the
total taxable income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year. If the
sum of the quarterly tax payments made during the said taxable year
is not equal to the total tax due on the entire taxable income of that
year, the corporation shall either:
(A) Pay the balance of tax still due; or
(B) Carry-over the excess credit; or
(C) Be credited or refunded with the excess amount paid, as the case
may be.

In case the corporation is entitled to a tax credit or refund of the
excess estimated quarterly income taxes paid, the excess amount
shown on its final adjustment return may be carried over and credited
against the estimated quarterly income tax liabilities for the taxable
quarters of the succeeding taxable years. Once the option to carryover and apply the excess quarterly income tax against Income tax
due for the taxable quarters of the succeeding taxable years has been
made, such option shall be considered irrevocable for that taxable
period and no application for cash refund or issuance of a tax credit
certificate shall be allowed therefor.
A corporation must file the final return covering the preceding
fiscal or calendar year.

If the sum of the quarterly returns is not equal to the total tax
due, the corporation shall either

o

Pay the balance;

o

Carry over the excess credit perpetually: or

o

Be credited or refunded with the excess amount.
•

But the corporation can choose only one option and it
is irrevocable, even if you didn't get the benefit of the
overpayment.

See comments in the section on remedies (refunds).

Where and when to file

Sec. 77. Place and Time of Filing and Payment of Quarterly
Corporate Income Tax. —
(A) Place of Filing. — Except as the Commissioner otherwise
permits, the quarterly income tax declaration required in Section 75
and the final adjustment return required in Section 76 shall be filed

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

267

with the authorized agent banks or Revenue District Officer or Collection
Agent or duly authorized Treasurer of the city or municipality having
jurisdiction over the location of the principal office of the corporation
filing the return or place where its main books of accounts and other
data from which the return is prepared are kept.
(B) Time of Filing the Income Tax Return. — The corporate
quarterly declaration shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the
close of each of the first three (3) quarters of the taxable year. The
final adjustment return shall be filed on or before the fifteenth (15th)
day of April, or on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth
(4th) month following the close of the fiscal year, as the case may be.

(C) Time of Payment of the Income Tax. — The income tax due
on the corporate quarterly returns and the final adjustment income
tax returns computed in accordance with Sections 75 and 76 shall
be paid at the time the declaration or return is filed in a manner
prescribed by the Commissioner.

Where to file: same as individuals
When to file:

o

For quarterly declarations: within 60 days following the close
of the quarter

o

For final: on or before April 15, or the 15th day of the 4th
month following the close of the fiscal year

When to pay: same as individuals

a)

Differentiate between a calendar year and a fiscal year.

b) When is the deadline for the filing of a corporation's final
adjustment return for a calendar year? How about for a fiscal year?
(2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

A calendar year means an accounting period of 12 months
which ends on the last day of December. A fiscal year means an
accounting period of 12 months ending on the last day of any
month other than December.

b)

The deadline for the filing of a corporation's final adjustment
return for a calendar year Is on April 15. The deadline for those
following a fiscal year Is on the 15th day of the 4th month following
the close of the fiscal year.

J9JC9B0M

268

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Filing of return covering capita! gains from shares of stock

Sec. 52. (D) Return on Capita! Gains Realized from Sale of
Shares of Stock not Traded in the Local Stock Exchange. —
Every corporation deriving capital gains from the sale or exchange
of shares of stock not traded through a local stock exchange as
prescribed under Sections 24(c), 25(A)(3), 27(E)(2), 28(A)(8)(c)
and 28(B)(5)(c), shall file a return within thirty (30) days after each
transactions and a final consolidated return of all transactions during
the taxable year on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the fourth
(4th) month following the close of the taxable year.
For sale or exchange of stock not traded through local stock
exchanges, within 30 days after each transaction and a final
consolidated return of ALL transactions during the year

Return of corporations contemplating dissolution/reorganization
Sec. 52. (C) Return of Corporation Contemplating Dissolution
or Reorganization. — Every corporation shall, within thirty (30)
days after the adoption by the corporation of a resolution or plan
for its dissolution, or for the liquidation of the whole or any part of
its capita! stock, Including a corporation which has been notified
of possible involuntary dissolution by the Securities and Exchange
Commission, or for its reorganization, render a correct return to the
Commissioner, verified under oath, setting forth the terms of such
resolution or plan and such other Information as the Secretary of
Finance, upon recommendation of the commissioner, shall, by rules
and regulations, prescribe.
The dissolving or reorganizing corporation shall, prior to the
issuance by the Securities and Exchange Commission of the
Certificate of Dissolution or Reorganization, as may be defined by
rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, secure a certificate of tax
clearance from the Bureau of Internal Revenue which certificate shall
be submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission.

After the corporation adopts a plan or resolution for its dissolution,
it must submit to the BIR, within 30 days from dissolution, a
short period return. The corporation must likewise secure a tax
clearance certificate from the BIR which it will submit to the SEC
before its dissolution. (Section 244, R.R. 2-1940)
They have to submit to the BIR:

o

A copy of the resolution

J9JC9B0M

INCOME TAX

269

O

Balance sheet at the date of dissolution and the income
statement covering the beginning of the year to the date of
dissolution

o

Names and addresses of the shareholders and their holdings

o

Value and a description of the assets received in liquidation
by each shareholder (Section 244, R.R. 2-1940)

Return of General Professional Partnerships

Sec. 55. Returns of General Professional Partnerships. — Every
general professional partnership shall file, in duplicate, a return of
its income, except income exempt under Section 32(B) of this Title,
setting forth the items of gross income and of deductions allowed
by this Title, and the names. Taxpayer Identification Numbers (TIN),
addresses and shares of each of the partners.
General professional partnerships and joint ventures for
construction, and other exempt corporations are STILL REQUIRED
to file their tax return, which should specify:

o

The items of gross income,

o

The deductions allowed, and

o

The names, TIN, addresses and shares of each partner.

Spouses Pablo Gonzales and Teresita Gonzales, both resident citizens,
acquire during their marriage a residential house and lot located in
Makati City, which Is being leased to a tenant for a monthly rental
of Pl 00,000. Mr. Pablo Gonzales is the President of PG Corporation
and he receives P50,000 salary per month. The spouses have only
one (1) minor child. In late June 2010, he was Immediately brought
to the hospital because of the heart attack and he was pronounced
dead on June 30, 2010. With no liabilities, the estate of the late Pablo
Gonzales was settled extra-judicially In early 2011.
a) Is Mr. Pablo Gonzales required to file income tax for 2010? If so,
how much Income must he declare for the year? How much personal
and additional exemption Is he entitled to? Explain your answer.

b) Is Mrs. Teresita Gonzales required to file income tax return for
2010? If so, how much Income must she declare for the year? How
much personal exemption Is she entitled to? Explain your answer.

c) Is the Estate of the late Pablo Gonzales required to file Income
tax return for 2010? If so, how much income must It declare for the
year? How much personal exemption is It entitled to? Explain your
answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

J9JC9B0M

270

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Suggested answers:

a) Mr. Gonzales is required to file income tax for 2010, but this
can be done in conjunction with his wife. The Tax Code states
that married individuals who do not derive income purely from
compensation shall file a return for the taxable year to include the
income of both spouses. In this case, Mr. Gonzales does not earn
purely compensation income as he has income also from the lease to
the tenant. He must declare his income from his work as a president
(P300,000 as of the end ofJune) and his share from the lease rentals,
which I assume is half of the monthly rental (P300,000 as of the end
of June.) He can claim P50,000 persona! exemption and the P25,000
for their dependent.
b) Mrs. Gonzales is likewise required to file an income tax return
for 2010, but this shall be filed together with her husband's, for the
same reasons in a). In this case, we assume that Mrs. Gonzales
receives half of the rental income and should thus declare P6OO,OOO
which will cover her share for the entire 2010. As she earns income,
she can claim personal exemption of P50,000; but not the P25,000
as this was previously claimed by her husband.

c)
The estate is likewise required to file an income tax return for
2010; the return will cover P3OO,OOO which will cover Mr. Gonzales'
share of the rental income from the time he passed away until the
end of the year. The estate cannot claim any exemption because the
previous exemption has been repealed by TRAIN. (Answer adjusted
to reflect TRAIN, obvs.)

J9JC9B0M

I

i
i

ESTATE TAX
A.

Principles and Definition

•

Estate tax is the tax on the right to transmit property at death
and on certain transfers by the decedent during his lifetime which
are made by the law equivalent of testamentary dispositions.

•

It accrues upon the death of the decedent.

•

A transmission by inheritance is taxable at the time of the
predecessor's death, notwithstanding the postponement of the
actual possession or enjoyment of the estate by the beneficiary.
(Lorenzo v. Posadas, G.R. No. L-43083, June 18, 1937)

•

The tax is measured by the value of the property transmitted at
the time of death, regardless of its appreciation or depreciation.

•

The accrual of the tax is distinct from the obligation to pay the
tax.

B.

Rates and Value
Sec. 84. Rates of Estate Tax. —There shall be levied, assessed,
collected and paid upon the transfer of the net estate as determined
in accordance with Sections 85 and 86 of every decedent, whether
resident or nonresident of the Philippines, a tax at the rate of six
percent (6%) based on the value of such net estate. (As amended by
TRAIN)

TRAIN has removed the graduated rates for estate tax.
As it now stands, estate tax has a flat rate of 6% based on the
value of the net estate.

Sec. 88. Determination of the Value of the Estate. —

(A) Usufruct. — To determine the value of the right of usufruct, use
or habitation, as well as that of annuity, there shall be taken into
account the probable life of the beneficiary in accordance with the
latest Basic Standard Mortality Table, to be approved by the Secretary
of Finance, upon recommendation of the Insurance Commissioner.

271

i

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

272

(B) Properties. — The estate shall be appraised at its fair market
value as of the time of death. However, the appraised value of real
property as of the time of death shall be, whichever is higher of:
(1) The fair market value as determined by the Commissioner, or

(2) The fair market value as shown in the schedule of values fixed
by the Provincial and City Assessors.
The properties comprising the gross estate shall be valued based
on the FMV as of the time of death.

In case of real property, the fair market value shall be:
O

The FMV as determined by the Commissioner; or

O

The FMV as shown in the schedule of values fixed by the
Provincial and City Assessors

■

Whichever is HIGHER

In case of personal property recently acquired by the decedent,
the purchase price may indicate the FMV.
O

In case of personal property not recently acquired, there
should be some evidence of the FMV.

For shares of stock, the FMV shall depend on whether the shares
are listed or unlisted in the stock exchange.
o

O

If unlisted
•

Common shares — based on their book value

■

Preferred shares — based on their par value

If listed

■

The mean between the highest and lowest quotation on
the date of death;

■

If none, then the date nearest the death.

For use of usufruct, there shall be taken into account the probable
life of the beneficiary in accordance with the latest basic standard
mortality table, to be approved by the Secretary of Finance.

C.

Gross Estate
Sec. 85. Gross Estate. — The value of the gross estate of the
decedent shall be determined by including the value at the time of his
death of all property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, wherever
situated: Provided, however, That in the case of a nonresident

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

273

decedent who at the time of his death was not a citizen of the
Philippines, only that part of the entire gross estate which is situated
in the Philippines shall be included in his taxable estate.

(A) Decedent's Interest. — To the extent of the interest therein of
the decedent at the time of his death;
Sec. 104. Definitions. — For purposes of this Title, the terms
"gross estate" and "gifts" include real and personal property, whether
tangible or intangible, or mixed, wherever situated: Provided,
however. That where the decedent or donor was a nonresident alien
at the time of his death or donation, as the case may be, his real and
personal property so transferred but which are situated outside the
Philippines shall not be included as part of his "gross estate" or "gross
gift": Provided, further, That franchise which must be exercised in the
Philippines; shares, obligations or bonds issued by any corporation
or sociedad anonima organized or constituted in the Philippines in
accordance with its laws; shares, obligations or bonds by any foreign
corporation eighty-five percent (85%) of the business of which is
located in the Philippines; shares, obligations or bonds issued by any
foreign corporation if such shares, obligations or bonds have acquired
a business situs in the Philippines; shares or rights in any partnership,
business or industry established in the Philippines, shall be considered
as situated in the Philippines: Provided, still further, that no tax shall
be collected under this Title in respect of intangible personal property:
(a) if the decedent at the time of his death or the donor at the time
of the donation was a citizen and resident of a foreign country which
at the time of his death or donation did not impose a transfer tax of
any character, in respect of intangible personal property of citizens
of the Philippines not residing in that foreign country, or (b) if the
laws of the foreign country of which the decedent or donor was a
citizen and resident at the time of his death or donation allows a
similar exemption from transfer or death taxes of every character
or description in respect of intangible personal property owned by
citizens of the Philippines not residing in that foreign country.

For estate tax purposes, residence refers to the domicile of the
person. (CIR v. de Lara, G.R. No. L-9456, January 6, 1958)
For residents and citizens, gross estate includes ALL properties,
real or personal, tangible or intangible, WHEREVER situated.

For nonresident aliens, gross estate includes only properties
situated in the Philippines.
O

Except with respect to INTANGIBLE personal property (IPP),
its inclusion to the gross estate is subject to the rule of
reciprocity.

*

If the foreign country of the nonresident alien does not
impose a transfer tax of any character on the IPP of
Filipinos not residents of that foreign country; or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

274

•

The foreign country of the nonresident alien allows a
similar exemption from transfer tax in respect of IPP
owned by Filipinos not residents of that foreign country,

•

Then IPPs of the nonresident alien here are exempt
from the estate tax.

•

Reciprocity must be total. If any of the two states or
countries collects or imposes and does not exempt
any transfer, death, legacy, or succession tax of any
character, reciprocity does not apply. (CIR v. Fisher, G.R.
No. L-11622, January 28, 1961)

■

Reciprocity in exemption does not require the "foreign
country" to possess international personality. (CIR v.
Campos Rueda, G.R. No. L-13250, October 29, 1971)

Gross estate includes any interest or right in the nature of
property, but less than title, having value or capable of having
value, like
O

Dividends declared, but paid after the death

O

Partnership profits

O

Right of usufruct

The following, among others, are intangible personal properties
located in the Philippines:
O

Franchise which must be exercised in the Philippines

O

Shares, obligations or bonds issued by any corporation or
sociedad anonima organized or constituted in the Philippines
in accordance with its laws

O

Shares, obligations or bonds issued by any foreign corporation
85% of the business of which is located in the Philippines
•

Note that this is different from the 50% requirement in the
situs rules for dividends issued by a foreign corporation
for income tax,

O

Shares, obligations or bonds issued by ay foreign corporation
if such shares, obligations or bonds have acquired a business
situs in the Philippines, and

o

Shares or rights in any partnership, business or industry in
the Philippines.

Karissa is the registered owner of a beachfront property in Kawayan,
Quezon which she acquired in 2015. Unknown to many, Karissa was
only holding the property in trust for a rich politician who happened
to be her lover. It was the politician who paid for the full purchase

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

275

price of the Kawayan property. No deed of trust or any other
document showing that Karissa was only holding the property in
trust for the politician was executed between him and Karissa.
Karissa died single on May 1, 2017 due to a freak surfing accident.
She left behind a number of personal properties as well as real
properties, including the Kawayan property. Karissa's sister,
Karen, took charge of registering Karissa's estate as a taxpayer
and reporting, for income tax and VAT purposes, the rental income
received by the estate from real properties. However, it was only on
October 1, 2017 when Karen managed to file an estate tax return for
her sister's estate.

Should the beachfront property be included In Karissa's gross estate?
(2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Yes, it should be included in Karissa's gross
estate. Gross estate includes all property of the decedent at the time
of his or her death. It also includes any interest or right in the
nature of property. In this case, she is the registered owner of the
property. Thus, even if she's holding it in trust (which her estate
will find difficult to prove given there is no deed of trust), it should
be part of the gross estate as she had an interest or right to the
property at the time of her death.

Properties not in the estate
•

There may be properties, which at the time of the decedent's
death, are not in the estate because they were transferred by him
during his lifetime.

O

These transfers are:

Transfers in contemplation of death;
Revocable transfers;

Transfers under a general power of appointment; and
Transfers for an insufficient consideration.

The values of these properties will be included in the determination
of the gross estate for estate tax purposes.
As such, the gross estate, for purposes of the estate tax, may
exceed the actual value of his assets at the time of his death as
it includes the value of transfers of property by him during his
lifetime that partake of the nature of testamentary dispositions.

These kinds of transfers have the following in common:

o

They are ostensible transfers, usually with the purpose to
evade the estate tax;

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

276

O

They are extension of interests; and

O

If the transfers are in fact for a bona fide consideration, then
they will not form part of the gross estate (this proviso is
present in all the provisions regarding these transfers)
•

This is important. As long as the transfers were for a bona
fide consideration, then you don't have to add it anymore
in determining the gross estate.

Transfers in contemplation of death

(B) Transfer in Contemplation of Death. — To the extent of
any interest therein of which the decedent has at any time made
a transfer, by trust or otherwise, in contemplation of or intended to
take effect in possession or enjoyment at or after death, or of which
he has at any time made a transfer, by trust or otherwise, under
which he has retained for his life or for any period which does not in
fact end before his death (1) the possession or enjoyment of, or the
right to the income from the property, or (2) the right, either alone
or in conjunction with any person, to designate the person who shall
possess or enjoy the property or the income therefrom; except in
case of a bona fide sale for an adequate and full consideration in
money or money's worth.
A transfer in contemplation of death is a transfer motivated by
the thought of death, although death may not be imminent.
The following are examples of circumstances which may be taken
into consideration in determining whether the transfer was made
in contemplation of death:

o

We can look at the age and state of health of the decedent at
the time of the transfer (Is he terminally ill?)

o

Length of time between the transfer and the date of the
death.

o

Concurrent making of a will or making of a will within a short
time after the transfer.

The following are transfers in contemplation of death:
o

Transfers, by trust or otherwise, in contemplation or intended
to take effect (in possession or enjoyment) at or after death,

o

Transfers, by trust or otherwise, under which the decedent
has retained for his life (or for any period which does not in
fact end before his death) the possession or enjoyment of,
or the right to the income from the property, or the right to

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

277

designate the person who shall possess or enjoy the property
or the income therefrom.
But again, in the case of a bona fide sale for an adequate and
full consideration in money or money's worth, the value of the
property transferred will not be considered in determining the
gross estate.

Mr. Mayuga donated his residential house and lot to his son and duly
paid the donor's tax. In the Deed of Donation, Mr. Mayuga expressly
reserved for himself the usufruct over the property for as long as he
lived. Will the house and lot form part of Mr. Mayuga's estate? (2013
Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Yes, the donation is a transfer under which he
has retained for his life the possession or enjoyment of the property.
This is considered a transfer in contemplation of death, and thus
should form part of his gross estate.

Mr. Agustin, 75 years old and suffering from an incurable disease,
decided to sell for valuable and sufficient consideration a house and
lot to his son. He died one year later.
In the settlement of Mr. Agustin's estate, the BIR argued that the
house and lot were transferred in contemplation of death and should
therefore form part of the gross estate for estate tax purposes.
Is the BIR correct? (2013 Bar Exam)

I

Suggested answer: The BIR is once again wrong. The sale of the house
and lot to his son was made for valuable and sufficient consideration,
and hence is not deemed a transfer in contemplation of death. The
Tax Code explicitly states that transfers for a valuable and sufficient
consideration are not considered transfers in contemplation of death.

Revocable transfers

(C) Revocable Transfer. —

(1) To the extent of any interest therein, of which the decedent has
at any time made a transfer (except In case of a bona fide sale for an
adequate and full consideration in money or money's worth) by trust
or otherwise, where the enjoyment thereof was subject at the date of
his death to any change through the exercise of a power (in whatever
capacity exercisable) by the decedent alone or by the decedent in
conjunction with any other person (without regard to when or from
what source the decedent acquired such power), to alter, amend,
revoke, or terminate, or where any such power is relinquished in
contemplation of the decedent's death.

I

J9JC9B0M

278

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(2) For the purpose of this Subsection, the power to alter, amend or
revoke shall be considered to exist on the date of the decedent's death
even though the exercise of the power is subject to a precedent giving
of notice or even though the alteration, amendment or revocation
takes effect only on the expiration of a stated period after the exercise
of the power, whether or not on or before the date of the decedent's
death notice has been given or the power has been exercised. In such
cases, proper adjustment shall be made representing the interests
which would have been excluded from the power if the decedent had
lived, and for such purpose if the notice has not been given or the
power has not been exercised on or before the date of his death, such
notice shall be considered to have been given, or the power exercised,
on the date of his death.

A revocable transfer is a transfer where the terms of the enjoyment
of the property may be altered, amended, revoked, or terminated
by the decedent.
It is sufficient that the decedent had the power to revoke, though
he did not exercise the power to revoke.

Again, the same rule with bona fide sales applies.
Transfers Under a General Power of Appointment

(D) Property Passing Under General Power of Appointment.
— To the extent of any property passing under a general power of
appointment exercised by the decedent: (1) by will, or (2) by deed
executed in contemplation of, or intended to take effect in possession
or enjoyment at, or after his death, or (3) by deed under which he has
retained for his life or any period not ascertainable without reference
to his death or for any period which does not in fact end before his
death (a) the possession or enjoyment of, or the right to the income
from, the property, or (b) the right, either alone or In conjunction with
any person, to designate the persons who shall possess or enjoy the
property or the income therefrom; except in case of a bona fide sale
for an adequate and full consideration in money or money's worth.

A power of appointment refers to the right to designate the person
or persons who will succeed the property of a prior decedent.
A general power of appointment is one which may be exercised in
favor of anybody. This forms part of the powerholder's estate.

o

Leo donated property to Andres, with a provision that Andres
can transfer the property to anyone. Andres transferred it to
Xavi. The property should be included in the gross estate of
Andres.

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

279

A limited power of appointment is one which may be exercised
only in favor of a certain person or persons designated by the
prior decedent.

Leo donated property to Andres, with a provision that Andres
should transfer the property to Xavi, and only Xavi. The value
of the property should not be included in the gross estate of
Andres.

O

In order that property passing under a power of appointment
may be included in the gross estate of the transferor, the power
of appointment must be a general power of appointment.

Again, the bona fide sale rule applies.
Life Insurance Proceeds
(E) Proceeds of Life Insurance. — To the extent of the
amount receivable by the estate of the deceased, his executor, or
administrator, as insurance under policies taken out by the decedent
upon his own life, irrespective of whether or not the insured retained
the power of revocation, or to the extent of the amount receivable by
any beneficiary designated in the policy of insurance, except when
it is expressly stipulated that the designation of the beneficiary is
irrevocable.

Proceeds of insurance under policies taken out by the decedent
upon his life shall constitute part of the gross estate if the
beneficiary is:

1.

The estate of the decedent, his executor or administrator AS
SUCH;or

2.

A third person (not those in #1), and the designation of the
beneficiary is revocable.

The Insurance Code states that the designation of a beneficiary is
generally revocable.
o

Except of course, when the policy states that the designation
Is irrevocable. In such cases, the proceeds are not considered
as part of the decedent's estate.

For #1, doesn't matter if revocable or not. As long as the
beneficiary is the estate of the decedent, or his executor or
administrator as such, then you include that in the gross estate.

For #2, life insurance proceeds are excluded, provided:
o

Irrevocable, and

J9JC9B0M

1
TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

280

O

Payable to beneficiary other than estate, executor, administrator

Life insurance proceeds must be taken out BY THE DECEDENT.
O

So not included in the computation of gross income if the
proceeds are from:

•

Company policy;

•

GSIS; or

■

SSS.

O

It must stem from life insurance to be included in the gross
estate.

o

If accident insurance, not included in the gross estate.

Transfers of Insufficient Consideration

(F) Prior Interests. — Except as otherwise specifically provided
therein, Subsections (B), (C) and (E) of this Section shall apply to the
transfers, trusts, estates, interests, rights, powers and relinquishment
of powers, as severally enumerated and described therein, whether
made, created, arising, existing, exercised or relinquished before or
after the effectivity of this Code.

(G) Transfers of Insufficient Consideration. — If any one of
the transfers, trusts, interests, rights or powers enumerated and
described in Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this Section is made,
created, exercised or relinquished for a consideration in money or
money's worth, but Is not a bona fide sale for an adequate and full
consideration in money or money's worth, there shall be included in
the gross estate only the excess of the fair market value, at the time
of death, of the property otherwise to be included on account of such
transaction, over the value of the consideration received therefor by
the decedent.

In the transfers In contemplation of death, revocable transfer, or
transfer under a GPA, the value to include in the gross estate will
be determined under the following rules:

o

If the transfer was in the nature of a bona fide sale for an
adequate and full consideration in money or money's worth,
no value will be included in the gross estate;

o

If the consideration received on the transfer was less than
adequate and full, the value to include in the gross estate

■

J9JC9B0M

281

ESTATE TAX

will be the excess of the fair market value at the time of the
decedent's death over the consideration received;
O

If there was no consideration received on the transfer
(donation mortis causa}, the value to include in the gross
estate will be the fair market value of the property at the time
of the decedent's death.

When looking at a transaction, ask yourself, "Was the consideration
insufficient?"
O

If yes, then add the balance of the FMV at the time of death
and the consideration.

O

If no, then it was a bona fide sale. Don't add the value to the
gross estate.

Capital of the Surviving Spouse

(H) Capital of the Surviving Spouse. — The capital of the surviving
spouse of a decedent shall not, for the purpose of this Chapter, be
deemed a part of his or her gross estate.

•

The capital of the surviving spouse shall not form part of the
decedent's gross estate.

Let's take a quick look at some cases on estate tax. Hopefully,
you already read the originals of these. If not, you still have time.

Was the
transferee a
voluntary or
compulsory
heir?

Time
between
transfer
and
death

Was
there a
will?

What did the
Supreme Court
say?

Zapanta v.
Posadas, G.R.
No. 29204,
December 29,
1928

Compulsory

None

Yes

Not considered
advances. Not
part of gross
estate.

Tuason v.
Posadas, G.R.
No. L-30885,
January 23, 1930

Voluntary

3 years

Yes

Considered
as advances,
because the
donees became
legatees in the
will. Part of gross
estate, include it.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

282

Dizon v.
Posadas, G.R.
No. L-36770,
November 4,
1932

Compulsory

1 day

No

Considered
advances. The
donee is a
compulsory heir.
Include it in the
gross estate

Vida! de Roces
v. Posadas, G.R.
No. L-34937,
March 13, 1993

Voluntary

9 months

Yes

Considered
advances.
Donees were
legatees in the
will. Include
that in the gross
estate

When it comes to transfers done during the lifetime of a decedent,
there is a disputable presumption that the transfers are in
contemplation of death if the recipients are compulsory heirs.

o

The government presumes that one is transferring property
beforehand to escape the estate tax, and instead pay the
lower donor's tax.

o

The case of Zapanta showed that the presumption is
disputable. There, the Court considered the gifts as not
advances even if the recipients were compulsory heirs. The
reason for this was the condition imposed upon the recipients
by the decedent (they had to pay the decedent a certain
amount of rice and money during his lifetime). It showed
that the transfer was not in contemplation of death, because
the decedent in fact, would benefit from the transfer.

The presence of a will also plays a part. In the cases of Tuason and
Vidal de Roces, the Court considered the transfers as advances
because a will was made making the transferees legatees. This
played a part in the Court's impression that there was an intention
of the decedent to minimize his gross estate.

Thus, when looking at cases like these, the totality of all the
factors and facts must be taken into consideration.
Does the government always want to consider a transfer an
advance (to be covered by the estate tax)? Not necessarily. There
are instances where they will argue for it to be considered under
the donor's tax.

In summary, gross estate is made up of:
1.

The decedent's interests at the time of his death

2.

Transfers made during his lifetime (in contemplation of death,
revocable, and under a GPA)

ESTATE TAX

283

3.

Life insurance proceeds

4.

Some other stuff required by law to be included in the gross
estate in order to allow deductions (claims against insolvent
persons, unpaid mortgage, value of the family home,
vanishing deductions, and the retirement benefits under R.A.
4917)

D. Computation for the Net Estate
•

The basic equation to determine the net taxable estate is (gross
estate — deductions)

•

The complication arises when the decedent is married at the time
of his death. We'll tackle that later.

•

First, let's take a look at the deductions.

Deductions for a Citizen or a Resident
The deductions from the gross estate are:

I:

s
£

F

J

3

1

r
r
K

■0

J9JC9B0M

o

Standard deduction of P5,000,000;

o

Claims against the estate;

o

Claims against insolvent persons;

o

Unpaid mortgages or indebtedness on property;

o

Accrued taxes and losses;

o

Vanishing deductions;

o

Transfers for public use;

o

Family home to the extent of P10,000,000;

o

Amounts received by heirs under R.A. 4917; and

o

Net share of the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership,
if any.

These deductions are allowed for a citizen or resident of the
Philippines. Nonresident aliens have a different set of deductions.
Because of TRAIN, funeral expenses, medical expenses, and
judicial expenses are no longer deductions.

SEC. 86. Computation of Net Estate. — For the purpose of the
tax imposed in this Chapter, the value of the net estate shall be
determined:
(A) Deductions Allowed to the Estate of a Citizen or a Resident. — In
the case of a citizen or resident of the Philippines, by deducting from
the value of the gross estate —

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

284

Standard Deduction
(1) Standard Deduction. — An amount equivalent to Five million
pesos (P5,000,000).

Don't forget to deduct P5,000,000 every time you compute for
the net estate. You don't need any substantiation either.
Claims against the estate
(2) For claims against the estate: Provided, That at the time the
indebtedness was incurred the debt instrument was duly notarized
and, if the loan was contracted within three (3) years before the
death of the decedent, the administrator or executor shall submit a
statement showing the disposition of the proceeds of the loan.

"Claims" means debts or demands of a pecuniary nature which
could have been enforced against the deceased in his lifetime and
could have been reduced to simple money judgments.
o

In other words, if enforceable against him when he was alive,
the obligations will be claims against his estate when he dies.

o

So, an obligation that has prescribed during his lifetime,
or that was unenforceable against him, will not be a claim
against his estate when he shall be dead.

Claims against the estate or indebtedness in respect of property
may also arise out of contract, tort, or operation of law. (R.R. 122018)
Requisites:

1.

The liability must represent a personal obligation of the
deceased at the time of his death,

2.

The liability was contracted in good faith and for adequate
and full consideration,

3.

The claim must be a debt or claim which is valid in law and
enforceable in court, and

4.

The indebtedness must not have been condoned by the
creditor during the lifetime of the decedent, or the actions to
collect must not have prescribed.

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

285

Note that if the debts were condoned AFTER the decedent's death,
the debts are deductible, following the date-of-death valuation
rule. (Dizon v. CTA, G.R. No. 140944, April 30, 2008)
R.R. 12-2018 has outlined the documentary requirements for
different kinds of unpaid obligations:
O

For loans:

Debt instrument must be notarized at the time the
indebtedness was incurred

•

•

O

0

EXCEPT for loans granted by financial institutions
where notarization is not part of the business practice

■

Duly notarized certification from the creditor as to the
unpaid balance of the debt, including interest as of the
time of death;

■

Proof of financial capacity of the creditor to lend the
amount at the time the loan was granted; and

•

Statement under oath by the administrator or executor of
the estate reflecting the disposition of the proceeds of the
loan if said loan was contracted within three years prior
to the death of the decedent.

For unpaid obligations from purchase of goods or services:

•

Documents evidencing purchase of goods or service (like
official receipts, etc.) or contracts of service;

•

Duly notarized certification from the creditor as to the
unpaid balance of the debt, including interest as of the
time of death; and

■

Certified true copy of the latest audited balance sheet
of the creditor with a detailed schedule of tis receivable
showing the unpaid balance.

For settlements made through court, the documents filed in
court and the court order approving such claims, in addition
to the documents above.

There Is no requirement to add the amount to the gross estate
(as compared to claims against insolvent persons/mortgage).
This is a DIRECT DEDUCTION.

Claims against insolvent persons

(3) For claims of the deceased against insolvent persons where the
value of decedent's interest therein is included in the value of the
gross estate.

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

286

Claims against insolvent persons are deductions from the gross
estate
O

SUBJECT to the condition that the full amounts of the
receivables are first included in the gross estate.

The deduction from the gross estate will be the uncollectible
portion.
Insolvent persons are those defined under FR.IA and other existing
laws. (R.R. 12-2018)

Unpaid mortgage or indebtedness on property

(4) For unpaid mortgages upon, or any indebtedness in respect to,
property where the value of decedent's interest therein, undiminished
by such mortgage or indebtedness, is included in the value of the
gross estate, but not including any income tax upon income received
after the death of the decedent, or property taxes not accrued before
his death, or any estate tax.

The deduction herein allowed in the case of claims against the estate,
unpaid mortgages or any indebtedness shall, when founded upon
a promise or agreement, be limited to the extent that they were
contracted bona fide and for an adequate and full consideration in
money or money's worth.
The mortgage or indebtedness will be claimed as a deduction
from the gross estate.

If the loan is merely an accommodation loan, where the proceeds
of the loan went to another person, the value of the unpaid loan
must be included in the receivable of the estate. (R.R. 12-2018)

For 1) claims against insolvent persons and 2) unpaid mortgage/
indebtedness on property, the values of each must first be added
to the gross estate.
o

These are called zero-sum computations. They do not
really benefit the heirs because these transactions were not
supposed to be part of the gross estate anyway. Note that the
value of the property undiminished by the mortgage must be
included in the gross estate. (R.R. 12-2018)

Example:
Kobe Ryan died leaving real property with a FMV of
P1M, subject to a mortgage in the amount of P600k.
Before the estate can deduct the P600k, it has to include
the total FMV of the property to the gross estate. (We
miss you, Bean.)

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

287

Taxes
•

Taxes are deductions from the gross estate if such taxes accrued
prior to the decedent's death. (R.R. 12-2018)

•

Those that accrued after the decedent's death are not deductions
from gross estate.

•

These taxes can NOT be deducted:

O

Income tax on income received after death

O

Property taxes not accrued before death

O

Estate tax

Losses

There shall also be deducted losses incurred during the settlement of
the estate arising from fires, storms, shipwreck, or other casualties,
or from robbery, theft or embezzlement, when such losses are not
compensated for by insurance or otherwise, and if at the time of the
filing of the return such losses have not been claimed as a deduction
for the income tax purposes in an income tax return, and provided
that such losses were incurred not later than the last day for the
payment of the estate tax as prescribed in Subsection (A) of Section
91.

Losses are deductible from the gross estate if:

1.

Arising from fire, storm, shipwreck, or other casualty, robbery,
theft or embezzlement;

2.

Not compensated by insurance or otherwise;

3.

Not claimed as a deduction in an Income tax return of the
estate subject to income tax;

4.

Occurring during the settlement of the estate; and

5.

Occurring before the last day for the payment of the estate
tax (one year after the decedent's death, or the allowed
extension).

Example:

Ronaldo McDonaldo died January 1, 2018. A fire razed his mansion
on March 1, 2018. His estate was settled January 1, 2020. He can
claim a deduction, because the fire happened within a year of his
death.
Joe Li Bag died January 1, 2018. A fire razed his shanty on
January 19, 2019. He cannot claim a deduction, because the fire
happened more than a year after his death.

J9JC9B0M

288

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Vanishing deductions

(5) Property Previously Taxed. — An amount equal to the value
specified below of any property forming a part of the gross estate
situated in the Philippines of any person who died within five (5) years
prior to the death of the decedent, or transferred to the decedent
by gift within five (5) years prior to his death, where such property
can be identified as having been received by the decedent from the
donor by gift, or from such prior decedent by gift, bequest, devise
or inheritance, or which can be identified as having been acquired in
exchange for property so received:

One hundred percent (100%) of the value, if the prior decedent
died within one (1) year prior to the death of the decedent, or if the
property was transferred to him by gift within the same period prior
to his death;

Eighty percent (80%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more
than one (1) year but not more than two (2) years prior to the death
of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift
within the same period prior to his death;
Sixty percent (60%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than
two (2) years but not more than three (3) years prior to the death of
the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within
the same period prior to his death;

Forty percent (40%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more than
three (3) years but not more than four (4) years prior to the death of
the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift within
the same period prior to his death;

Twenty percent (20%) of the value, if the prior decedent died more
than four (4) years but not more than five (5) years prior to the death
of the decedent, or if the property was transferred to him by gift
within the same period prior to his death;
These deductions shall be allowed only where a donor's tax or estate
tax imposed under this Title was finally determined and paid by or
on behalf of such donor, or the estate of such prior decedent, as
the case may be, and only in the amount finally determined as the
value of such property in determining the value of the gift, or the
gross estate of such prior decedent, and only to the extent that the
value of such property is included in the decedent's gross estate, and
only if in determining the value of the estate of the prior decedent,
no deduction was allowable under paragraph (2) In respect of the
property or properties given in exchange therefor. Where a deduction
was allowed of any mortgage or other lien in determining the donor's
tax, or the estate tax of the prior decedent, which was paid in whole
or in part prior to the decedent's death, then the deduction allowable
under said Subsection shall be reduced by the amount so paid. Such
deduction allowable shall be reduced by an amount which bears the
same ratio to the amounts allowed as deductions under paragraphs

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

289

(1) and (3) of this Subsection as the amount otherwise deductible
under said paragraph (2) bears to the value of the decedent's estate.
Where the property referred to consists of two or more items, the
aggregate value of such items shall be used for the purpose of
computing the deduction.

•

Property may change hands within a very short period of time
by reason of the early death of the owner who received it by
inheritance or by donation (gift).

•

To provide relief to the burdened taxpayer, vanishing deductions
are allowed to reduce the gross estate.

•

Vanishing deductions are allowed when:

1.

The present decedent died within five years from receipt of
the property from a prior decedent or donor;

2.

The property on which the vanishing deduction is being
claimed must be located in the Philippines;

3.

The property must have formed part of the taxable estate of
the prior decedent, or of the taxable gift of the donor;

4.

The estate tax on the prior succession or the donor's tax on
the gift must have been finally determined and paid;

5.

The property must be identified as the one received from the
prior decedent or donor, or something acquired in exchange
therefore;

6.

No vanishing deduction on the property was allowable to the
estate of the prior decedent.

How do we compute?
Step 1: Get the basis. Either the value of the property in the prior
estate/value used for donor's tax purposes OR the value of
the property in the present estate, whichever is LOWER.

Step 2: The Step 1 value will be reduced by any payment made
by the present decedent on any mortgage or lien on the
property (when such mortgage/lien was used as a deduction
on the prior dead guy's estate, or gift of the donor)
Step 3: The Step 2 value shall be further reduced by:
Step 2 value

Gross Estate

x

Expenses, losses, indebtedness,
taxes and transfers for public use

This is done to prevent double deduction.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

290

Step 4: Look at the chart below and multiply to get the value that
you can actually deduct.
%

If received by inheritance or gift

100

Within one year prior to death of the decedent

80

More than one year but not more than two years

60

More than two years but not more than 3 years

40

More than 3 years but not more than 4 years

20

More than 4 years but not more than 5 years

Example:
Tony Stank inherited land from his pop, Howard Stank, with a fair
market value of P500k at the time of the inheritance. Two and a
half years later, Tony died after stealing Than Nosh's bejeweled
glove and getting electrocuted. The FMV of the land was P600k at
that time. The gross estate, on which the land was part, was P2M.
Deductions from the gross estate (not including the family home
medical expenses, standard deduction, or R.A. 4917 receivable)
amounted to P400k.

What is the vanishing deduction?
Step 1: Get the lower value.

P500k

Step 2: No mortgage mentioned, so

P500k

Step 3:

I

P500k
P2M

x

PlOOk

P400k =

Basis of the vanishing deduction (500K - 100K)

=

P400k

Vanishing deduction (60% of P400k)

=

P240k

During his lifetime, Mr. Sakitin obtained a loan amounting to PIO
million from Bangko Uno for the purchase of a parcel of land located
in Makati City, using such property as collateral for the loan. The loan
was evidenced by a duly notarized promissory note. Subsequently,
Mr. Sakitin died. At the time of his death, the unpaid balance of the
loan amounted to P2 million. The heirs of Mr. Sakitin deducted the
amount of P2 million from the gross estate, as part of the "Claims
against the Estate." Such deduction was disallowed by the Bureau
of Interna! Revenue (BIR) Examiner, claiming that the mortgaged
property was not included in the computation of the gross estate. Do
you agree with the BIR? Explain. (2014 Bar Exam)

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

291

Suggested answer: I agree with the BIR. Unpaid mortgages can be
deducted from gross estate as long as the value of the mortgaged
property is included in the computation of the gross estate. The heirs
of Mr. Sakitin didn't include the value in his gross estate, so he can't
deduct it.
The heirs also assumed the unpaid mortgage was a claim against
the estate, which, to be fair to them, is a direct deduction that need
not be included in the computation of gross estate. However, they
assumed wrong and got burned. Just like a spurned lover.

Transfers for public use

(6) Transfers for Public Use. — The amount of all the bequests,
legacies, devises or transfers to or for the use of the Government of
the Republic of the Philippines, or any political subdivision thereof, for
exclusively public purposes.
•

Transfers for public use are dispositions in a last will and
testament, or a transfer to take effect after death, in favor of
the Government of the Philippines, or any political subdivision
thereof, for exclusively public purposes.

•

You can deduct the value of the property transferred to the
government.

Family home

(7) The Family Home. — An amount equivalent to the current fair
market value of the decedent's family home: Provided, however,
That If the said current fair market value exceeds Ten million pesos
(PIO,000,000), the excess shall be subject to estate tax.
•

The allowable deduction Is the amount equivalent to the current
FMV of the family home.

o

•

But the maximum amount you can deduct Is P10,000,000.

The family home follows the definition of the Family Code: it's
the dwelling house (including the land where it's situated), where
the husband and wife, or a head of the family, and members of
their family reside. It's deemed constituted on the house and lot
from the time it's actually occupied as a family residence and
considered as such for as long as any of its beneficiaries actually
resides therein.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

292

O

However, actual occupancy shall not be considered Interrupted
or abandoned in such cases as the temporary absence from
the constituted family home due to travel or studies or work
abroad.

O

The family home is generally characterized by permanency.

O

A person may only constitute only one family home. (R.R. 122018)

O

Head of the family is an unmarried or legally separated man
or woman with one or both parents, or with one or more
brothers or sisters, or with one or more legitimate, recognized
natural or legally adopted children living with and dependent
upon him or her for their chief support, where such brothers
or sisters or children are not more than 21 years old,
unmarried and not gainfully employed or where such children,
brothers or sisters, regardless of age are incapable of selfsupport because of mental or physical defect, or any of the
beneficiaries mentioned in Article 154 of the Fam Code who
is living in the family home and dependent upon the head of
the family for legal support.

Requisites for deducting the family home:
O

Must be the actual home of the decedent and his family at the
time of his death, as certified by the Barangay Captain of the
locality;

O

Total value of the family home must be included as part of the
gross estate (zero-sum!); and

O

Deduction equivalent to current FMV, or the extent of the
(whether
Interest
or
conjugal/community
decedent's
exclusive property), whichever is lower, but not exceeding
P10,000,000. (R.R. 12-2018)

For a person married at the time of death, and who was under
a system of conjugal partnership or absolute community, the
deduction for the family home is 1/2 of the FMV, but should not
exceed PIO,000,000, if such family home was conjugal property
or community property. (Remember this!)
Amounts receivable under R. A. 4917

Amount Received by Heirs Under Republic Act No. 4917.
— Any amount received by the heirs from the decedent-employee as
a consequence of the death of the decedent-employee in accordance
with Republic Act No. 4917: Provided, That such amount is included
in the gross estate of the decedent.

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

293

Retirement benefits received by employees of private firms in
accordance with a reasonable benefit plan maintained by the
employer are EXEMPT from all taxes, provided that the retiring
employee has been in the services of the same employer for at
least 10 years and is not less than 50 years old at the time of his
retirement.

The amount must:
O

have been received by the heirs of the decedent-employee as
a consequence of the latter's death, and

O

included in the gross estate of the decedent.

Net share of the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership, if any

Sec. 86. (C) Share in the Conjugal Property. — The net share
of the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership property as
diminished by the obligations properly chargeable to such property
shall, for the purpose of this Section, be deducted from the net estate
of the decedent.

If the decedent was married, we'll have to consider the share of
the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership. The share of
the surviving spouse must be removed to ensure that only the
decedent's interest in the estate is taxed. (More on this later!)
State the conditions for allowing the following as deductions from the
gross estate of a citizen or resident alien for the purpose of imposing
estate tax:

a.

Claims against the estate

b.

Medical expenses (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

!

i
I

a) For claims against the estate, the requisites are the following.
First, the liability must represent a personal obligation of the deceased
at the time of his death. Second, the liability was contracted in good
faith and for adequate and full consideration. Third, the claim must
be valid In law and enforceable In court. Fourth, It must not have
been condoned by the creditor during the lifetime of the deceased,
or it has not yet prescribed. Finally, If the claim arose out a debt
Instrument, the debt instrument must be notarized. Also, if the debt
was contracted within 3 years before the death of the decedent,
the estate must submit a statement showing the disposition of the
proceeds of the loan.
b) Medical expenses are no longer allowed as deductions. (TRAIN
amendment)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

294

A, a resident Filipino citizen, died in December 2018. A's only assets
consist of a house and lot in Alabang, where his heirs currently reside,
as well as a house in Los Angeles, California, USA. In computing
A's taxable net estate, his heirs only deducted: 1. PIO,000,000.00
constituting the value of their house in Aiabang as their family
home; and 2. P200,000.00 in funeral expenses because no other
expenses could be substantiated.
a)

Are both deductions claimed by A's heirs correct? Explain.

b) May a standard deduction be claimed by A's heirs? If so, how
much and what proof needs to be presented for the same to be
validly made?

c) In determining the gross estate of A, should the heirs include
A's house in Los Angeles, California, USA? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

a)

The deduction for the family home is correct, as the Tax Code
allows a deduction of a max amount of PIO,000,000.00 for
the family home. The deduction for funeral expenses is wrong,
because the Tax Code no longer allows funeral expenses as a
deduction from gross estate.

b)

Yes, the standard deduction of P5,000,000.00 is allowed.
The Tax Code allows resident citizens a standard deduction
of P5,000,000.00 without need for proof. Hence, the heirs of
A, a resident citizen, may claim the P5,000,000.00 standard
deduction.

c)

Yes, they should include A's house in LA, California. Under the
Tax Code, the gross estate of resident citizens such as A include
all properties with and without the Philippines. Hence, the heirs
should include the house in California... (...LOVE. California
knows how to party, Californiaaaa, knows how to party. In the
city of LA. In the city of good oT Watts. In the city, city of
Compton. We keep it rockin' we keep it rockin. Please don't
include Tupac lyrics in your bar exam.)

Deductions for a NONRESIDENT, NOT CITIZEN of the Philippines

(B) Deductions Allowed to Nonresident Estates. — In the case
of a nonresident not a citizen of the Philippines, by deducting from
the value of that part of his gross estate which at the time of his
death is situated in the Philippines:
(1) Standard Deduction. — An amount equivalent to Five hundred
thousand pesos (P500,000);
(2) That proportion of the deductions specified in paragraphs (2),
(3) , and (4) of Subsection (A) of this Section which the value of such
part bears to the value of his entire gross estate wherever situated.

1

J9JC9B0M

295

ESTATE TAX

(3) Transfers for Public Use. — The amount of all bequests, legacies,
devises or transfers to or for the use of the Government of the
Republic of the Philippines or any political subdivision thereof, for
exclusively public purposes. (As amended by TRAIN)

The estate of a nonresident alien decedent at the time of death,
with properties within and outside the Philippines, is subject to
tax only on his or her estate within the Philippines.

The estate of a nonresident alien in the Philippines is allowed
deductions for:

O

Standard deduction of P500,000;

O

The proportion of the total losses and indebtedness which the
value of such part bears to the value of his entire gross estate
wherever situated. This includes:
■

Claims against the estate;

■

Claims against insolvent persons;

-

Unpaid mortgages, taxes, and casualty losses;

O

Vanishing deductions;

O

Transfers for public use; and

O

Net share of the surviving spouse in the conjugal property or
community property.

The allowable deduction for the proportion of total losses and
indebtedness shall be computed as follows:

Gross estate, Philippines
Gross estate, World

X

claims against the estate,
claims against insolvent persons,
unpaid mortgages, taxes, and
casualty losses

Mr. X, a Filipino residing In Alabama, U.S.A., died on January 2, 2013
after undergoing a major heart surgery. He left behind to his wife
and two (2) kids several properties, to wit:
(1) Family home In Makati City;

(2) Condominium unit in Las Pinas City;
(3) Proceeds of health Insurance from Take Care,
maintenance organization In the Philippines; and

(4) Land In Alabama, U.S.A.

a health

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

296

The following expenses were paid:

(1) Funeral expenses;
(2) Medical expenses; and

(3) Judicial expenses in the testate proceedings.
a) What are the items that must be considered as part of the gross
estate income of Mr. X?
b) What are the items that may be considered as deductions from
the gross estate? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) The family home in Makati City, condo unit in Las Pinas, and
the land in Alabama, USA are included in the gross estate of Mr.
X. The Tax Code states that for residents and citizens, gross estate
includes all properties of the decedent, wherever situated. As a
Filipino citizen, his gross estate includes all his properties, wherever
situated. Hence, his properties in the Philippines and the US are
included. However, the proceeds from his health insurance are not
included in his gross estate.

The Tax Code states that only life insurance taken out by the
decedent, under certain conditions, is included in gross estate. In
this case, the insurance taken out is health insurance, and thus
excluded from gross estate.
b) He cannot claim funeral expenses, medical expenses, and judicial
expenses in the testate proceedings as these have been removed by
TRAIN. The estate can, however, claim the standard deduction of
P5,000,000 and the FMV of the family home, but only to the extent
of PIO,000,000. (Answer amended to reflect the changes of TRAIN)

E.

Net Estate Computation of Married Persons
Sec. 85. (H) Capita! of the Surviving Spouse. — The capital of
the surviving spouse of a decedent shall not, for the purpose of this
Chapter, be deemed a part of his or her gross estate.

Sec. 86. (C) Share in the Conjugal Property. — The net share
of the surviving spouse in the conjugal partnership property as
diminished by the obligations properly chargeable to such property
shall, for the purpose of this Section, be deducted from the net estate
of the decedent.
F.

Gross Estate
The gross estate of a decedent who was married and who was
under the system of absolute community of property or conjugal
property of gains during the marriage consists of:

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

1.

The EXCLUSIVE properties of the decedent, and

2.

The COMMUNITY properties

297

The exclusive properties are:
1.

Property acquired during the marriage by gratuitous title
(inheritance/donation) by either spouse, and the fruits as
well as the income thereof

•
2.

Property for personal and exclusive use of either spouse

•
3.

Unless the donor, testator or grantor states that they will
be part of the community property
But jewelry will form part of the community property

Property acquired BEFORE the marriage by either spouse who
has legitimate descendants by a former marriage, and the
fruits as well as the income of such property

Community property will consist of all properties owned by the
spouses at the time of the celebration marriage or acquired
thereafter (presumed to belong to the community)
The family home constituted by the husband and wife is
community property.
O

Proceeds of life insurance taken out by the decedent on his
own life, when includible in the gross estate, will be exclusive
property if the premiums were paid out of exclusive funds.

O

They will be community property if the premiums were paid
out of community funds.

Deductions from gross estate

•

The same rules and ceilings which were discussed on the part of
deductions will apply.
Example:
Elvis Rooney, a resident Filipino, was married under the system
of absolute community of property during the marriage. He died
leaving a family home worth P30,000,000, some real estate worth
P14,000,000, and a condo unit he was given by a friend during
his marriage worth P5,000,000. He had a claim against Fifi San
Pedro, an insolvent person, worth P2,000,000.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

298

Step 1:

Determine what are conjugal/community property and
what are exclusive. Add both up to get the gross estate.
(Spoiler: gross estate is P49,000,000)

Conjugal/community:

Step 2:

Family home
Real Estate

P30,000,000
P14,000,000

Exclusive:
Condo unit

P5,000,000

Subtract your ordinary deductions from the conjugal/
community property, to get your net conjugal/community estate. (Spoiler: net conjugal/community estate is
P42,000,000)

Ordinary deductions:
P2,000,000

Claims

against

insolvent person

Step 3:

Get the 1/2 share of the surviving spouse from the conjugal/
community property by dividing Step 2 by 2. Set that
aside. (Spoiler: share of surviving spouse is P21,000,000)

Step 4:

Subtract your ordinary deductions and special deductions
from the gross estate (your amount in Step 1). You'll end
up with the net estate. (Spoiler: net estate is P32,000,000)

Ordinary deductions:
P2,000,000

Claims

against

insolvent

Special deductions: Family home P10,000,000
P10,000,000 only? Because that's the max!)

person

(why

Standard deduction P5,000,000 (don't forget this. The
facts won't mention this but you still have to deduct this!)

Step 5:

G.

Subtract the 1/2 share of the surviving spouse (your
amount in Step 3) from your net estate to get the net
taxable estate of the decedent. (Spoiler: the net taxable
estate is Pll,000,000)

Exemption from Estate Tax

Sec. 87. Exemption of Certain Acquisitions and Transmissions.
— The following shall not be taxed:
(A) The merger of usufruct in the owner of the naked title;
(B) The transmission or delivery of the inheritance or legacy by the
fiduciary heir or legatee to the fideicommissary;

(C) The transmission from the first heir, legatee or donee in favor of
another beneficiary, in accordance with the desire of the predecessor;
and

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

299

(D) All bequests, devises, legacies or transfers to social welfare,
cultural and charitable institutions, no part of the net income of which
insures to the benefit of any individual: Provided, however, That not
more than thirty percent (30%) of the said bequests, devises, legacies
or transfers shall be used by such institutions for administration
purposes.
The following are exempt from estate tax:
1.

Merger of usufruct in the owner of the naked title;

2.

Transmission or delivery of the inheritance or legacy by the
fiduciary heir or legatee to the fideicommissary;

3.

Transmission from the 1st heir, legatee or donee in favor
of another beneficiary in accordance with the desire of the
predecessor;

4.

All bequests, devises, legacies or transfers to social welfare,
cultural and charitable institutions, no part of the net income
inures to the benefit of any individual, provided that not more
than 30% of the said bequests, devises, legacies or transfers
shall be used by such institutions for the administration
purposes;

5.

Irrevocable life insurance to someone other than the estate,
administrator, or executor;

6.

GSIS/SSS benefits;

7.

Retirement benefits of private firms approved by the BIR;
and

8.

Separate property of the surviving spouse.

Tax Credit for Foreign Estate Tax

(D) Tax Credit for Estate Taxes paid to a Foreign Country. —
(1) In General. — The tax imposed by this Title shall be credited
with the amounts of any estate tax imposed by the authority of a
foreign country.
(2) Limitations on Credit. — The amount of the credit taken under
this Section shall be subject to each of the following limitations:
(a) The amount of the credit in respect to the tax paid to any country
shall not exceed the same proportion of the tax against which such
credit is taken, which the decedent's net estate situated within such
country taxable under this Title bears to his entire net estate; and

J9JC9B0M

1

300

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(b) The total amount of the credit shall not exceed the same
proportion of the tax against which such credit is taken, which the
decedent's net estate situated outside the Philippines taxable under
this Title bears to his entire net estate.

To minimize the onerous effect of taxing the same property twice,
a tax credit against Philippine estate tax is allowed for estate
taxes paid to foreign countries.
One foreign country

What you paid to the foreign country

Tax Credit Limit =

Net Foreign Estate
Entire Net Estate

X Tax here in the
Philippines

Between what you paid to the foreign country and the tax credit
limit here, you choose whatever is lower as what you can credit.

See example in donor's tax part.

If tax is paid to two or more foreign countries:

Limitation A: see above

Limitation B: Tax Credit Limit =

Total Foreign Net Estate
Entire Net Estate

x

Tax here in the
Philippines

Between limitation A and B, you choose whatever is
tower as your credit.

H.

Estate Tax Returns

Sec 90 - Estate Tax Returns
(A) Requirements. — In all cases of transfers subject to the tax
imposed herein, or regardless of the gross value of the estate, where
the said estate consists of registered or registrable property such as
real property, motor vehicle, shares of stock or other similar property
for which a clearance from the Bureau of Internal Revenue is required
as a condition precedent for the transfer of ownership thereof in the
name of the transferee, the executor, or the administrator, or any of
the legal heirs, as the case may be, shall file a return under oath in
duplicate, setting forth:

(1) The value of the gross estate of the decedent at the time of his
death, or in case of a nonresident, not a citizen of the Philippines, of
that part of his gross estate situated in the Philippines;

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

301

(2) The deductions allowed from gross estate in determining the
estate as defined in Section 86; and
(3) Such part of such information as may at the time be ascertainable
and such supplemental data as may be necessary to establish the
correct taxes.

Provided, however, That estate tax returns showing a gross value
exceeding Five million pesos (PS,000,000) shall be supported with a
statement duly certified to by a Certified Public Accountant containing
the following:
(a) Itemized assets of the decedent with their corresponding gross
value at the time of his death, or in the case of a nonresident, not a
citizen of the Philippines, of that part of his gross estate situated in
the Philippines;

(b) Itemized deductions from gross estate allowed in Section 86;
and

(c) The amount of tax due whether paid or still due and outstanding.
(B) Time for Filing. — For the purpose of determining the estate
tax provided for in Section 84 of this Code, the estate tax return
required under the preceding Subsection (A) shall be filed within one
(1) year from the decedent's death.

A certified copy of the schedule of partition and the order of the
court approving the same shall be furnished the Commissioner within
thirty (30) after the promulgation of such order.

(C) Extension of Time. — The Commissioner shall have authority
to grant, in meritorious cases, a reasonable extension not exceeding
thirty (30) days for filing the return.

(D) Place of Filing. — Except in cases where the Commissioner
otherwise permits, the return required under Subsection (A)
shall be filed with an authorized agent bank, or Revenue District
Officer, Collection Officer, or duly authorized Treasurer of the city or
municipality in which the decedent was domiciled at the time of his
death or if there be no legal residence in the Philippines, with the
Office of the Commissioner. (As amended by TRAIN)

An estate tax return must be filed when the estate is:

1.

Subject to estate tax; and

2.

Regardless of the amount of the gross estate, where the said
gross estate consists of registered or registrable property,
motor vehicle or shares of stock, or other similar property
for which clearance from the BIR is required as a condition
precedent for the transfer of ownership thereof in the name
of the transferee.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

302

The return shall be under oath and shall include the following:
O

Value of the gross estate at the time of the decedent (for
nonresident aliens, the value of the gross estate here in the
Philippines);

O

Deductions allowed from the gross estate;

O

Whatever is necessary to establish the correct estate tax.

If the estate tax return shows that the gross estate exceeds
P5,000,000, it should be accompanied by a statement certified
by a CPA.
The estate tax return should be filed within one year from the
decedent's death.

The BIR can extend this, but not more than 30 days.

A return need not be complete in all particulars. It is sufficient
if it complies substantially with the law. There is substantial
compliance when:
o

The return is made in good faith and is not false or fraudulent;

o

It covers the entire period involved; and

o

It contains information as to the various items of income,
deductions and credits with such definiteness as to permit the
computation and assessment of the tax. (CIR v. Gonzales,
G.R. No. L-19495, November 24, 1966)

•

Where the return was made on the wrong form, it was
held that the filing thereof did not stop the running
of the period of limitations, and where the return was
very deficient, there was no return at all. (Ibig., CIR v.
Gonzales)

Approval of probate court is NOT mandatory in collection of estate
taxes.
I.

Payment of Tax

Sec. 91. Payment of Tax. —
(A) Time of Payment. — The estate tax imposed by Section 84 shall
be paid at the time the return is filed by the executor, administrator or
the heirs.

(B) Extension of Time. — When the Commissioner finds that the
payment on the due date of the estate tax or of any part thereof
would impose undue hardship upon the estate or any of the heirs,
he may extend the time for payment of such tax or any part thereof
not to exceed five (5) years, in case the estate is settled through the

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

303

courts, or two (2) years in case the estate is settled extrajudicially. In
such case, the amount in respect of which the extension is granted
shall be paid on or before the date of the expiration of the period
of the extension, and the running of the Statute of Limitations for
assessment as provided in Section 203 of this Code shall be suspended
for the period of any such extension.
Where the taxes are assessed by reason of negligence, intentional
disregard of rules and regulations, or fraud on the part of the taxpayer,
no extension will be granted by the Commissioner.

If an extension is granted, the Commissioner may require the executor,
or administrator, or beneficiary, as the case may be, to furnish a bond
in such amount, not exceeding double the amount of the tax and
with such sureties as the Commissioner deems necessary, conditioned
upon the payment of the said tax in accordance with the terms of the
extension.

(C) Payment by Installment. — In case the available cash of the
estate is insufficient to pay the total estate tax due, payment by
installment shall be allowed within two (2) years from the statutory
date for its payment without civil penalty and interest. (As amended
by TRAIN)
(D) Liability for Payment. — The estate tax imposed by Section
84 shall be paid by the executor or administrator before delivery
to any beneficiary of his distributive share of the estate. Such
beneficiary shall to the extent of his distributive share of the estate,
be subsidiarily liable for the payment of such portion of the estate tax
as his distributive share bears to the value of the total net estate.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "executor"or "administrator"
means the executor or administrator of the decedent, or if there is no
executor or administrator appointed, qualified, and acting within the
Philippines, then any person in actual or constructive possession of
any property of the decedent.

Estate tax shall be paid at the time the return is filed.

•

O

TRAIN now allows payment by Installment for estate tax,
which should be made within two years.

O

R.R. 12-2018 also allows the partial disposition of estate and
the application of its proceeds to the estate tax due.

The Commissioner may extend the payment of such tax.
O

It should not exceed five years in case of judicial settlement,
and two years if extrajudicial settlement.

O

The running of the period of limitation for assessment shall
be suspended for the period of such extension.

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

304

The estate tax shall be paid by the executor or administrator
before delivery to any beneficiary of his distributive share of the
estate.
O

Where there are two or more executors, all of them are
severally liable for the payment of the estate tax. (CIR v.
Gonzales, G.R. No. L-19495, November 24, 1996)

O

The inheritance tax, although charged against the account
of each beneficiary, should be paid by the executor or
administrator.

O

Such beneficiary shall be subsidiarily liable for the payment of
such tax to the extent of his share.

Claims for income tax need not be filed with the committee
on claims and appraisals in the course of testate proceedings,
and the amount thereof may be collected after the distribution
of the decedent's estate among his heirs, who shall be liable
in proportion to their share in the inheritance. (Government v.
Pamintuan, G.R. No. L-33139, October 11, 1930)
The government, in collecting unpaid taxes accruing before the
death of the decedent, has two ways of collecting the said taxes:

J.

O

By going after all the heirs and collecting from each one of
them the amount of the tax proportionate to the inheritance
received, or

O

By subjecting said property of the estate which is in the
hands of an heir or transferee to the payment of the tax due
the estate, (or, go against one heir for the entire tax, subject
to the heirs right of contribution from his co-heirs.) (CIR v.
Pineda, G.R. No. L-22734, September 15, 1967)

Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 92. Discharge of Executor or Administrator from Persona!
Liability. — If the executor or administrator makes a written
application to the Commissioner for determination of the amount of
the estate tax and discharge from personal liability therefore, the
Commissioner (as soon as possible, and in any event within one (1)
year after the making of such application, or if the application is
made before the return is filed, then within one (1) year after the
return is filed, but not after the expiration of the period prescribed
for the assessment of the tax in Section 203 shall not notify the
executor or administrator of the amount of the tax. The executor or
administrator, upon payment of the amount of which he is notified,
shall be discharged from personal liability for any deficiency in the
tax thereafter found to be due and shall be entitled to a receipt or
writing showing such discharge.

J9JC9B0M

ESTATE TAX

305

Sec. 93. Definition of Deficiency. — As used in this Chapter, the
term "deficiency" means:

(a) The amount by which the tax imposed by this Chapter exceeds
the amount shown as the tax by the executor, administrator or any
of the heirs upon his return; but the amounts so shown on the return
shall first be increased by the amounts previously assessed (or
collected without assessment) as a deficiency and decreased by the
amount previously abated, refunded or otherwise repaid in respect of
such tax; or

(b) If no amount is shown as the tax by the executor, administrator
or any of the heirs upon his return, or if no return is made by the
executor, administrator, or any heir, then the amount by which the
tax exceeds the amounts previously assessed (or collected without
assessment) as a deficiency; but such amounts previously assessed
or collected without assessment shall first be decreased by the
amounts previously abated, refunded or otherwise repaid in respect
of such tax.
Sec. 94. Payment Before Delivery by Executor or Administrator.
— No judge shall authorize the executor or judicial administrator
to deliver a distributive share to any party interested in the estate
unless a certification from the Commissioner that the estate tax has
been paid is shown.

Sec. 95. Duties of Certain Officers and Debtors. — Registers of
Deeds shall not register in the Registry of Property any document
transferring real property or real rights therein or any chattel
mortgage, by way of gifts inter vivos or mortis causa, legacy or
inheritance, unless a certification from the Commissioner that the
tax fixed in this Title and actually due thereon had been paid is
show, and they shall immediately notify the Commissioner, Regional
Director, Revenue District Officer, or Revenue Collection Officer or
Treasurer of the city or municipality where their offices are located, of
the non payment of the tax discovered by them. Any lawyer, notary
public, or any government officer who, by reason of his official duties,
intervenes in the preparation or acknowledgment of documents
regarding partition or disposal of donation inter vivos or mortis
causa, legacy or inheritance, shall have the duty of furnishing the
Commissioner, Regional Director, Revenue District Officer or Revenue
Collection Officer of the place where he may have his principal office,
with copies of such documents and any information whatsoever
which may facilitate the collection of the aforementioned tax. Neither
shall a debtor of the deceased pay his debts to the heirs, legatee,
executor or administrator of his creditor, unless the certification of
the Commissioner that the tax fixed in this Chapter had been paid is
shown; but he may pay the executor or judicial administrator without
said certification if the credit is included in the inventory of the estate
of the deceased.

Sec. 96. Restitution of Tax Upon Satisfaction of Outstanding
Obligations. — If after the payment of the estate tax, new obligations

J9JC9B0M

1

306

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

of the decedent shall appear, and the persons interested shall have
satisfied them by order of the court, they shall have a right to the
restitution of the proportional part of the tax paid.

Sec. 97. Payment of Tax Antecedent to the Transfer of Shares,
Bonds or Rights. — There shall not be transferred to any new owner
in the books of any corporation, sociedad anonima, partnership,
business, or industry organized or established in the Philippines
any share, obligation, bond or right by way of gift inter vivos or
mortis causa, legacy or inheritance, unless a certification from the
Commissioner that the taxes fixed in this Title and due thereon have
been paid is shown.
If a bank has knowledge of the death of a person, who maintained
a bank deposit account alone, or jointly with another, it shall allow
any withdrawal from the said deposit account, subject to a final
withholding tax of six percent (6%). For this purpose, ali withdrawal
slips shall contain a statement to the effect that all of the joint
depositors are still living at the time of withdrawal by any one of the
joint depositors and such statement shall be under oath by the said
depositors. (As amended by TRAIN)

TRAIN now allows the withdrawal of bank deposits of dead
folks, subject to a final withholding tax of 6%, provided that the
withdrawal shall only be made within 1 year from the death of the
decedent. (R.R. 12-2018)

J9JC9B0M

DONOR’S TAX
A.

In General

Sec. 98. Imposition of Tax. —
(A) There shall be levied, assessed, collected and paid upon the
transfer by any person, resident or nonresident, of the property by
gift, a tax, computed as provided in Section 99.

(B) The tax shall apply whether the transfer is in trust or otherwise,
whether the gift is direct or indirect, and whether the property is real
or personal, tangible or intangible.

Donor's tax will be levied, assessed, collected and paid upon the
transfer by any person, resident or nonresident, of property by
gift
o

The property can be real or personal, tangible or intangible

o

The transfer can be in trust or otherwise

o

The gift can be direct or indirect

The donor's tax shall not apply unless and until there is a
completed gift. The transfer of property by gift is perfected from
the moment the donor knows of the acceptance by the donee; it
Is completed by the delivery, either actually or constructively, of
the donated property to the donee. Thus, the law in force at the
time of the perfection/completion of the donation shall govern
the Imposition of the donor's tax. (R.R. 12-2018)
A gift that is Incomplete because of reserved powers becomes
complete when either:

o

The donor renounces the power; or

o

His right to exercise the reserved power ceases because
of the happening of some event or contingency or the
fulfillment of some condition, other than because of the
donor's death.

307

J9JC9B0M

308

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Implications of Renunciation (R.R. 12-2018)

surviving
the
by
Renunciation
spouse of his/her share in the
conjugal partnership or absolute
community after dissolution of
the marriage in favor of the heirs

Subject to donor's tax

General renunciation by an heir,
including the surviving spouse, of
share in the hereditary estate left
by decedent

Not subject to donor's tax

Renunciation by an heir, including
the surviving spouse, of share in the
hereditary estate to a specified and
identified heir to the exclusion or
disadvantage of the other co-heirs

Subject to donor's tax

In the settlement of the estate of Mr. Barbera who died intestate,
his wife renounced her inheritance and her share of the conjugal
property in favor of their children. The BIR determined that there
was a taxable gift and thus assessed Mrs. Barbera as a donor.

Was the BIR correct? (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The BIR is correct. Renunciation by the surviving
spouse of his/her share in the conjugal partnership or absolute
community after the dissolution of the marriage in favor of the heirs
of the deceased spouse or any other persons is subject to donor's
tax whereas general renunciation by an heir, including the surviving
spouse, of his/her share in the hereditary estate left by the decedent
is not subject to donor's tax, unless specifically and categorically
done in favor of identified heirs to the exclusion or disadvantage
of the other co-heirs in the hereditary estate. In this case, the
renunciation was specifically made in favor of the children; hence,
donor's tax can be assessed on Mrs. Barbera.

In 2011, Solar Computer Corporation (Solar) purchased a proprietary
membership share covered by Membership Certificate No. 8 from
the Mabuhay Golf Club, Inc. for P500,000.00. On December 27,
2012, it transferred the same to David, its American consultant, to
enable him to aval! of the facilities of the Club. David executed a
Deed of Declaration of Trust and Assignment of Shares wherein he
acknowledged the absolute ownership of Solar over the share; that
the assignment was without any consideration; and that the share
was placed in his name because the Club required it to be done. In
2013, the value of the share increased to P800,000.00.

i

i

J9JC9B0M

DONOR'S TAX

309

Is the said assignment a "gift" and, therefore, subject to gift tax?
Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The transfer is subject to donor's tax. The Tax
Code states that donor's tax will be levied and assessed on the
transfer of property by gift, whether the transfer is by trust or
otherwise. Transfers for less than adequate and full consideration
are considered gifts subject to donor's tax. In this case, there was no
consideration for the transfer, making it a gift, and the transfer, even
if by trust, will be subject to donor's tax.

B.

Gross Gifts

Sec. 104. Definitions. — For purposes of this Title, the terms
"gross estate "a nd "gifts" include real and personal property, whether
tangible or intangible, or mixed, wherever situated: Provided,
however, That where the decedent or donor was a nonresident alien
at the time of his death or donation, as the case may be, his real
and personal property so transferred but which are situated outside
the Philippines shall not be included as part of his "gross estate"
or "gross gift": Provided, further, That franchise which must be
exercised in the Philippines; shares, obligations or bonds issued by
any corporation or sociedad anonima organized or constituted in the
Philippines in accordance with its laws; shares, obligations or bonds
by any foreign corporation eighty-five percent (85%) of the business
of which is located in the Philippines; shares, obligations or bonds
issued by any foreign corporation if such shares, obligations or bonds
have acquired a business situs in the Philippines; shares or rights in
any partnership, business or industry established in the Philippines,
shall be considered as situated in the Philippines: Provided, still
further, That no tax shall be collected under this Title in respect
of intangible personal property: (a) if the decedent at the time of
his death or the donor at the time of the donation was a citizen
and resident of a foreign country which at the time of his death or
donation did not Impose a transfer tax of any character, in respect of
intangible personal property of citizens of the Philippines not residing
In that foreign country, or (b) if the laws of the foreign country of
which the decedent or donor was a citizen and resident at the time
of his death or donation allows a similar exemption from transfer or
death taxes of every character or description In respect of intangible
personal property owned by citizens of the Philippines not residing in
that foreign country.

•

There are two kinds of donors (similar to estate tax):
1.

The resident or citizen of the Philippines, and

2.

The nonresident, not citizen of the Philippines

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

310

If the donor is a resident or a citizen of the Philippines, gross gifts
would consist of:

1.

Real estate, regardless of location

2.

Tangible personal property, regardless of location

3.

Intangible personal property, regardless of location

If the donor is a nonresident and not a citizen of the Philippines,
gross gifts would consist of:

1.

Real estate located in the Philippines

2.

Tangible personal property located in the Philippines

3.

Intangible personal property located in the Philippines, subject
to the "reciprocity clause" (Similar to the rules for estate tax,
see discussion there for what constitutes intangible property)
a.

If the donor at the time of the donation was a citizen and
resident of a foreign country which at the time of the
donation did not impose a transfer tax of any character in
respect of intangible personal property of Filipino citizens
not residing in that country, or

b.

If the laws of the foreign country of which the donor was
a citizen and resident at the time of donation allow a
similar exemption from transfer taxes of every character
in respect of intangible personal property owned by
citizens of the Philippines not residing in that country

A donation made by a corporation to the heirs of a deceased
officer out of gratitude for his past services is subject to donor's
tax. It is not subject to deduction for the value of said services
that do not constitute a recoverable debt. (Pirovano v. CIR, G.R.
No. L-19865, July 31, 1965, where the heirs wanted to consider
it remuneratory so it won't be taxed as a gift.)

Badges of a donation inter vivos:

o

Made out of love and affection;

o

Reservation of usufruct in favor of the donor (/.e.z the naked
ownership has been transferred to the donee);

o

Donor reserved certain properties for himself (so he still had
something to live by);

o

The donee accepted the donation (no need for acceptance if
donation mortis causa). (Spouses Gestopa v. CA, G.R. No.
111904, Octobers, 2000)

J9JC9B0M

DONOR'S TAX

311

Also to be considered as gifts are the following:
1.

Transfers for insufficient consideration; and

2.

Cancellation of indebtedness.

C.

Transfer for Insufficient Consideration
SEC. 100. Transfer for Less Than Adequate and Full
Consideration. — Where property, other than real property referred
to in Section 24(D), is transferred for less than an adequate and
full consideration in money or money's worth, then the amount by
which the fair market value of the property exceeded the value of
the consideration shall, for the purpose of the tax imposed by this
Chapter, be deemed a gift, and shall be included in computing the
amount of gifts made during the calendar year: Provided, however,
That a sale, exchange, or other transfer of property made in the
ordinary course of business (a transaction which is a bona fide, at
arm's length, and free from any donative intent), will be considered
as made for an adequate and full consideration in money or money's
worth. (As amended by TRAIN)

A transfer of real/personal property will be considered a donation/
gift and subject to the donor's tax when:
1.

The transfer was for less than adequate and full consideration,

2.

Such transfer was effective during his lifetime (inter vivos),
and

3.

Other than real property in Section 24(D), NIRC, i.e., the
property was not subject to final capital gains tax (capital
asset).

Prior to the passage of TRAIN, the absence of donative intent did
not matter, as Section 100 categorically states that the amount
by which the fair market value of the property exceeds the value
of the consideration shall be deemed a gift. (Philippine American
Life and General Insurance v. Secretary of Finance, G.R. No.
210987, November 24, 2014) The amount by which the value
of the property exceeded the consideration received shall be
considered a donation.

o

For example, Bettina Cooper sold her car to Ronnie Lodge for
PlOOk. It had an FMV of P280k. The P180k will be considered
a donation and thus subject to tax.

o

But TRAIN now gives an exception:

*

When the transfer is made in the ordinary course of
business, it will be considered as made for an adequate

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

312

and full consideration. The requisites for this type of
transfer are:
•

Bona fide transaction;

•

Arm's length; and

•

Free from any donative intent.

What are the implications if the real property sold was a capital
asset as against an ordinary asset?

O

For example, the real property had a cost of PlOOk, an FMV
of P200k, but sold for only P170k.
•

If it were classified as a capital asset, it will be taxed 6% of
the FMV (remember, the base is either the consideration
or the FMV, whichever is higher).

•

If it were classified as an ordinary asset, it will be taxed
twice. First, it will be taxed for income tax purposes (tax
base of P70k). Second, it will be taxed for donor's tax (tax
base of P30k). In this case, donor's tax will be attracted
unwittingly.

D. Cancellation of Indebtedness
•

If a creditor desires to benefit a debtor, and without any
consideration therefore, cancels the debt (and the debtor
"accepts"), the amount of the debt is a donation by the creditor
to the debtor. (Section 50, R.R. 2-1940)

E.

Value of the Gifts

Sec. 102. Valuation of Gifts Made in Property. — If the gift is
made in property, the fair market value thereof at the time of the gift
shall be considered the amount of the gift. In case of real property,
the provisions of Section 88(B) shall apply to the valuation thereof.
The fair market value of the property donated/given at the time
of the donation shall be the value of the gross gifts.
Mr. L owned several parcels of land and he donated a parcel each
to his two children. Mr. L acquired both parcels of land in 1975 for
P200,000.00. At the time of donation, the fair market value of the two
parcels of land, as determined by the CIR, was P2,300,000.00; white
the fair market value of the same properties as shown in the schedule
of values prepared by the City Assessors was P2,500,000.00. What
is the proper valuation of Mr. L's gifts to his children for purposes of
computing donor's tax? (2015 Bar Exam)
■

I

DONOR'S TAX

313

Suggested answer: The proper valuation is P2,500,000.00 or the
FMV based on the schedule of the City Assessors. According to the
Section 88 (B), Tax Code, for donor's tax purposes (and also estate
tax purposes), the FMV of real property is the higher value of either
the FMV as determined by the CIR or the FMV as determined by the
schedule prepared by the Provincial or City Assessor.
F.

Deductions from Gross Gifts Resident or Citizen Donors

Sec. 101. Exemption of Certain Gifts. — The following gifts or
donations shall be exempt from the tax provided for in this Chapter:

(A) In the Case of Gifts Made by a Resident. —
(1) Gifts made to or for the use of the National Government or
any entity created by any of its agencies which is not conducted for
profit, or to any political subdivision of the said Government; and
(2) Gifts in favor of an educational and/or charitable, religious,
cultural or social welfare corporation, institution, accredited
nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic organization or
research institution or organization: Provided, however, That not
more than thirty percent (30%) of said gifts shall be used by such
donee for administration purposes. For the purpose of the exemption,
a 'non-profit educational and/or charitable corporation, institution,
accredited nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic
organization and/or research institution or organization' is a school,
college or university and/or charitable corporation, accredited
nongovernment organization, trust or philanthropic organization and/
or research institution or organization, incorporated as a nonstock
entity, paying no dividends, governed by trustees who receive no
compensation, and devoting all its income, whether students' fees
or gifts, donation, subsidies or other forms of philanthropy, to the
accomplishment and promotion of the purposes enumerated in its
Articles of Incorporation. (As amended by TRAIN)

I
>

i

I

•

These "exemptions of certain gifts" should be taken to mean the
deductions allowed by law to arrive at the taxable net gifts.

•

The deductions allowed for a resident or citizen donor:

i

1.

Gifts made to or for the use of the National Government or any
entity created by any of its agencies which is not conducted
for profit, or to any political subdivision of the government

2.

Gifts in favor of educational and/orcharitable, religious, cultural
or social welfare corporations, institutions, accredited NGOs,
trust or philanthropic organizations, research institutions or
organizations, provided that not more than 30% of said gifts
shall be used by such donee for administration purposes

1

■

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

314

The entity must be:

Non-stock;

i

ii.

Paying no dividends;

iii.

Governed by trustees who receive NO compensation;
and

iv.

Devoting ALL its income to the accomplishment of
the purpose enumerated in its AOI. (R.R. 12-2018)

CMI School, Inc., a nonstock, non-profit corporation, donated its
three parcels of idle land situated in the Municipality ofCuyapo, Nueva
Ecija to SLC University, another nonstock, non-profit corporation,
in recognition of the latter's contribution to and participation in the
spiritual and educational development of the former.
a) Is CMI School, Inc. liable for the payment of donor's tax? Explain
your answer.

b) If SLC University later sells the three parcels of idle land to
Puregold Supermarket, Inc., a stock corporation, will SLC University
be liable for capital gains tax? Explain your answer.
c) If SLC University donates the three parcels of idle land in favor
of the Municipality of Cuyapo, Nueva Ecija, will SLC University
be liable for donor's tax? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
a) CMI School, Inc. is not liable for donor's tax. Under the Tax
Code, donations to non-profit educational institutions are exempt
from donor's tax. The donation is to SLC University, a nonstock,
non-profit educational institution. Hence, it is exempt from donor's
tax.

::

I
i

b) Assuming the Income from the sale Is actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes, the sale is exempt from
capita! gains tax. Under the Constitution, all revenues of non-stock,
non-profit educational institutions which are actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes are exempt from all taxes.
Hence, assuming this is the case with SLC University, then its sale to
Puregold is exempt from capita! gains tax.
c) The donation to the Municipality of Cuyapo is exempt from
donor's tax. Under the Tax Code, donations to the any political
subdivision of the government is exempt from donor's tax.

Years ago, Krisanto bought a parcel of land In Muntinlupa for only
PhP65,000. He donated the land to his son, Kornelio, in 1980 when
the property had a fair market value of PhP75,000, and paid the
corresponding donor's tax.

I

!

!

l

DONOR'S TAX

315

Kornelio, in turn, sold the property In 2000 to Katrina for PhP 6.5
million and paid the capital gains tax, documentary stamp tax, local
transfer tax, and other fees and charges. Katrina, in turn, donated
the land to Klaret School last August 30, 2017 to be used as the site
for additional classrooms. No donor's tax was paid, because Katrina
claimed that the donation was exempt from taxation. At the time of
the donation to Klaret School, the land had a fair market value of
PhP 65 million.

Is Katrina Hable for donor's tax? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No, Katrina is not liable for donor's tax. Under
the Tax Code, donations to non-profit educational institutions are
exempt from donor's tax. Hence, assuming Klaret School is a nonprofit educational institution, then the donation is exempt from
donor's tax.

9

5o
B

5

Upon the death of their beloved parents in 2009, Karla, Karla, and
Karlie inherited a huge tract of farm land in Kanlaon City. The siblings
had no plans to use the property. Thus, they decided to donate the
land, but were not sure to whom the donation should be made. They
consult you, a well-known tax law expert, on the tax implications of
the possible donations they plan to make, by giving you a list of the
possible donees:

3

1. The Kanlaon City High School Alumni Association (KCHS AA),
since the siblings are all alumni of the same school and are active
members of the organization. KCHS AA is an organization intended
to promote and strengthen ties between the school and its alumni;

8

2. The Kanlaon City Water District which intends to use the land for
its offices; or

i
S
S
?

I
e

?

I

j

J

£
3

$

J9JC9B0M

3. Their second cousin on the maternal side, Klkay, who serves as
the caretaker of the property.

Advise the siblings which donation would expose them to the least
tax liability. (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: I would advise the siblings to donate the land to
the Kanlaon City Water District because the donation will be exempt
from donor's tax. Under the Tax Code, donations to any government
entity created by any of its agencies which is not conducted for profit
Is exempt from donor's tax. A water district, such as the donee here,
Is a government entity not organized for profit. Hence, the donation
will be exempt.

Due to rising liquidity problems and pressure from its concerned
suppliers, P Corp, instituted a flash auction sale of its shares of
stock. P Corp, was then able to sell Its treasury shares to Z, Inc.,
an unrelated corporation, for Pl,000,000.00, which was only a little
below the valuation of P Corp, 's shares based on its latest audited

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

316

financial statements. In connection therewith, P Corp, sought a
Bureau of Internal Revenue ruling to confirm that, notwithstanding
the price difference between the selling price of the shares and their
book value, the said transaction falls under one of the recognized
exemptions to donor's tax under the Tax Code.

a)
Cite the instances under the Tax Code where gifts made are
exempt from donor's tax.
b)
Does the above transaction fall under any of the exemptions?
Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

a)

Gifts made to the national government or any of its political
subdivisions are exempt. Gifts to educational, charitable, social
welfare corporations or institutions, and accredited NGOs are
also exempt from donor's tax.

b)

It does not fall under any of the enumerated exemptions, but
it is still exempt from donor's tax because TRAIN states that
that a sale, exchange, or other transfer of property made in
the ordinary course of business (a transaction which is bona
fide, at arm's length, and free from any donative intent), will
be considered as made for an adequate and full consideration
in money or money's worth and therefore not subject to donor's
tax. In this case, the sale of its shares to an unrelated corporation
a little below the valuation was bona fide, at arm's length, and
free from any donative intent. Hence, it is exempt.

G. Deductions from the Gross Gifts by Husband and Wife
•

For deductions from gross gifts made by husband and wife, out
of community/conjugal property, each donor has his or her own
deductions. Their donations will be distributed equally among
them (1/2).

•

However, if what was donated is a conjugal or community property
and only the husband signed the deed of donation, there is only
one donor for donor's tax purposes, without prejudice to the right
of the wife to question the validity of the donation without her
consent pursuant to the pertinent provisions of the Civil Code of
the Philippines and the Family Code of the Philippines.

H.

Deductions for a Nonresident. Not Citizen Donor
(B) In the Case of Gifts Made by a Nonresident Not a Citizen
of the Philippines. —

(1) Gifts made to or for the use of the National Government or any
entity created by any of its agencies which is not conducted for profit,
or to any political subdivision of the said Government.

J9JC9B0M

DONOR'S TAX

317

(2) Gifts in favor of an educational and/or charitable, religious,
cultural or social welfare corporation, institution, foundation, trust
or philanthropic organization or research institution or organization:
Provided, however, That not more than thirty percent (30%) of said
gifts shall be used by such donee for administration purposes.

Same as the resident or citizen donor.
I.

Other Deductions

•

The BIR has allowed the following as deductions from gross gifts
to arrive at net gifts:
o
o

Encumbrance on the property donated, if assumed by the
donee
Those specifically provided by the donor as a diminution of
the property donated. (R.R. 12-2018)

Example:
Fabby Wabby donated land which was subject to a mortgage to
Elfie. The FMV of the land was P1M, but the mortgage was P400k.
Elfie agreed to assume the mortgage, hence the deduction of
P400k is allowed. The net gift is P600k.

3.

Exemptions Under Special Laws

Gifts and donations to the University of the Philippines is exempt
from donor's tax. (R.A. 9500)
Contributions to the National Book Trust Fund is exempt from
donor's tax. (R.A. 9521)

Donations to qualified foster care agencies are exempt from
donor's tax. (R.A. 10165)

Under R.A. 7166, contributions to candidates or political parties
duly reported to the BIR are not subject to any donor's tax.3
O

Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, any
contribution in cash or in kind to any candidate or political
party or coalition of parties for campaign purposes, duly
reported to the Commission shall not be subject to the
payment of any gift tax. (R.R. 8-2009)

3Section 13. xxx Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding any
contribution in cash or in kind to any candidate or political party or coalition of
parties for campaign purposes, duly reported to the Commission shall not be
subject to the payment of any gift tax.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

318

Segue to income taxes: so what happens to the money
given to the candidate? (R.R.. 7-2011, February 8, 2011)

•

GR: The money given to the candidate will NOT go
into his taxable income, as long as it is utilized in his
campaign.

•

HOWEVER, unutilized/excess campaign funds shall
be subject to income tax.

•

Moreover, any candidate (winner or loser) must file
with the COMELEC his/her statement of expenditures.
If not, he/she will be precluded from using such
expenditures as deductions from his/her campaign
contributions. As such, the entire amount of such
contributions will be directly subject to income tax.

Mr. De Sarapen is a candidate in the upcoming Senatorial elections.
Mr. De Aimacen, believing in the sincerity and ability of Mr.
De Sarapen to introduce much needed reforms in the country,
contributed P500,000.00 in cash to the campaign chest of Mr. De
Sarapen. In addition, Mr. De Aimacen purchased tarpaulins, t-shirts,
umbrellas, caps and other campaign materials that he also donated
to Mr. De Sarapen for use in his campaign. Is the contribution ofcash
and campaign materials subject to donor's tax? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, they are actually exempt from donor's tax.
Campaign contributions, whether in cash or In kind, to any political
candidate is exempt from gift tax.
K. Tax Rates Payable by Donor

Sec. 99. Rates of Tax Payable by Donor. —

(A) In General. — The tax for each calendar year shall be six
percent (6%) computed on the basis of the total gifts in excess of
two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250,000) exempt gift made
during the calendar year.
(B) Any contribution in cash or in kind to any candidate, political
party or coalition of parties for campaign purposes shall be governed
by the Election Code, as amended. (As amended by TRAIN)

Donor's tax is reported by calendar year.

So if you want to avoid paying the tax, split the donation
(December 31 and January 1).
Donations made which are not over P250,000 in a calendar year
are exempt from donor's tax.

J9JC9B0M

DONOR'S TAX

319

Note that the P250,000 counts as a deduction from total gifts,
because the 6% rate is imposed on the total gifts in excess of
P250,000.

The basic tax formula is as follows:

On the first donation of a calendar year

Gross gifts
Less: Deductions from these gross gifts
Net Gifts

X Donor's tax rate
Donor's tax due on the net gifts

On a subsequent donation in the same calendar year
Gross gifts made on this date
Less: Deductions from these gross oifts
Net gifts made on this date

Plus: All prior net gifts given with the same calendar year
Aggregate net gifts
Donor's tax on aggregate net gifts

Less: Donor's tax on all prior net gifts within the same calendar
year
Donor's tax due on the net gifts of this date
L.

Donor's Tax Return
Sec. 103. Filing of Return and Payment of Tax. —

(A) Requirements. — Any Individual who makes any transfer by
gift (except those which, under Section 101, are exempt from the tax
provided for in this Chapter) shall, for the purpose of the said tax,
make a return under oath in duplicate. The return shall set forth:
(1) Each gift made during the calendar year which Is to be included
In computing net gifts;
(2) The deductions claimed and allowable;

(3) Any previous net gifts made during the same calendar year;

(4) The name of the donee; and
(5) Such further information as may be required by rules and
regulations made pursuant to law.

J9JC9B0M

320

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(B) Time and Place of Filing and Payment. — The return of the
donor required in this Section shall be filed within thirty (30) days
after the date the gift is made and the tax due thereon shall be paid at
the time of filing. Except in cases where the Commissioner otherwise
permits, the return shall be filed and the tax paid to an authorized
agent bank, the Revenue District Officer, Revenue Collection Officer
or duly authorized Treasurer of the city or municipality where the
donor was domiciled at the time of the transfer, or if there be no legal
residence in the Philippines, with the Office of the Commissioner.
In the case of gifts made by a nonresident, the return may be filed
with the Philippine Embassy or Consulate in the country where he is
domiciled at the time of the transfer, or directly with the Office of the
Commissioner.
The donor's tax return must be filed within 30 days after the date
of the donation.

On all donations of one date, only one donor's tax return is
required.
In case of husband and wife as donors, the donor's tax return of
the husband will be apart of the donor's tax return of the wife.

When and where to pay? The donor's tax will be paid at the time
the return is filed, and with the office where the return is filed.
Note: In order to be i) exempt from donor's tax, and ii) to claim
full deduction of the donation given to qualified donee institutions
duly accredited by the PCNC, the donor engaged in business shall
give a notice of donation on every donation worth at least P50,000
to the Revenue District Office (RDO) which has jurisdiction over
his place of business within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
qualified donee institution's duly issued Certificate of Donation,
which shall be attached to the said Notice of Donation, stating
that not more than thirty percent (30%) of the said donation/
gifts for the taxable year shall be used by such accredited nonstock, non-profit corporation/NGO institution (qualified-donee
institution) for administration purposes. (R.R. 12-2018)
M. Donor's Tax Credit(C) Tax Credit for Donor's Taxes Paid to a Foreign Country. —

(1) In General. — The tax imposed by this Title upon a donor who
was a citizen or a resident at the time of donation shall be credited
with the amount of any donor's tax of any character and description
imposed by the authority of a foreign country.

J9JC9B0M

DONOR'S TAX

321

(2) Limitations on Credit. — The amount of the credit taken under
this Section shall be subject to each of the following limitations:
(a) The amount of the credit in respect to the tax paid to any
country shall not exceed the same proportion of the tax against
which such credit is taken, which the net gifts situated within such
country taxable under this Title bears to his entire net gifts; and
(b) The total amount of the credit shall not exceed the same
proportion of the tax against which such credit is taken, which the
donor's net gifts situated outside the Philippines taxable under this
title bears to his entire net gifts.

Only resident or citizen donors are allowed donor's tax credit.
O

Why? Because they are the only ones taxed worldwide. A
nonresident noncitizen is not taxed for his donations in foreign
jurisdictions.

For a foreigner's donor's tax paid to a foreign country, a credit
is allowed to reduce the Philippine donor's tax to pay, under the
formula:

Foreign donor's tax paid = xxxx
Limit:

Net foreign gifts
Net gifts, worldwide

x

Philippine Donor's Tax = xxxx

Allowed tax credit is whichever is lower of the foreign donor's
tax paid and the limit.
Example:

Mi Idolo Iniesta donated property to Liza I.S. Darna here in
the Philippines, net gift value of P200,000
He also donated to Claire Fraser in Scotland, net gift value
of P300,000. In Scotland, he paid a tax of PIO,000

Foreign donor's tax paid = P10,000
Donor's tax supposed to be paid worldwide, without the
credit = P14,000.
Credit is:

300,000
500,000

x P14,000 = 8,400

J9JC9B0M

322

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

So choose what is lower between the tax paid abroad and the
credit limitation. So, it is P8,400. That's the tax credit.

Mi Idolo Iniesta has to pay P5,600.
If two foreign countries

Limitation A: Foreign donor's tax paid to the foreign country

Net gifts, foreign country
Net gifts, world

x Philippine donor's tax

Allowed tax credit = whatever's lower

Limitation B (by totals)
Total of foreign donor's taxes paid to the foreign countries

Net gifts, outside the Phil

Net gifts, world

- x Philippine donor’s tax

Allowed tax credit = whatever's lower
Tax credit to apply is whatever is lower between Limitation A and
Limitation B

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX
A.

In General
TITLE IV
VALUE-ADDED TAX

CHAPTER I
IMPOSITION OF TAX
Sec. 105. Persons Liable. — Any person who, in the course of trade
or business, sells barters, exchanges, leases goods or properties,
renders services, and any person who imports goods shall be subject
to the value-added tax (VAT) imposed in Sections 106 to 108 of this
Code.

The value-added tax is an indirect tax and the amount of tax may be
shifted or passed on to the buyer, transferee or lessee of the goods,
properties or services. This rule shall likewise apply to existing
contracts of sale or lease of goods, properties or services at the time
of the effectivity of Republic Act No. 7716.

VAT is imposed on any person who:

1.

Sells, barters, or exchanges goods or properties in the course
of trade or business; or

2.

Sells services in the course of trade or business; or

3.

Imports goods, whether or not in the course of trade or
business.

The VAT is a tax on consumption, levied on the sale, barter,
exchange, or lease of goods or properties and services in the
Philippines and the importation of goods into the Philippines.
o

The seller is the one statutorily liable for the payment of the
tax, but the amount of the tax may be shifted or passed on to
the buyer, transferee or lessee of the goods or properties or
services.

o

VAT is imposed on the seller, not the buyer.
•

EXCEPT: in importation

323

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

324

If the seller is VAT exempt, no need for payment on VAT on his
sales. He will have to shoulder the burden of the VAT passed to
him by his suppliers for his purchases.
Is VAT really a tax on the value-added?

Yes. Consider this:

O

Aragorn sells to Bo-ra a piece of wood — a nice, fine, wellsanded piece of wood.

Price:
VAT (12%):
Total:

P100
P12
P112

Bo-ra then expertly crafts the wood into a rocking chair and
sells it to Clint Barton.
Price:
Tax:

Total:

P150
P18
P168

Bo-ra has an output tax of P18, and an input tax of P12. She
has a P6 net VAT payable (output minus input). But where do we
see the tax on the "value added" by B?

We see that at the level of the price. By applying her skills
and labor (and masungit but cute charm), Bo-ra made a chair
out of the wood that she had bought from Aragorn. From P100,
the price increased to P150. There was a P50 increase because
of the value added by Bo-ra. And applying the VAT on this P50, it
results into the same amount, which is 6. This proves that the tax
is really on the "value added."

How do we know if the transaction is subject to VAT? What are
the elements?
1.

It must be done in the ordinary course of trade or business;

2.

There must be a sale, barter, exchange, lease of goods or
properties, or rendering of service in the Philippines; and

3.

It is not VAT-exempt or VAT zero-rated.

o

If all three are present, then the transaction is subject to
the 12% VAT. Absence of one will not make the transaction
subject to VAT.
■

But remember that importations are subject to VAT,
whether or not in the course of trade or business.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

325

As it is a tax on the transaction, there is no need whatsoever
for there to be a taxable gain (unlike in income tax). It is not
required by either law or jurisprudence.
O

In fact, the NIRC and CIR v. CA and Commonwealth
Management and Services Corporation (COMASERCO) (G.R.
No. 125355, March 30, 2000) state that nonstock, nonprofit
organizations are subject to VAT, as long as the service is
done for a fee or remuneration.

Ordinary course of trade or business
Sec. 105. —
The phrase "in the course of trade or business" means the regular
conduct or pursuit of a commercial or an economic activity, including
transactions incidental thereto, by any person regardless of whether
or not the person engaged therein is a nonstock, nonprofit private
organization (irrespective of the disposition of its net income and
whether or not it sells exclusively to members or their guests), or
government entity.
The rule of regularity, to the contrary notwithstanding, services as
defined in this Code rendered in the Philippines by nonresident foreign
persons shall be considered as being course of trade or business.

"Ordinary course of trade or business" means the regular conduct
or pursuit of a commercial or an economic activity.

o

It also includes transactions incidental thereto.

o

It covers any person regardless of whether or not the
person engaged therein is a nonstock, nonprofit organization
(irrespective of the disposition of its net income and whether
or not it sells exclusively to members or their guests), or a
government entity.

There should be
o

a commercial or economic activity, and

o

regularity In the action.
«

•

Regular involves more than one isolated transaction. It
requires repetition and continuity of action.

However, if the taxpayer Is a nonresident foreign person, there is
no need for the regularity of conduct. Services rendered by them
in the Philippines are considered as being in the course of trade
or business, and thus, subject to the VAT.
o

This is an exception to the "regularity" requirement.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

326

Any sale, barter, or exchange of goods or services in the course
of trade or business is subject to VAT.

•

O

The sale of a vehicle used in the business of the taxpayer,
while isolated, is subject to VAT as the transaction was an
incidental transaction made in the course of the taxpayer's
business. (Mindanao II Geothermal Partnership v. CIR, G.R.
No. 193301, March 11, 2013)
•

However, the involuntary sale of vessels by a taxpayer
not engaged in the sale of vessels pursuant to the
government's policy of privatization is not subject to
VAT because the sale was not in the course of trade or
business. (CIR v. Magsaysay Lines, Inc., G.R. No. 146984,
July 28, 2006)

■

The sale of a power plant by a GOCC due to a law
that mandated the privatization of NPC assets is also
not subject to VAT because it was not in pursuit of a
commercial or economic activity. (PSALM v. CIR, Inc.,
G.R. No. 198146, August 8, 2017)

When determining if this element/requisite exists, be mindful of
the following:
O

Was the transaction done regularly? Or isolated?

O

Was it incidental to the taxpayer's business?

O

Is the taxpayer a nonresident alien? (Because if he is, the
transaction need not be regular.)

Between an automobile shop that sells five parcels of land and a
real estate dealer who sold a parcel of land, both will be subject
to VAT. The automobile shop because of its regular conduct, and
the real estate dealer because of the nature of his business in the
pursuit of an economic activity.
This provision notwithstanding, importation of goods for personal
use is still subject to VAT because of Section 107.
O

This is an exception to "pursuit of a commercial or an economic
activity" requirement.

Sale, barter, exchange, lease of goods or properties, or rendering of
service in the Philippines
•

There must be a sale, barter, exchange, lease of goods or
properties, or rendering of service in the Philippines.
O

Hence, if a taxpayer renders service to an affiliate for a fee
(even if the fee is merely to reimburse costs), the service is still

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

327

subject to VAT. (CIR v. CA and Commonwealth Management
and Services Corporation [COMASERCO], G.R. No. 125355,
March 30, 2000)

O

Similarly, the fees collected by toll way operators are subject
to VAT. Toll way operators are engaged in rendering service
(constructing, maintaining, and operating expressways).
(Diaz v. Secretary of Finance, G.R. No. 193007, July 19,
2011)

When there is no sale, barter or exchange of goods or properties,
then no VAT should be imposed.

O

Hence, when an affiliate provides funds to a taxpayer who
then uses the funds to pay a third party, the transaction is
not subject to VAT, as there was no sale, barter, or exchange
between the affiliate and the taxpayer. The money was simply
given as a dole-out. (CIR v. Sony Philippines, Inc., G.R. No.
178697, November 17, 2010)

O

Membership fees, association dues, and the like collected by
recreational clubs from its members are also not subject to
VAT, because the clubs aren't selling its service to its members.
There is no economic or commercial activity because these
dues are devoted to the operations and maintenance of the
facilities of the club. (Association of Non-Profit Clubs v. BIR,
G.R. No. 228539, June 26, 2019)

O

The same rule applies for membership fees, association
dues, and the like collected by condominium corporations.
These are not subject to VAT. (BIR v. First E-Bank Tower
Condominium Corp., G.R. Nos 215801 and 218924, January
15, 2020, which invalidated the controversial RMC 65-2012)

O

The allocation of condominium units to partners of a joint
venture is also not subject to VAT, as the allocation is not
a sale, barter, or exchange of goods, but a return of the
partners' capital Investments under the joint venture
agreement. (Malayan Insurance Company, Inc. v. St. Francis
Square Realty Corporation, G.R. No. 198916, July 23, 2018)

If the said transaction is outside the Philippines, then it is not
subject to VAT.
Masarap Kumain, Inc. (MKI) is a Value-Added Tax (VAT)-registered
company which has been engaged in the catering business for the
past 10 years. It has invested a substantial portion of its capital
on flat wares, table linens, plates, chairs, catering equipment, and
delivery vans. MKI sold its first delivery van, already 10 years old
and idle, to Magpapala Gravel and Sand Corp. (MGSC), a corporation

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

328

engaged in the business of buying and selling gravel and sand. The
selling price of the delivery van was way below its acquisition cost. Is
the sale of the delivery van by MKI to MGSC subject to VAT? (2014
Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Yes, the sale is subject to VAT. The law states
that any person who, in the ordinary course of trade or business, sells
goods or properties is subject to VAT. Included in the ordinary course
of trade or business are incidental transactions. In this case, the sale
of the delivery van is incidental to the company's catering business.
Hence, it is subject to VAT. The Supreme Court has previously ruled
the same way in a similar case.

In June 2013, DDD Corp., a domestic corporation engaged in the
business of leasing real properties in the Philippines, entered into a
lease agreement of a residential house and lot with EEE, Inc., a nonresident foreign corporation. The residential house and lot will be
used by officials of EEE, Inc. during their visit to the Philippines. The
tease agreement was signed by representatives from DDD Corp, and
EEE, Inc. in Singapore. DDD Corp, did not subject the said lease to
VAT believing that it was not a domestic service contract. Was DDD
Corp, correct? Explain. (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: DDD Corp, is wrong. It is a domestic service
contract subject to VAT. VAT is imposed on the rendering of services
in the Philippines. In this case, the tease of the residential house
and tot is considered service in the Philippines because the service
performed (the lease of EEE, Inc. for use by its officials) is in the
Philippines. It is immaterial where the lease agreement was signed.

r

I

•

i

AH the homeowners belonging to ABC Village Homeowners'
Association elected a new set of members of the Board of Trustees
for the Association effective January 2019. The first thing that the
Board looked into is the need to increase the prevailing association
dues. Mr. X, one of the trustees, proposed an increase of 100°/o to
account for the payment of the 12°/o value-added tax (VAT) on the
association dues which were being collected for services allegedly
rendered "in the course of trade or business" by ABC Village
Homeowners' Association.

a) What constitutes transactions done "in the course of trade or
business" for purposes of applying VAT?

b) Is Mr. X correct in stating that the association dues are subject
to VAT? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answers:

a)

For VAT purposes, this means the regular conduct or pursuit
of a commercial or an economic activity, including incidental
transactions thereto. It covers any person regardless whether
or not the person engaged therein is a nonstock, nonprofit

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

329

organization (irrespective of the disposition of its net income and
whether or not it sells exclusively to members or their guests),
or a government entity.
b)

Mr. X is wrong. Association dues are not collected in the course of
trade or business. Jurisprudence has stated that the associations
are not selling its services to its members. TRAIN has also stated
that the collection of association dues from homeowners are
VAT-exempt. Hence, Mr. X is wrong.

For the next part, we'll go by tax rates.

First, we'll look at those taxed at 12°/o (Usual VATable and
Importations). Next, those taxed at 0°/o. And then finally, the
exempt transactions.
B.

Normal VAT Transactions fl2°/o)

When it comes to normal VAT transactions or those subject to
12%, we have three categories:

1.

The sale of goods and properties,

2.

The sale of services, and

3.

Importation.

Let's start with sale of goods and properties first.

SEC. 106. Value-added Tax on Sale of Goods or Properties. —
(A) Rate and Base of Tax. — There shall be levied, assessed and
collected on every sale, barter or exchange of goods or properties,
a value-added tax equivalent to twelve percent (12%) of the gross
selling price or gross value in money of the goods or properties sold,
bartered or exchanged, such tax to be paid by the seller or transferor.
(As amended by TRAIN)

In dealing with this element, you're dealing with two questions:

•

0

Is this a normal sale?

o

If not, is this at least a transaction which are deemed sales by
law (Section 106[B])?

Generally, the VAT rate is 12% on the gross selling price or
gross value in money of the goods, properties sold, bartered, or
exchanged.

o

We say "generally" because there are some transactions that
are subject to 0% or tax-exempt, but we'll tackle those later.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

330

For sale of goods or properties, the tax base is the gross selling
price.
Gross selling price
The term "gross selling price" means the total amount of money or
its equivalent which the purchaser pays or is obligated to pay to the
seller in consideration of the sale, barter, or exchange of the goods
or properties, excluding the value-added tax. The excise tax, if any,
on such goods or properties shall form part of the gross selling price.

Sec. 106. (D) Sales Returns, Allowances and Sales Discounts.
— The value of goods or properties sold and subsequently returned
or for which allowances were granted by a VAT-registered person
may be deducted from the gross sales or receipts for the quarter in
which a refund is made or a credit memorandum or refund is issued.
Sales discount granted and indicated in the invoice at the time of
sale and the grant of which does not depend upon the happening of
a future event may be excluded from the gross sales within the same
quarter it was given.

The term "gross selling price" means the total amount of money
or its equivalent which the purchaser pays or is obligated to pay
to the seller in consideration of the sale, barter, or exchange
of the goods or properties, excluding the value-added tax. The
excise tax, if any, on such goods or properties shall form part of
the gross selling price.
o

In other words, the gross selling price includes everything
that the buyer pays the seller, except the VAT which is shifted
to the buyer.

■

o

For example, Elton sold a shirt to Sassy. The quoted
selling price was P100, but there were freight charges of
P50. The gross selling price is P150. You apply the VAT to
P150.

While the law says the VAT is based on the gross selling price,
"gross selling price" does not mean gross sales. The law and
regulations allow downward adjustments for:
•

Sales returns and allowances;

•

Sales discounts agreed upon at the time of the sale
indicated in the sales invoice, and availed of by the buyer.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

331

Goods or properties

Sec. 106. (A) (1) The term "goods" or "properties" shall mean
all tangible and intangible objects which are capable of pecuniary
estimation and shall include:
(a) Real properties held primarily for sale to customers or held for
lease in the ordinary course of trade or business;

(b) The right or the privilege to use patent, copyright, design or
model, plan, secret formula or process, goodwill, trademark, trade
brand or other like property or right;

(c) The right or the privilege to use in the Philippines of any
industrial, commercial or scientific equipment;
(d) The right or the privilege to use motion picture films, tapes and
discs; and
(e) Radio, television, satellite transmission and cable television
time.
Goods or properties include:

•

1.

Real properties held primarily for sale to customers, or held
for lease in the ordinary course of trade or business;

2.

The right or privilege to use patent, copyright, design or
model, plan, secret formula or process, goodwill, trademark,
trade brand or other like property or right;

3.

The right or the privilege to use in the Philippines of any
industrial, commercial or scientific equipment;

4.

The right or the privilege to use motion picture films, tapes
and discs; and

5.

Radio, television, satellite transmission and cable television
time.

This is not an exclusive list, obviously.

Transactions deemed sale

Sec. 106. (B) Transactions Deemed Sale. — The following
transactions shall be deemed sale:

(1) Transfer, use or consumption not in the course of business of
goods or properties originally intended for sale or for use in the course
of business;

(2) Distribution or transfer to:
(a) Shareholders or Investors as share in the profits of the VATregistered persons; or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

332

(b) Creditors in payment of debt;
(3) Consignment of goods if actual sale is not made within sixty (60)
days following the date such goods were consigned; and
(4) Retirement from or cessation of business, with respect to
inventories of taxable goods existing as of such retirement or
cessation.
By virtue of law, the following are considered sales in the course
of trade or business, and is subject to the VAT:

1.

Transfer, use or consumption not in the course of business of
goods or properties originally intended for sale or for use in
the course of business;

2.

Distribution or transfer of inventory to shareholders or
investors as share in the profits of the VAT-registered persons;
(Property Dividends)

3.

Distribution or transfer of inventory to creditors in payment
of debt;

4.

Consignment of goods if actual sale is not made within sixty
(60) days following the date such goods were consigned; and

5.

Retirement from or cessation of business, with respect to
inventories of taxable goods existing as of such retirement or
cessation, (includes capital goods — R.R. 16-2005)

For example, Ramen at Taek's Room, Inc. sells on a regular
basis kimchi ramen which is just absolutely delicious. It decides to
give its tax counsel, Deok Sun, a box of its best-selling kimchi ramen.
That transaction is a transaction deemed sale under (1).

(E) Authority of the Commissioner to Determine the
Appropriate Tax Base. — The Commissioner shall, by rules and
regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, determine the
appropriate tax base in cases where a transaction is deemed a sale,
barter or exchange of goods or properties under Subsection (B)
hereof, or where the gross selling price is unreasonably lower than
the actual market value.
The CIR shall determine the appropriate tax base in cases where
transactions are deemed sales, or where the gross selling price is
unusually lower than the actual market value.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

333

Now let's look at sale of service and use or lease of properties.
Sec. 108. Value-added Tax on Sale of Services and Use or
Lease of Properties. —
(A) Rate and Base of Tax. — There shall be levied, assessed and
collected, a value-added tax equivalent to twelve percent (12%)
of gross receipts derived from the sale or exchange of services,
including the use or lease of properties.

The phrase 'sale or exchange of services' means the
performance of all kinds of services in the Philippines for others for
a fee, remuneration or consideration, including those performed
or rendered by construction and service contractors; stock, real
estate, commercial, customs and immigration brokers; lessors
of property, whether personal or real; warehousing services;
lessors or distributors of cinematographic films; persons engaged
in milling, processing, manufacturing or repacking goods for
others; proprietors, operators or keepers of hotels, motels, resthouses, pension houses, inns, resorts; proprietors or operators of
restaurants, refreshment parlors, cafes and other eating places,
including clubs and caterers; dealers in securities; lending investors;
transportation contractors on their transport of goods or cargoes,
including persons who transport goods or cargoes for hire and other
domestic common carriers by land relative to their transport of goods
or cargoes; common carriers by air and sea relative to their transport
of passengers, goods or cargoes from one place in the Philippines to
another place in the Philippines; sales of electricity by generation
companies, transmission, and distribution companies; services of
franchise grantees of electric utilities, telephone and telegraph,
radio and television broadcasting and all other franchise grantees
except those under Section 119 of this Code and non-life insurance
companies (except their crop insurances), including surety, fidelity,
indemnity and bonding companies; and similar services regardless of
whether or not the performance thereof calls for the exercise or use
of the physical or mental faculties. The phrase 'sale or exchange of
services' shall likewise include:
(1) The lease or the use of or the right or privilege to use
any copyright, patent, design or model plan, secret formula or
process, goodwill, trademark, trade brand or other like property
or right;

(2) The lease or the use of, or the right to use of any Industrial,
commercial or, scientific equipment;
(3) The supply of scientific, technical, Industrial or commercial
knowledge or information;

(4) The supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary
to and is furnished as a means of enabling the application or
enjoyment of any such property, or right as is mentioned in
subparagraph (2) or any such knowledge or information as Is
mentioned in subparagraph (3);

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

334

(5) The supply of services by a nonresident person or his
employee in connection with the use of property or rights
belonging to, or the installation or operation of any brand,
machinery or other apparatus purchased from such nonresident
person;
(6) The supply of technical advice, assistance or services
rendered in connection with technical management or
administration of any scientific, industrial or commercial
undertaking, venture, project or scheme;

(7) The lease of motion picture films, films, tapes and discs;
and
(8) The lease or the use of or the right to use radio, television,
satellite transmission and cable television time.
Lease of properties shall be subject to the tax herein imposed
irrespective of the place where the contract of lease or licensing
agreement was executed if the property is leased or used in the
Philippines.

Any sale or exchange of services in the course of trade or business,
including the use or lease of properties, shall be subject to the
VAT.
For the sale or exchange of services, including the use or lease of
properties, the VAT rate is 12% of the gross receipts.

To be defined as "sales of services," the services:
O

Should be rendered in the Philippines,

O

Can be any and all kinds of services rendered to others
(provided there is no employer-employee relationship); and

O

There is a fee, remuneration or consideration.

Lease of properties shall be subject to VAT irrespective of the
place where the contract or lease or licensing agreement was
executed if the property is leased or used in the Philippines.
Sale of services in the course of trade or business includes those
performed or rendered by:

1.

construction and service contractors;

2.

stock, real estate, commercial, customs and immigration
brokers;

3.

lessor of property, whether personal or real;

4.

warehousing services;

5.

lessor or distributors of cinematographic films;

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

335

6.

persons engaged in milling, processing, manufacturing or
repacking of goods for others;

7.

proprietors, operators, or keepers of hotels, motels, rest
houses, pension houses, inns, resorts;

8.

proprietors or operators of restaurants, refreshment
parlors, cafes and other eating places, including clubs and
caterers;

9.

dealers in securities;

10.

lending investors;

11.

transportation contractors on their transport of goods or
cargoes, including persons who transport goods or cargoes
for hire and other domestic common carriers by land, relative
to their transport of goods or cargoes;

12.

common carriers by air and sea relative to their transport
of passengers, goods or cargoes from one place in the
Philippines to another place in the Philippines;

13.

sales of electricity by generation companies, transmission
by any entity including the National Grid Corporation of the
Philippines, and distribution companies including electric
cooperatives; (R.R. No. 13-2018)

14.

services of franchise grantees of electric utilities, telephone
and telegraph, radio and television broadcasting and all other
franchise grantees, except those under Section 119 of the
NIRC;

15.

non-life insurance companies (except their crop insurances),
including surety, fidelity and bonding companies; and

16.

similar services regardless of whether or not the performance
thereof calls for the exercise or use of the physical or mental
faculties.

Also included are:

1.

The lease or use of or right or privilege to use any copyright,
patent, design or model, plan, secret formula or process,
goodwill, trademark, trade brand and other like property or
right;

2.

The lease or the use of, or the right to use of any industrial,
commercial or scientific equipment;

3.

The supply of scientific, technical, industrial or commercial
knowledge or information;

4.

The supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary
to and is furnished as a means of enabling the application or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

336

enjoyment of any such property, or right as is enumerated in
number (2) hereof or any such knowledge or information as
is mentioned in number (3);
5.

The supply of services by a nonresident person or his employee
in connection with the use of property or rights belonging to,
or the installation or operation of any brand, machinery or
other apparatus purchased from such non-resident person;

6.

The supply of technical advice, assistance or services rendered
in connection with technical management or administration of
any scientific, industrial or commercial undertaking, venture,
project or scheme;

7.

The lease of motion picture films, tapes, and discs;

8.

The lease or use of or the right to use radio, television,
satellite transmission and cable television time.
•

The list is not exhaustive, obviously.

However, the exhibition of movies (as opposed to the lease
thereof) is not subject to VAT, but subject to amusement tax
imposed by local government units. (CIR v. SM Prime Holdings,
Inc., G.R. No. 183505, February 26, 2010)
Cash deposits or advances received by taxpayers other than GPP
from clients and customers shall be subject to VAT, if applicable
(/.e.z if the taxpayer exceeds the threshold or if it registered as a
VAT taxpayer). (RMC 16-2013)

o

But see Medicard Philippines, Inc. v. CIR (G.R. No. 222743,
April 5, 2017), which stated that amounts earmarked for
payment to a third party are not part of gross receipts and
therefore not subject to VAT.

For VAT, all gross receipts from services rendered by the partners
shall be entirely taxable to the partnership.
Sec. 108. The term 'gross receipts' means the total amount
of money or its equivalent representing the contract price,
compensation, service fee, rental or royalty, including the amount
charged for materials supplied with the services and deposits and
advanced payments actually or constructively received during the
taxable quarter for the services performed or to be performed for
another person, excluding value-added tax.

Gross receipts mean cash or its equivalent actually received or
constructively received (not including the VAT) as:
o

Payments on the contract price, compensation, service fee,
rental or royalty;

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

337

O

Payments or materials supplied with the services; and

O

Deposits of advanced payments on the contract for services.

For example, Geralt of Cainta was a Filipino monster
hunter who specialized in hunting aswangs. He spent
P20,000,000 for materials and PIO,000,000 for labor.
People tossed him coins as payment amounting to gross
receipts of P30,000,000, the whole of which is VATable by
12%.

•

Constructive receipt occurs when the money consideration or its
equivalent is placed in the control of the person who rendered
the service without restriction by the payor, (like a bank deposit;
issuance by the debtor of a notice to offset any debt or obligation
and acceptance thereof by the seller as payment for the services
rendered)

Gross receipts do not include amounts earmarked for payment to
unrelated 3rd parties or received as reimbursement for advance
payment on behalf of another which do not redound to the benefit
of the payor. (R.R. 4-2007)
O

It is considered payment to a 3rd party if the same is made
to settle an obligation of another person (like a customer or a
client) to the said third party.

■

O

It is an advance payment on behalf of another if the payment
is to a 3rd party for a present or future obligation of said
another party.

■

O

The sales invoice or official receipt must be issued by the
3rd party to the obligor/debtor (the customer or a client
of the payor).

The sales invoice or official receipt must be Issued by
the obllgee/creditor to the obligor/debtor (the "another
party") for the sale of goods or services by the former to
the latter.

"Unrelated party" shall not include the taxpayer's employees,
partners, affiliates, relatives by consanguinity or affinity
within the 4th degree, and trust funds where the taxpayer
Is the trustor, trustee, or beneficiary, even if covered by an
agreement to the contrary.

Amounts earmarked by an HMO to Its medical service providers
on behalf of its clients do not form part of its gross receipts
for VAT purposes. (Medicare! Philippines, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No.
222743, April 5, 2017, where the HMO also issued two official
receipts—one pertaining to the VATable portion that represented

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

338

compensation for its services, the other pertaining to the nonVATable portion pertaining to the amounts earmarked for medical
utilization^

O

By earmarking said amounts, the HMO recognizes that
it possesses said funds not as an owner but as mere
administrator of the same. (Medicare! Philippines, Inc. v. CIR)

VAT on Importation
Sec. 107. Value-Added Tax on Importation of Goods. —
(A) In General. — There shall be levied, assessed and collected
on every importation of goods a value-added tax equivalent to
twelve percent (12%) based on the total value used by the Bureau
of Customs in determining tariff and customs duties, plus customs
duties, excise taxes, if any, and other charges, such tax to be paid
by the importer prior to the release of such goods from customs
custody: Provided, That where the customs duties are determined
on the basis of the quantity or volume of the goods, the value-added
tax shall be based on the landed cost plus excise taxes, if any.
Every importation of goods shall be subject to the VAT, whether
for use in business or not.
The imported goods shall be subject to 12% VAT.
The tax base is:

o

the total value used by the Bureau of customs in determining
tariff and customs duty, plus customs duties, excise tax (if
any), and other charges prior to the removal of the goods
from customs custody; OR

o

based on the landed cost, when the customs duties are
determined on the basis of the quantity or volume of the
goods. By "landed cost" is meant the invoice cost, freight,
insurance, customs duties, excise tax (if any), and other
charges prior to the removal of the goods from customs
custody.

(B) Transfer of Goods by Tax-Exempt Persons. — In the case of
tax-free importation of goods into the Philippines by persons, entities
or agencies exempt from tax where such goods are subsequently
sold, transferred or exchanged in the Philippines to non-exempt
persons or entities, the purchasers, transferees or recipients shall be
considered the importers thereof, who shall be liable for any internal
revenue tax on such importation. The tax due on such importation
shall constitute a lien on the goods superior to all charges or liens on
the goods, irrespective of the possessor thereof.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

339

When a person who was exempt from the VAT on his importation
subsequently sells (transfers or exchanges) in the Philippines such
imported article to a non-exempt person or entity, the purchaser
(transferee or assignee) will be required to pay the VAT.

o

Tiki Taka, Inc. is a tax-exempt entity that imports high-end
soccer balls. Tiki Taka, Inc. then sold it to Diego Dribblers,
Inc., a non-exempt entity. Diego Dribblers, Inc. has to pay
for the VAT. Diego Dribblers, Inc. can claim the VAT paid as
creditable input taxes.

The VAT of an importation should be paid prior to the release of
the goods from customs custody. If it is subject to both excise tax
and VAT, the taxpayer has to pay both prior to the release.
A seller of goods or services who imports stuff can claim the
VAT paid on importations during a taxable period as input taxes
creditable against the output taxes on the sales of the same
period.

The same rule applies to technical importation of goods sold by a
person located in a special economic zone to a customer located
in a customs territory.
Before tackling zero-rated and exempt transactions, let's have an
overview of the VAT system.
•

Understanding VAT is a matter of perspective.

•

Remember VAT is an indirect tax, hence the burden of paying the
VAT is passed on to the buyer. Our focus here is on Bellatrix, a
crazy strange witch who openly flirts with her boss in front of her
husband.

•

Albus sells Bellatrix a purple potion; Bellatrix shoulders the 12%
VAT on it.
O

Bellatrix can recover the amount she paid to Albus by selling
the purple potion to Cho, wherein Cho will shoulder the 12%
VAT.

The biggest difference between zero-rated/effectively zerorated transactions and VAT-exempt transactions is the ability to
recover VAT already paid to the seller.
O

Why do we look at the input tax and not the output tax?
•

Because the Input tax is what we all seek to recover, that
is what we shouldered.
•

Bellatrix wants to recover the 12% VAT that she had
paid to Albus.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

340

•

Output tax doesn't come out of our own pockets because
we can pass that burden to our buyers.
•

0

In zero-rated transactions, there is total relief for the
purchaser (Cho) from the burden of the tax since she does
not have to pay any VAT on the transaction.

■

0

•

Bellatrix's selling of the purple potion to Cho will
burden Cho, not Bellatrix.

On the side of the seller (Bellatrix), the input tax on her
purchases from her supplier (Albus) shall be available as
a tax credit or refund.

In exempt transactions, there is only partial relief because
the seller (Bellatrix) is not allowed any tax refund or credit for
input taxes paid on her purchases from her supplier (Albus).

In fact, some jurisdictions call zero-rated transactions "exempt
with credit" (because you can credit input tax) and VAT-exempt
transactions "exempt without credit" (because you can't credit
input tax). So that's a helpful way of remembering the difference
between zero-rated and VAT-exempt. You can get a credit with
zero-rated transactions and you can't get a credit with VATexempt transactions.

In normal VAT transactions, the VAT paid to the supplier (Albus) can
be recovered by selling the product to a purchaser (Cho).
Albus sells
to Bellatrix

Bellatrix
sells to Cho

VAT
TAXABLE

VAT
TAXABLE

P100
.+ Pl2 (VAT)
P112

P 150
+ P18
P168

Bellatrix paid Albus P12 as VAT.
But she recovered the P12 by
selling the product to Cho. In her
sale to Cho, she received P18
which covered the P12 she had
paid Albus. So, in essence, she
recovered the P12 she had paid
Albus.

What if the transaction of Bellatrix to Cho is VAT ZERO-RATED?
Albus sells
to Bellatrix

Bellatrix
sells to Cho

VAT
TAXABLE

VAT ZERORATED

P100

±_E12(VAD
P112

P150
+ P0
P150

Bellatrix paid Albus P12 as VAT.
But, her transaction to Cho
was zero-rated. So she did not
receive anything from Cho to
offset her VAT payment to Albus.
She has an output of zero, and
an input of P12.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

341

She can apply for a refund or a
tax credit of the P12 with the BIR
because the law allows this.

What if the transaction of Bellatrix to Cho is VAT EXEMPT?

Albus sells
to Bellatrix

Bellatrix sells to
Cho

VAT
TAXABLE

VAT EXEMPT

P100
+ P12 (VAT)
P112

P150
+ PO
P150

Bellatrix paid Albus P12 as
VAT. But, her transaction to
Cho was VAT-exempt. So
she did not receive anything
from Cho to offset her VAT
payment to Albus. She has
an output of zero, and an
input of P12.
However, unlike a zero-rated
transaction, she cannot apply
for a refund or a credit of the
P12 with the BIR because the
law does not allow this.

!

j
i

I

I

So, if we were Bellatrix, and we had a choice... what should
our next sale transaction be — normal VATable, zero-rated, or
exempt?

O

Clearly, we won't go for exempt, because we won't recover
the VAT we paid to our suppliers (Albus).

■

But what do you do with the unrecovered VAT in exempt
transactions?

It will be considered cost.
o

It Is a toss-up between going for normal VATable transactions
and zero-rated transactions.

■

In both these cases, we will recover the VAT we paid to
our suppliers. It will just depend on different factors.

•

If we go for a zero-rated transaction, do we want to go through
the hassle of having to deal with the BIR and paying the fees?

•

If we go for the normal VATable, the recovery would be quicker.
But this would mean we'd have to keep track of the VAT paid to us
and then have to pay the net VAT payable to the government. And
what if our line of business is really engaged in exporting (zerorated), should we go to the trouble of looking for buyers here in
the Philippines if that's not our main line of business anyway?

11

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

342

C.

Zprn-rated/Effectively Zero-rated Transactions

Purpose:
•

To exempt the transaction completely from VAT previously
collected since input taxes passed to him may be recovered as
refunds or credits

For goods

Sec. 106. (2) Sec. 106. (2) The following sales by VAT-registered
persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate:
(a) Export Sales. — The term 'export sales' means:

(1) The sale and actual shipment of goods from the Philippines to a
foreign country, irrespective of any shipping arrangement that may
be agreed upon which may influence or determine the transfer of
ownership of the goods so exported and paid for in acceptable foreign
currency or its equivalent in goods or services, and accounted for in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas (BSP);
(2)—Sale and delivery of goods to:
(f)—Registered enterprises within-u-scpur&te customs territory
os-provided under-special iaws^-and
(ii)—Registered-enterprises within tourism enterprise-zones os
deeiured by the Tourism—Infrastructure and-Enterprise Zone
Authority-(TIEZA) subject to the provisions under Republic- Act
No. 9593 or The Tourism Act of 2009. (Vetoed)

(3) Sale of raw materials or packaging materials to a nonresident
buyer for delivery to a resident local export-oriented enterprise
to be used in manufacturing, processing, packing or repacking in
the Philippines of the said buyer's goods and paid for in acceptable
foreign currency and accounted for in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);
(4) Sale of raw materials or packaging materials to export-oriented
enterprise whose export sales exceed seventy percent (70%) of total
annual production;

(5) Those considered export sales under Executive Order No. 226,
otherwise known as the Omnibus Investment Code of 1987, and
other special laws; and
(6) The sale of goods, supplies, equipment and fuel to persons
engaged in international shipping or international air transport

operations: Provided, That the goods, supplies, equipment and fuel
shall be used for international shipping or air transport operations.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

343

Provided, That subparagraphs (3), (4), and (5) hereof shall be
subject to the twelve percent (12%) value-added tax and no longer
be considered export sales subject to zero percent (0%) VAT rate
upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) The successful establishment and implementation of an enhanced
VAT refund system that grants refunds of creditable input tax within
ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application with the
Bureau: Provided, That, to determine the effectivity of item no. 1, all
applications filed from January 1, 2018 shall be processed and must
be decided within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund
application; and
(2) All pending VAT refund claims as of December 31, 2017 shall be
fully paid in cash by December 31, 2019.

I'

Provided, That the Department of Finance shall establish a VAT refund
center in the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) and in the Bureau of
Customs (BOC) that will handle the processing and granting of cash
refunds of creditable input tax.

1

An amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total VAT collection
of the BIR and the BOC from the immediately preceding year shall be
automatically appropriated annually and shall be treated as a special
account in the General Fund or as trust receipts for the purpose of
funding claims for VAT refund: Provided, That any unused fund, at
the end of the year shall revert to the General Fund.

Provided, further, That the BIR and BOC shall be required to submit
to the Congressional Oversight Committee on the Comprehensive
Tax Reform Program (COCCTRP) a quarterly report of all pending
claims for refund and any unused fund.

I

I"

(b) Sales to persons or entities whose exemption under special laws
or international agreements to which the Philippines is a signatory
effectively subjects such sales to zero rate. (As amended by TRAIN)

For goods, a rate of 0% of the gross selling price will be applied
If:

1.

Export sale; or

2.

Sales to persons or entities whose exemption under special
laws, or international agreements to which the Philippines is
a signatory (effectively-zero rated sales)

Export sales means:

o

The sales and actual shipments or exportations of goods
from the Philippines to a foreign country, irrespective of any
shipping arrangement that may be agreed upon which may
influence or determine the transfer of ownership of the goods
so exported, and
I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

344

Paid for in acceptable foreign currency or its equivalent in
goods or services, and accounted for in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the BSP.

O

The following are also considered export sales:

•

1.

Sales of raw materials or packaging materials to a nonresident buyer for delivery to a resident local export-oriented
enterprise to be used in manufacturing, processing, packing
or repacking in the Philippines of said buyer's goods and
paid for in acceptable foreign currency and accounted for in
accordance with BSP rules and regulations;

2.

Sale of raw materials or packaging materials to an exportoriented enterprise whose export sales exceed 70% of total
annual production (as long as 70% is exported, then 100% of
net input may be refunded);

3.

Those considered export sales under EO 226 and other special
laws; and

4.

Sale of goods, supplies, equipment and fuel to persons
engaged in international shipping or international air transport
operations, as long as the goods, supplies, equipment, and
fuel are used for international shipping or air transport
operations.

TRAIN has also set some standards to remove the zero-rating for
sale of packaging materials to nonresidents, sale of packaging
materials to export-oriented enterprises, and export sales under
EO 226.
These transactions will be subject to the normal 12% rate if a
successful VAT refund system is established, among others.

O

Under the cross-border principle or destination principle of the
VAT system, no VAT shall be imposed to form part of the cost
of goods destined outside of the territorial border of the taxing
authority. (CIR v. Seagate Technology [Philippines], G.R. No.
153866, February 11, 2005) While an ecozone is geographically
within the Philippines, it is deemed a separate customs territory
and is regarded in law as foreign soil.
O

Since ecozones (such as the Clark Special Economic Zone and
Clark Freeport Zone) are considered foreign territories, a R.R.
which imposes VAT on the importation of petroleum products
into the ecozones is invalid. (Secretary of Finance v. Lazatin,
G.R. No. 210588, November 29, 2016)
•

Articles brought into and remain in ecozones are not
taxable importations, because the goods remain in
foreign territory.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

345

As long as the goods remain in the ecozone or re-exported
to a foreign jurisdiction, they are tax-free.

O

O

But once introduced into the Philippines customs
territory, it shall then be considered "technical
importation" subject to taxes and customs duties.
(Secretary of Finance v. Lazatin)

Thus, sales by suppliers from outside the ecozone to this
separate customs territory are deemed as exports and treated
as export sales. (CIR v. Sekisui Jushi Philippines, Inc., G.R.
No. 149761, July 21, 2006)

■

But what if suppliers erroneously impose VAT on goods
sold to an entity within a separate customs territory?

O

The purchaser's (/.e., the entity in the ecozone)
recourse is against the supplier, not the government.
The purchaser can't run after the government.

O

The supplier is the proper party to claim the refund
because VAT is an indirect tax and the supplier is the
one statutorily liable. (Coral Bay Nickel Corporation
v. CIR, G.R. No. 190506, June 13, 2016)

For services
Sec. 108. (B) Transactions Subject to Zero Percent (O°/o)
Rate. — The following services performed in the Philippines by VATregistered persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate:

(1) Processing, manufacturing or repacking goods for other persons
doing business outside the Philippines which goods are subsequently
exported, where the services are paid for in acceptable foreign
currency and accounted for in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);
(2) Services other than those mentioned in the preceding paragraph,
rendered to a person engaged in business conducted outside the
Philippines or to a nonresident person not engaged in business who
is outside the Philippines when the services are performed, the
consideration for which is paid for in acceptable foreign currency and
accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);
(3) Services rendered to persons or entities whose exemption under
special laws or international agreements to which the Philippines is
a signatory effectively subjects the supply of such services to zero
percent (0%) rate;

J9JC9B0M

346

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(4) Services rendered to persons engaged in international shipping
or international air transport operations, including leases of property
for use thereof: Provided, That these services shall be exclusively for
international shipping or air transport operations;
(5) Services performed by subcontractors and/or contractors in
processing, converting, or manufacturing goods for an enterprise
whose export sales exceed seventy percent (70%) of total annual
production;

(6) Transport of passengers and cargo by domestic air or sea vessels
from the Philippines to a foreign country; and

(7) Sale of power or fuel generated through renewable sources of
energy such as, but not limited to, biomass, solar, wind, hydropower,
geothermal, ocean energy, and other emerging energy sources using
technologies such as fuel cells and hydrogen fuels.
(8)—Services rendered to:
(+)------Registered en terprises—within—a—separate—customs
territory us provided-under-specta! low; and

(0)----- Registered—enterprises—within—tourism—enterprise
zonesus-dedared by the TIEZA subject to the provisions under
Republic Act No. 9503 or The Tourism Act of 2009. (Vetoed!!!)
Provided, That subparagraphs (B)(1) and (B)(5) hereof shall be
subject to the twelve percent (12%) value-added tax and no longer
be subject to zero percent (0%) VAT rate upon satisfaction of the
following conditions:

(1) The successful establishment and implementation of an enhanced
VAT refund system that grants refunds of creditable input tax within
ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund application with the
Bureau: Provided, That, to determine the effectivity of item no. 1, all
applications filed from January 1, 2018 shall be processed and must
be decided within ninety (90) days from the filing of the VAT refund
application; and
(2) All Pending VAT refund claims as of December 31, 2017 shall be
fully paid in cash by December 31, 2019.

Provided, That the Department of Finance shall establish a VAT refund
center in the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) and in the Bureau of
Customs (BOC) that will handle the processing and granting of cash
refunds of creditable input tax.
An amount equivalent to five percent (5%) of the total value-added
tax collection of the BIR and the BOC from the immediately preceding
year shall be automatically appropriated annually and shall be
treated as a special account in the General Fund or as trust receipts

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

347

for the purpose of funding claims for VAT Refund: Provided, That any
unused fund, at the end of the year shall revert to the General Fund.

Provided, further, That the BIR and the BOC shall be required to
submit to the COCCTRP a quarterly report of all pending claims for
refund and any unused fund. (As amended by TRAIN)
For services performed in the Philippines, a rate of 0% of the
gross receipts will be applied in the following instances:

1.

From processing, manufacturing or repacking of goods:
a.

For other persons doing business outside the Philippines,

b.

The goods are subsequently exported, and
The services are paid for in acceptable foreign currency
and accounted for in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the BSP

2.

Services other than processing, manufacturing or repacking
of goods, rendered to a:

a.

Person engaged
Philippines, or

b.

Nonresident person not engaged in business who is
outside the Philippines when the services are performed,
and

c.

The consideration is paid in acceptable foreign currency
and accounted for in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the BSP

in

business conducted

outside the

3.

Services rendered to persons or entities whose exemption
under special laws or international agreements to which the
Philippines is a signatory effectively subjects such services to
zero rate;

4.

Services rendered to persons engaged in international
shipping or international air transport operations, including
leases of property for use thereof, as long as the services
shall be exclusively for international shipping or air transport
operations;

5.

Services performed by subcontractors and/or contractors
in processing, converting, or manufacturing goods for an
enterprise whose export sales exceed 70% of total annual
production;

6.

Transport of passengers and cargo by domestic air and sea
vessels from the Philippines to a foreign country; and

[

I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

348

Sale of power or fuel generated through renewable sources of
energy (this does not cover the sale of services to maintain
the operation of these plants). (R.R. 13-2018)

7.

TRAIN has also set some standards to remove the zero-rating
for processing goods for persons doing business outside the
Philippines and services performed by contractors for exportoriented enterprises.
O

These transactions will be subject to the normal 12% rate if a
successful VAT refund system is established, among others.

For "services other than processing, manufacturing or repacking
of goods"
O

The phrase covers all aspects of the word "service" as long as
the service is done in the Philippines
«

O

Hence, when the Philippine branch facilitates the collection
of receivables from customers of its foreign affiliate, said
service qualifies under Section 108(b)(2) as zero-rated.
(CIR v. American Express International, Inc. [Philippine
Branch], G.R. No. 152609, June 29, 2005)

The recipient of the services (other than processing,
manufacturing, or repacking of goods under Section 108 [b]
[1]) must likewise be fora person engaged in business outside
the Philippines. (CIR v. Burmeister and Wain Scandinavian
Contractor Mindanao, Inc., G.R. No. 153205, January 22,
2007 where the recipient of the services was the Consortium
who was deemed doing business within the Philippines)
■

It is not enough that the recipient has no business
presence in the Philippines. The taxpayer has the burden
to prove that the recipient is engaged in business outside
the Philippines. (Accenture, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 190102,
July 11, 2012)

The VAT system generally follows the "destination principle"
(exports are zero-rated whereas imports are taxed).
o

However, there is an exception in the form of services
performed in the Philippines for a recipient doing business
outside the Philippines (since the service is still done here)
(CIR v. Burmeister and Wain Scandinavian Contractor
Mindanao, Inc., G.R. No. 153205, January 22, 2007).

Effectively-zero rated sales usually come from special laws and
international agreements
O

R.A. 7227, R.A. 7916, Asia Development Bank, Embassies,
etc. (R.R. 16-2005)

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

349

Difference between zero-rated and effectively zero-rated transactions
(CIR v. Seagate Technology [Philippines], G.R. No. 153866, February
11, 2005).

•

Zero-rated transactions refer to the export sale of goods and
supply of services. The seller of such transactions charges no
output tax, but can claim a refund or a tax credit certificate for
the VAT previously charged by suppliers. This is for the benefit of
the seller.

Effectively zero-rated transactions refer to the sale of goods or
supply of services to persons or entities whose exemption under
special laws or international agreements to which the Philippines
is a signatory effectively subjects such transactions to a zero
rate. Such rate does not yield any tax chargeable against the
purchaser. This is for the benefit of the purchaser.
O

Strictly speaking, it is the sales by the suppliers which are
zero-rated. But the entities are granted an indirect tax
exemption for policy and economic reasons.

In both zero-rated and effectively zero-rated transactions, the
seller who charges zero output tax can claim a refund or a tax
credit certificate for the VAT previously charged by suppliers.

XYZ Law Offices, a law partnership in the Philippines and a VATregistered taxpayer, received a query by e-mail from Gainsburg
Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of Delaware,
but the e-mail came from California where Gainsburg has an office.
Gainsburg has no office in the Philippines and does no business in
the Philippines.

XYZ Law Offices rendered its opinion on the query and billed
Gainsburg US$1,000 for the opinion. Gainsburg remitted its payment
through Citibank which converted the remitted US$1,000 to pesos
and deposited the converted amount in the XYZ Law Offices account.
What are the tax Implications of the payment to XYZ Law Offices in
terms of VAT and income taxes? (2013 Bar Exam)

i

Suggested answer: The payment of XYZ Law Offices is subject to
zero-rated VAT and income tax. It is subject to zero-rated VAT as
it was for services rendered for persons doing business outside the
Philippines and paid in foreign currency. The payment will form part
of the gross income of the Law Office (which will be distributed to
the partners) because these services were performed within the tax
jurisdiction of the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

1

350

D.

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Pxpmnt Transactions
Sec. 109. Exempt Transactions. — (1) Subject to the provisions
of subsection (2) hereof, the following transactions shall be exempt
from the value-added tax:
(A) Sale or importation of agricultural and marine food products in
their original state, livestock and poultry of a kind generally used as,
or yielding or producing foods for human consumption; and breeding
stock and genetic materials therefor.

Products classified under this paragraph shall be considered in their
original state even if they have undergone the simple processes of
preparation or preservation for the market, such as freezing, drying,
salting, broiling, roasting, smoking or stripping. Polished and/or
husked rice, com grits, raw cane sugar and molasses, ordinary salt,
and copra shall be considered in their original state;

(B) Sale or importation of fertilizers; seeds, seedlings and fingerlings;
fish, prawn, livestock and poultry feeds, including ingredients,
whether locally produced or imported, used in the manufacture of
finished feeds (except specialty feeds for race horses, fighting cocks,
aquarium fish, zoo animals and other animals generally considered
as pets);

(C) Importation of personal and household effects belonging to the
residents of the Philippines returning from abroad and nonresident
citizens coming to resettle in the Philippines: Provided, That such
goods are exempt from customs duties under the Tariff and Customs
Code of the Philippines;
(D) Importation of professional instruments and implements, tools of
trade, occupation or employment, wearing apparel, domestic animals,
and personal and household effects belonging to persons coming to
settle in the Philippines or Filipinos or their families and descendants
who are now residents or citizens of other countries, such parties
hereinafter referred to as overseas Filipinos, in quantities and of
the class suitable to the profession, rank or position of the persons
importing said items, for their own use and not for barter or sale,
accompanying such persons, or arriving within a reasonable time:
Provided, That the Bureau of Customs may, upon the production
of satisfactory evidence that such persons are actually coming to
settle in the Philippines and that the goods are brought from their
former place of abode, exempt such goods from payment of duties
and taxes: Provided, further, That vehicles, vessels, aircrafts,
machineries and other similar goods for use in manufacture, shall
not fall within this classification and shall therefore be subject to
duties, taxes and other charges;

(E) Services subject to percentage tax under Title V;
(F) Services by agricultural contract growers and milling for others of
palay into rice, corn into grits and sugar cane into raw sugar;

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

351

(G) Medical, dental, hospital and veterinary services except those
rendered by professionals;
(H) Educational services rendered by private educational institutions,
duly accredited by the Department of Education (DepEd), the
Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the Technical Education
and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and those rendered by
government educational institutions;

(I) Services rendered by individuals pursuant to an employeremployee relationship;
(J) Services rendered by regional or area headquarters established
in the Philippines by multinational corporations which act as
supervisory, communications and coordinating centers for their
affiliates, subsidiaries or branches in the Asia-Pacific Region and do
not earn or derive income from the Philippines;
(K) Transactions which are exempt under international agreements
to which the Philippines is a signatory or under special laws, except
those under Presidential Decree No. 529;

(L) Sales by agricultural cooperatives duly registered with the
Cooperative Development Authority to their members as well as sale
of their produce, whether in its original state or processed form, to
non-members; their importation of direct farm inputs, machineries
and equipment, including spare parts thereof, to be used directly
and exclusively in the production and/or processing of their produce;

(M) Gross receipts from lending activities by credit or multi-purpose
cooperatives duly registered with the Cooperative Development
Authority;
(N) Sales by non-agricultural, non-electricand non-credit cooperatives
duly registered with the Cooperative Development Authority:
Provided, That the share capital contribution of each member does
not exceed Fifteen thousand pesos (P15,000) and regardless of the
aggregate capital and net surplus ratably distributed among the
members;

(O) Export sales by persons who are not VAT-registered;
(P) Sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to customers
or held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or business or real
property utilized for low-cost and socialized housing as defined by
Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development
and Housing Act of 1992, and other related laws, residential lot
valued at One million five hundred thousand pesos (Pl,500,000)
and below, house and lot, and other residential dwellings valued at
Two million five hundred thousand pesos (P2,500,000) and below:
Provided, That beginning January 1, 2021, the VAT exemption shall
only apply to sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

352

customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or
business, sale of real property utilized for socialized housing as
defined by Republic Act No. 7279, sale of house and lot, and other
residential dwellings with selling price of not more than Two million
pesos (P2,000,000): Provided, further, That every three (3) years
thereafter, the amount herein stated shall be adjusted to its present
value using the Consumer Price Index, as published by the Philippine
Statistics Authority (PSA);

(Q) Lease of a residential unit with a monthly rental not exceeding
Fifteen thousand pesos (P15,000);
(R) Sale, importation, printing or publication of books and any
newspaper, magazine, review or bulletin which appears at regular
intervals with fixed prices or subscription and sale and which is not
devoted principally to the publication of paid advertisements;

(S) Transport of passengers by international carriers;

(T) Sale, importation or lease of passenger or cargo vessels and
aircraft, including engine, equipment and spare parts thereof for
domestic or international transport operations;

(U) Importation of fuel, goods and supplies by persons engaged in
international shipping or airtransport operations: Provided, That the
fuel, goods, and supplies shall be used for international shipping or
air transport operations;
(V) Services of bank, non-bank financial intermediaries performing
quasi-banking functions, and other non-bank financial intermediaries;

(W) Sale or lease of goods and services to senior citizens and persons
with disability, as provided under Republic Act Nos. 9994 (Expanded
Senior Citizens Act of 2010) and 10754 (An Act Expanding the
Benefits and Privileges of Persons with Disability), respectively;
(X) Transfer of property pursuant to Section 40(C)(2) of the NIRC.
as amended;
(Y) Association dues, membership fees, and other assessments and
charges collected by homeowners associations and condominium
corporations;

(Z) Sale of gold to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);
(AA)

Sale or importation of prescription drugs and medicines for

I)
diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension beginning January 1, 2020; and

if) cancer, mental illness, tuberculosis,
diseases beginning January 1, 2023,

and

kidney

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

353

Provided, that the DOH shall issue a list of approved drugs
and medicines for this purpose within sixty (60) days from the
effectivity of this Act; and

(BB)
Sale or lease of goods or properties or the performance of
services other than the transactions mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs, the gross annual sales and/or receipts do not exceed
the amount of Three million pesos (P3,000,000). (As amended by
TRAIN and further amended by R.A. 11467)

VAT-exempt transactions refer to the sale of goods or properties
and/or services and the use or lease of properties that is not
subject to VAT (output tax) and the seller is not allowed any tax
credit of VAT (input tax) on purchases.
O

The person making the exempt sale of goods, properties or
services shall not bill any output tax to his customers because
the said transaction is not subject to VAT. (R.R. 16-2005)

The seller does not charge VAT and he CANNOT claim exemption
from what has been passed to him.

A VAT-registered person may elect that the exemptions shall not
apply to his sales of goods or properties or services.
O

But once the election is made, it shall be irrevocable for a
period of three years counted from the quarter when the
election was made.

Let's go through the VAT-exempt transactions: (based on R.R.
16-2005, unless otherwise indicated)
O

Sale or importation of agricultural and marine food products
in their original state, livestock and poultry, and breeding
stock and genetic materials:
•

The term "livestock" does not include fighting cocks,
race horses, zoo animals and other animals generally
considered as pets.

-

"Original state" shall include even if the products
have undergone the simple process of preparation or
preservation for the market (like freezing, drying).

■

Polished and/or husked rice, corn grits, raw cane sugar
and molasses, ordinary salt and copra are considered
agricultural food products in their original state.

•

"Raw cane sugar" is the natural sugar extracted from
sugarcane through simple mechanical process by
pressing for the juice, boiling it to crystallize, filtering
using a centrifuge to separate these crystals, and

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

354

drying—resulting to crystallized brown sugar. (R.R.
08-2015)

•

■

Only those falling under the new definition (which
includes muscovado) are exempt from VAT. (R.R. 082015)

"Specialty feeds" refer to non-agricultural feeds or food
for race horses, fighting cocks, aquarium fish, zoo animals
and other animals generally considered as pets.

Provided the goods are exempt from customs duties
under the Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines

Importation of professional instruments and implements,
wearing apparel, domestic animals, and personal household
effects (except vehicles, goods for use in manufacture and
merchandise for any kind commercial quantity)

O

•

Belonging to people coming to settle in the Philippines
and are not for sale;

O

Services subject to percentage tax

O

Services by agricultural contract growers and milling for
others of palay into rice, corn into grits and sugar cane into
raw sugar
■

■

J9JC9B0M

•

Importation of personal and household effects belonging to
residents of the Philippines returning from abroad and nonresident citizens coming to resettle in the Philippines

O

0

It shall only refer to raw cane sugar produced from
conducting only 1 stage of filtering and centrifuging
without any other further process applied thereto.

Sale or importation of fertilizers, seeds, seedlings, etc.’ except
specialty feeds:

O

|

•

Agricultural contract growers are folks producing for other
folks poultry, livestock, or other agricultural and marine
food products in their original state. This includes contract
growers who not only grow poultry or livestock, but also
process and dress poultry and livestock as a packaged
service to its contract growing. That's VAT exempt.
However, the processing and dressing services performed
independently from growing poultry, livestock, etc. are
subject to VAT, as these services are separated from the
VAT-exempt act of growing. (RMC 097-10)

Medical, dental, hospital and veterinary services, except
those rendered by professionals

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

O

355

-

Laboratory services are exempted. But if the hospital
or clinic operates a pharmacy or drug store, the sale of
drugs and medicine is subject to VAT.

•

A health care company which merely provides and
arranges for the provision of pre-need health care services
to its members is NOT VAT-exempt as it merely arranges
for medical services. It does not provide the medical
services. (CIR v. Philippine Health Care Providers, Inc.,
G.R. No. 168129, April 24, 2007)

Educational services rendered by private educational
institutions, accredited by the DEPED, CHED, TESDA, and
those rendered by government educational institutions

Educational services do not include seminars, in-service
training, review classes and other similar services
rendered by persons who are not accredited by the
DEPED, CHED or TESDA

■

O

Services rendered by individuals pursuant to an employeremployee relationship

O

Services rendered by RAHQs

O

Transactions exempt under international agreements except
those granted under P.D. 529 or the Petroleum Exploration
Concessionaires

O

Sales by agricultural cooperatives duly registered and in good
standing with the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA)
to their members, as well as sale of the produce to nonmembers
•

Sale by agricultural cooperatives to non-members
can only be exempted from VAT if the producer of the
agricultural products sold is the cooperative itself. It the
cooperative is not the producer (like a trader), then only
those sales to Its members shall be exempted from VAT.
(R.R. 4-2007)

■

The sale or importation of agricultural food products in
their original state is exempt from VAT irrespective of the
seller and buyer thereof. (R.R. 4-2007)

■

To enjoy VAT exemption, the cooperative must:
•

Be registered with the CDA; and

•

Sell exclusively to its members, or

•

If it sells both to members and nonmembers, the
sale must be of its produce, whether in its original or

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

356

processed state. (CIR v. United Cadiz Sugar Farmers
Association Multi-purpose Cooperative, G.R. No.
209776, December 7, 2016, where the cooperative
sold refined sugar—the exemption for raw sugar
didn't apply to them, but they were still exempt
because they were an agricultural cooperative that fit
the requisites for exemption)
•

O

Gross receipts from lending activities by credit or multipurpose cooperatives duly registered and in good standing
with the CDA

o

Sales by non-agricultural, non-electric
cooperatives duly registered with the CDA

•

and

non-credit

Provided, that share capital contribution of each member
does not exceed P15,000 and regardless of the aggregate
capital and net surplus ratably distributed among the
members;

o

Export sales by persons who are not VAT-registered

o

Sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to customers
or held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or business;

•

o

If the real property is not primarily held for sale to
customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of
trade or business BUT the same is used in the trade or
business of the seller, the sale thereof shall be subject to
VAT being a transaction incidental to the taxpayer's main
business. (R.R. 4-2007)

Sale of real properties utilized for low-cost housing
•

o

In other words, if the agricultural cooperative only sells
produce or goods that it manufactures on its own, its
entire sales is VAT-exempt. (CIR v. United Cadiz)

"Low-cost housing" refers to housing projects intended
for homeless low-income family beneficiaries, undertaken
by the Government or private developers, which may
either be a subdivision or a condominium registered and
licensed by the HLURB.

Sale of real properties utilized for socialized housing

•

"Socialized housing" refers to housing programs and
projects covering houses and lots or home lots only
undertaken by the Government or the private sector for
the underprivileged and homeless citizens.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

O

0

O

357

Sale of the following:

•

residential lot valued at Pl,919,500 and below, or

•

house and lot and other residential dwellings valued at
P3,199,200 and below (R.R. 16-2011, to be read with
R.R. 3-2012)

•

If two or more adjacent residential lots, house and
lots or other residential dwellings are sold or disposed
in favor of one buyer from the same seller, for the
purpose of utilizing the lots, house and lots or other
residential dwellings as one residential area, the sale
shall be exempt from VAT only if the aggregate value
of the lots do not exceed Pl,919,500 for residential
lots, and P3,199,200 for residential house and lots
or other residential dwellings. Adjacent residential
lots, house and lots or other residential dwellings
although covered by separate titles and/or separate
tax declarations, when sold or disposed to one and
the same buyer, whether covered by one or separate
Deed of Conveyance, shall be presumed as a sale
of one residential lot, house and lots or residential
dwelling. (R.R. 13-2012)

•

This does not include the sale of parking lot which may
or may not be included in the sale of condominium
units. The sale of parking lots in a condominium is a
separate and distinct transaction and is not covered by
the rules on threshold amount not being a residential
lot, house and lot or a residential dwelling. Thus, the
sale is subject to VAT regardless of the selling price.
(R.R. 13-2012)

Beginning 2021, the VAT exemption for the sale of real
properties shall only apply to the:
•

sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to
customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of
trade or business;

•

sale of real property utilized for socialized housing as
defined under R..A. 7279;

•

sale of house and lot, and other residential dwellings with
selling price of not more than P2,000,000 (to be adjusted
every 3 years depending on the Consumer Price Index);

Lease of residential units where the monthly rental per
unit does not exceed P15,000, regardless of the amount
of aggregate rentals received by the lessor during the year
(R.R. 13-2018)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

358

•

However, the lease of residential units where the monthly
rental per unit exceeds P15,000 but the aggregate of
such rentals of the lessor during the year do not exceed
P3,000,000 shall likewise be exempt from VAT. However,
it shall be subjected to the 3% percentage tax. (R.R. 132018)

■

So, less than P15,000/month -> exempt

•

More than P15,000/month but less than P3,000,000/year
-> 3% Percentage tax.

•

More than P15,000/month and more than P3,000,000/
year -> 12% VAT. (Refer to R.R. 13-2018 on the various
iterations of this rule)

•

"Residential units" shall refer to apartments and houses
and lots used for residential purposes, and buildings or
parts or units thereof used solely as dwelling places.
Motels, hotels, lodging houses, inns and pension houses
are not included. (R.R. 13-2018)

•

"Units" refer to an apartment unit in case of apartments,
house in the case of residential houses, per person in the
case of dorms, boarding houses and bed spaces, and per
room in case of rooms for rent.

O

Sale, importation, printing or publication of books and any
newspaper, magazine, review, or bulletin which appears at
regular intervals with fixed prices for subscription and sale
and is not devoted principally to the publication of paid ads

O

Transport of passengers by international carriers

•

O

Sale, importation, or lease of passenger or cargo vessels and
aircraft, including engine, equipment and spare parts thereof
for domestic or international transport operations;
■

O

The transport of cargo by international carriers is likewise
VAT-exempt as it is subject to percentage tax. (R.R. 152013)

Provided, however, that the exemption from VAT on the
importation and local purchase of passenger and/or cargo
vessels shall be subject to the requirements on restriction
on vessel importation and mandatory vessel retirement
program of MARINA. (R.R. 15-2015)

Importation of fuel, goods and supplies by persons engaged
in international shipping or air transport operations, provided
that such are used for international shipping or air transport
operations

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

O

359

•

Said fuel, goods and supplies should be used exclusively
or should pertain to the transport of goods and/or
passenger from a port in the Philippines directly to a
foreign port, or vice versa, without docking or stopping
at any other port in the Philippines unless the docking or
stopping at any other Philippine port is for the purpose of
unloading passenger and/or cargoes that originated from
abroad, or to load passengers and/or cargoes bound for
abroad. (R.R. 4-2007)

■

If any portion of such fuel, goods or supplies is used
for purposes other than that mentioned, such shall be
subject to 12% VAT.

Services of banks, non-bank financial intermediaries
performing quasi-banking functions, and other non-bank
financial intermediaries
•

Services provided by such institutions, like money
changers or pawnshops, are subject to percentage tax.
(R.R. 4-2007)

O

Sale or lease of goods and services to senior citizens and
PWDs

O

Transfers of property based on Section 40(C)(2) or tax-free
exchanges

•
O

This includes the transfer of property to a REIT in
exchange for its shares. (R.R. 03-2020)

Association dues, membership fees, and other assessments
collected on a purely reimbursement basis by homeowners'
associations and condo corps established under either the
Magna Carta for Homeowners (R.A. 9904) or the Condo Act
(R.A. 4726)
•

For homeowners' associations, note that the homeowners'
association has to present a certification from the LGU
and other evidence that the association is providing
basic services to its residents. (BIR Ruling No. 391-16,
November 18, 2016, as related to R.A. 9904)

•

For condo corps, the association dues, membership fees,
and other assessments are not collected in the course of
trade or business. These are not subject to VAT. These
are collected to maintain the common areas of the
building and is done for the benefit of the condo owners.
It is not collected as a service fee for services provided
by the condominium to the owners. (BIR v. First E-Bank
Tower Condominium Corp., G.R. Nos. 215801 & 218924,

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

360

January 15, 2020, which invalidated the controversial
RMC 65-2012>
O
O

o

Sale of gold to the BSP
Sale or importation of prescription drugs and medicines for
diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension (starting 2020)
and cancer, mental illness, TB, and kidney disease (starting
2023), provided the exemption only applies to the sale or
importation by the manufacturers, distributors, wholesalers,
and retailer of drugs and medicines included in the list of
approved drugs and medicines of the DOH I (R.R. 18-2020);
Sale or lease of goods or properties or the performance of
services other than the enumerated, the gross annual sales
and/or receipts do not exceed P3,000,000.

•

So if gross annual sales and/or receipts do not exceed
P3,000,000, a person need not register as a VAT-taxpayer.

Remember, qualified self-employed individuals and professionals
availing of the 8% income tax on gross sales and/or receipts are
exempt from 12% VAT. (R.R. 13-2018)

Are the fees, per diems, honoraria or allowances given to directors
of corporations exempt?
0

Yes, exempt since these are derived from an economic or
commercial activity. Said fees are remunerations paid in the
exercise of a right of an owner in the management of the
corporation.

0

Not even liable for 3% percentage tax. (RMC 77-2008)

What if the VAT-registered taxpayer erroneously imposes VAT on
a zero-rated or a VAT-exempt transaction?
o

It can claim a refund on the basis of erroneously paid taxes.
(CIR v. Acesite [Philippines] Hotel Corporation, G.R. No.
147295, February 16, 2007, where Acesite erroneously paid
VAT to the BIR on a zero-rated transaction with PAGCOR.)

Are the following transactions subject to VAT? If yes, what is the
applicable rate for each transaction. State the relevant authority/ies
for your answer.

a. Construction by XYZ Construction Co. of concrete barriers for
the Asian Development Bank in Ortigas Center to prevent car bombs
from ramming the ADB gates along ADB Avenue in Mandaiuyong
City.

b. Call Center operated by a domestic enterprise in Makati that
handles exclusively the reservations of a hotel chain which are all

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

361

located in North America. The services are paid for in US$ and duty
accounted for with the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.

c.

Sale of orchids by a flower shop which raises its flowers in
Tagaytay. (2010 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a. Zero-rated, as this is a service to an entity whose exemption
under international agreements subjects it to a zero rate.
b. Zero-rated, as these are services performed for a foreign
corporation doing business outside the Philippines, paid in foreign
currency under the rules and regulations of the BSP.

c. VAT-able, as orchids are not agricultural food products and thus,
not exempt.

Karlito, a Filipino businessman, is engaged in the business of
metal fabrication and repair of LPG cylinder tanks. He conducts
business under the name and style of "Karlito's Enterprises,” a
single proprietorship. Started only five (5) years ago, the business
has grown so enormously that Karlito decided to incorporate it by
transferring all the assets of the business, particularly the inventory
of goods on hand, machineries and equipment, supplies, parts,
raw materials, office furniture and furnishings, delivery trucks and
other vehicles, buildings, and tools to the new corporation, Karlito's
Enterprises, Inc., in exchange for 100°/o of the capital stock of the
new corporation, the stock subscription to which shall be deemed
fully paid in the form of the assets transferred to the corporation by
Karlito.

As a result, Karlito's Enterprises, the sole proprietorship, ceased
to do business and applied for cancellation of its BIR Certificate of
Registration. The BIR, however, assessed Karlito VAT on account of
the cessation of business based on the current market price of the
assets transferred to Karlito's Enterprises, Inc.

Is the transfer subject to VAT? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No. The transfer is VAT-exempt. The Tax
Code states that Section 40 (C) (2) transfers or tax-free exchange
transfers are exempt from VAT. The transfer here is a 40 (C) (2)
transfer because property is transferred to a corporation by a person
In exchange for stock, the result of which is that said person, alone or
together with others, not exceeding four (4) persons, gains control of
said corporation. Hence, it is not subject to VAT.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

362

E.

Input VAT

Sec. 110. Tax Credits. —
(A) Creditable Input Tax. —

(1) Any input tax evidenced by a VAT invoice or official receipt issued
in accordance with Section 113 hereof on the following transactions
shall be creditable against the output tax:
(a) Purchase or importation of goods:

(0

For sale; or

For conversion into or intended to form part of a
(ii)
finished product for sale including packaging materials; or

(iii)

For use as supplies in the course of business; or

(iv)

For use as materials supplied in the sale of service; or

For use in trade or business for which deduction for
(v)
depreciation or amortization is allowed under this Code;

(b) Purchase of services on which a value-added tax has been
actually paid.

(2) The input tax on domestic purchase or importation of goods or
properties by a VAT-registered person shall be creditable:
(a) To the purchaser upon consummation of sale and on importation
of goods or properties; and

(b) To the importer upon payment of the value-added tax prior to
the release of the goods from the custody of the Bureau of Customs.
X

X

X

X

X

(3) A VAT-registered person who is also engaged in transactions not
subject to the value-added tax shall be allowed tax credit as follows:
(a) Total input tax which, can be directly attributed to transactions
subject to value-add tax; and

(b) A ratable portion of any input tax which cannot be directly
attributed to either activity.
The term 'input tax' means the value-added tax due from or paid
by a VAT-registered person in the course of his trade or business on
Importation of goods or local purchase of goods or services, including
lease or use of property, from a VAT-registered person. It shall also
include the transitional input tax determined in accordance with
Section 111 of this Code.
The term 'output tax' means the value-added tax due on the sale
or lease of taxable goods or properties or services by any person
registered or required to register under Section 236 of this Code.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

363

Output tax
O

o

Output tax is the value-added tax due ON the sale or lease of
taxable goods/properties/services by any person registered
or required to register under the VAT system.

I

Output tax is what the taxpayer-seller passes on to the
purchaser.

Note, what is output tax for the seller is input tax to the
purchaser.

■

Input tax
o

Input tax is the VAT due from or paid by a VAT-registered
person on importation of goods or local purchases of goods,
properties, or services, including lease or use of properties,
from a VAT-registered person, in the course of his trade or
business.

It also includes:

■

•

the transitional input tax;

•

the presumptive input tax;

•

input taxes which can be directly attributed to
transactions subject to VAT plus a ratable portion of
any input tax which cannot be directly attributed to
either the taxable or exempt activity.

t

I
i

Any input tax on the following transactions evidenced by a VAT
invoice or official receipt by a VAT-registered person in accordance
with Sections 113 and 237 of the Tax Code shall be creditable
against the output tax:

1.

Purchase or importation of goods
a.

For sale, or

b.

For conversion Into or intended to form part of a finished
product for sale, including packaging materials, or

For use as supplies in the course of business, or

o

d.

For use as raw materials supplied in the sale of services,
or

e.

For use in trade or business for which deduction for
depreciation or amortization is allowed under the Tax
Code

Note that no depreciation shall be allowed for yachts,
helicopters, airplanes, and land vehicles is allowed if the value

I

i

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

364

exceeds P2,400,000, unless the taxpayer's line of business
is transport operations or lease of transportation equipment
and the vehicles purchased are used in said operations. (R.R.
12-2012)
O

Hence, the input taxes on non-depreciable vehicles (z.e.,
those which exceed the threshold amount) and all input taxes
on the maintenance incurred thereon are not allowed for tax
purposes. (R.R. 12-2012)

2.

Purchase of real properties for which a VAT has actually been
paid,

Purchase of services in which a VAT has actually been paid,
4.

Transactions "deemed sale,"

5. Transitional input tax,

6.

Presumptive input tax. (R.R. 16-2005)

•

Input tax is what is passed on to the purchaser/taxpayer by the
seller. If the purchaser is a VAT-registered person, then he can
use the input tax as credit to the output taxes that he is liable to
remit to the BIR.

•

The input tax credit on importation of goods or local purchases of
goods, properties or services by a VAT-registered person shall be
creditable:

1. To the importer upon payment of VAT prior to the release of
goods from customs custody;
2.

To the purchaser of the domestic goods or properties upon
consummation of the sale; or

3.

To the purchaser of services or the lessee or licensee upon
payment of the compensation, rental, royalty or fee. (R.R.
16-2005)

As long as the invoices from the suppliers are Issued in the name
of the taxpayer and expenses were actually incurred by the
taxpayer, then the input tax pertaining to such expenses must
be credited to the taxpayer. Where the money came from to pay
these expenses is another matter all together but it does not
change the fact that input tax has been incurred. (CIR v. Sony
Philippines, Inc., G.R. No. 178697, November 17, 2010, wherein
Sony Philippines incurred advertising expenses using money
given to it by its affiliate.)

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

365

Rule on capital goods
Provided, That the input tax on goods purchased or imported in a
calendar month for use in trade or business for which deduction for
depreciation is allowed under this Code shall be spread evenly over
the month of acquisition and the fifty-nine (59) succeeding months
if the aggregate acquisition cost for such goods, excluding the
VAT component thereof, exceeds One million pesos (Pl,000,000):
Provided, however, That if the estimated useful life of the capital good
is less than five (5) years, as used for depreciation purposes, then
the input VAT shall be spread over such a shorter period: Provided,
further, That the amortization of the input VAT shall only be allowed
until December 31, 2021 after which taxpayers with unutilized input
VAT on capital goods purchased or imported shall be allowed to apply
the same as scheduled until fully utilized: Provided, finally, That in
the case of purchase of services, lease or use of properties, the input
tax shall be creditable to the purchaser, lessee or licensee upon
payment of the compensation, rental, royalty or fee. (As amended
by TRAIN)

I

I

I
I
I

Capital goods or properties refer to goods or properties
o

with estimated useful life of more than one year and

o

which are treated as depreciable under the income tax law,

o

used directly or indirectly, in the production or sale of taxable
goods or services.

If the aggregate acquisition cost on capital goods purchased or
imported in a calendar month does NOT exceed Pl,000,000, the
input tax will be allowed in the month of purchase.

ll

I

I r

If the aggregate acquisition cost of such goods in a calendar
month, excluding the VAT, exceeds Pl,000,000:

o

o

If the estimated life is five years or more, the input tax will
be evenly spread over the month of acquisition and the 59
succeeding months.
If the estimated life is less than five years, the input tax will
be spread evenly on a monthly basis by dividing the input tax
by the actual number of months comprising the estimated
useful life of the asset.

I
I

An asset acquired In installment for an acquisition cost of more
than P1M, excluding the VAT, will be subject to the amortization of
input tax despite the fact that the monthly payments/installments
may not exceed P1M.

I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

366

When an asset with an unamortized input tax is retired from
business, the unamortized input tax will be closed against the
output taxes on the taxable period in which it is retired.
Starting 2022, the amortization of input VAT for capital goods
shall no longer be allowed. Those taxpayers with unutilized input
VAT on capital goods purchased or imported shall be allowed to
apply the same as scheduled until fully utilized. (R.R. 13-2018)

Input tax allocation and mixed transactions
(3) A VAT-registered person who is also engaged in transactions not
subject to the value-added tax shall be allowed tax credit as follows:
(a) Total input tax which can be directly attributed to transactions
subject to value-added tax; and
(b) A ratable portion of any input tax which cannot be directly
attributed to either activity.

The term "input tax" means the value-added tax due from or paid
by a VAT-registered person in the course of his trade or business on
importation of goods or local purchase of goods or services, including
lease or use of property, from a VAT-registered person. It shall also
include the transitional input tax determined in accordance with
Section 111 of this Code.
The term "output tax" means the value-added tax due on the sale
or lease of taxable goods or properties or services by any person
registered or required to register under Section 236 of this Code.

In crediting input tax, you have to look at two things:

1.

Those which can be directly attributed to transactions subject
to VAT, and

2.

Those which cannot be directly attributed to either a VAT
taxable or VAT-exempt transaction. For these cases, the
input tax shall be oro-rated to the VAT taxable and VATexempt transactions and only the ratable portion pertaining
to transactions subject to VAT may be recognized for input
tax credit.

R.R. 16-2005 states:
o

All the input taxes that can be directly attributed to
transactions subject to VAT may be recognized for input
tax credit; provided, that input taxes that can be directly
attributable to VAT taxable sales of goods and services to the
Government (or any of its political subdivisions, etc.) shall
not be credited against output taxes arising from sales to
non-Govemment entities, and

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

O

367

If any input tax cannot be directly attributed to either a VAT
taxable or VAT-exempt transaction, the input tax shall be prorated to the VAT taxable and VAT-exempt transactions and
only ratable portion pertaining to transactions subject to VAT
may be recognized for input tax credit.

11

I

I

The input tax attributable to VAT-exempt sales shall not be
allowed as credit against the output tax but should be treated as
part of cost or expense.

For persons engaged in both zero-rated sales of services and
non-zero rated sales, the aggregate input taxes shall be allocated
ratably between the zero-rated sale of services and the non-zerorated sale.

Excess output or input tax

(B) Excess Output or Input Tax. — If at the end of any taxable
quarter the output tax exceeds the input tax, the excess shall be paid
by the VAT-registered person. If the input tax exceeds the output
tax, the excess shall be carried over to the succeeding quarter or
quarters: Provided, however, that any input tax attributable to
zero-rated sales by a VAT-registered person may at his option be
refunded or credited against other internal revenue taxes, subject to
the provisions of Section 112. (R.A. 9361)
(C) Determination of Creditable Input Tax. — The sum of the
excess input tax carried over from the preceding month or quarter
and the input tax creditable to a VAT-registered person during the
taxable month or quarter shall be reduced by the amount of claim
for refund or tax credit for value-added tax and other adjustments,
such as purchase returns or allowances and input tax attributable to
exempt sale.

!

Ii
:i

I

I

The claim for tax credit referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall
include not only those filed with the Bureau of Internal Revenue but
also those filed with other government agencies, such as the Board
of Investments and the Bureau of Customs.
•

If at the end of any taxable quarter the output tax exceeds the
input tax, the excess shall be paid by the VAT-registered person,
(known as the Net VAT payable)

•

If the input tax inclusive of input tax carried over from the
previous quarter exceeds the output tax, the excess input tax
shall be carried over to the succeeding quarter or quarters,

o

Provided, that any input tax attributable to zero-rated sales
by a VAT-registered person may at his option be refunded or
applied for a tax credit certificate which may be used in the

i
I'

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

368

payment of internal revenue taxes, (this is where you can get
input tax credit or refunds)
O

In other words, any input tax, attributable to zero-rated sales
may be:

•

Refunded, or

■

Credited against other internal revenue taxes of the VAT
taxpayer.

Unutilized creditable input taxes attributable to zero-rated sales
can only be recovered through a refund or tax credit. Unapplied
input taxes cannot be treated as deductible expense for income
tax purposes. (RMC 57-2013)

i

For purposes of value-added tax, define, explain or distinguish the
following terms:
a)

Input tax and output tax

b)

Zero-rated and effectively zero-rated transactions

c)

Destination principle (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

Input tax is the VAT due from or paid by a VAT-registered person
on importation of goods or local purchases of goods, properties,
or services, including lease or use of properties, from a VATregistered person, in the course of his trade or business. Output
tax is the value-added tax due ON the sale or lease of taxable
goods/properties/services by any person registered or required
to register under the VAT system.

b)

Zero-rated transactions refer to the export sale of goods and
supply of services. The seller of such transactions charges no
output tax, but can claim a refund or a tax credit certificate for
the VAT previously charged by suppliers. This is for the benefit
of the seller. Effectively zero-rated transactions refer to the
sale of goods or supply of services to persons or entities whose
exemption under special laws or international agreements to
which the Philippines is a signatory effectively subjects such
transactions to a zero rate. Such rate does not yield any tax
chargeable against the purchaser. This is for the benefit of the
purchaser.

c)

Under the cross-border principle or destination principle of the
VAT system, no VAT shall be imposed to form part of the cost
of goods destined outside of the territorial border of the taxing
authority.

I
i

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX
F.

Transitional and
Withholding VAT

Presumptive

Input

369

Tax

Credits

and

Transitional and Presumptive Input Tax Credits
Sec. 111. Transitional/Presumptive Input Tax Credits. —

(A) Transitional Input Tax Credits. — A person who becomes
liable to value-added tax or any person who elects to be a VATregistered person shall, subject to the filing of an inventory according
to rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, be allowed input tax on his
beginning inventory of goods, materials and supplies equivalent to
two percent (2%) of the value of such inventory or the actual valueadded tax paid on such goods, materials and supplies, whichever is
higher, which shall be creditable against the output tax.

Taxpayers who become VAT-registered persons upon exceeding
the minimum turnover of P3,000,000 in any 12-month period, or
who voluntarily register even if they do not reach the threshold
shall be entitled to a transitional input tax on the inventory
on hand as of the effectivity of their VAT registration, on the
following:

1.

Goods purchased for resale in their present condition;

2.

Materials purchased for further processing, but which have
not yet undergone processing;

3.

Goods which have been manufactured by the taxpayer;

4.

Goods in process for sale; or

5.

Goods and supplies for use in the course of the taxpayer's
trade or business as a VAT-registered person. (R.R. 162005)

The transitional input tax shall be
o

2% of the value of the beginning inventory on hand, or

o

actual VAT paid on such goods, materials and supplies,
whichever is HIGHER.

The transitional input tax credit operates to benefit newly VATregistered persons, whether or not they previously paid taxes
(such as VAT) in the acquisition of their beginning inventory of
goods, materials and supplies. (Fort Bonifacio Development Corp,
v. CIR, G.R. No. 158885, April 2, 2009)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

370

O

During that period of transition from non-VAT to VAT status,
the transitional input tax credit serves to alleviate the impact
of the VAT on the taxpayer. (Fort Bonifacio Development
Corp. v. CIR, G.R. No. 158885, April 2, 2009)

(B) Presumptive Input Tax Credits. —
(1) Persons orfirms engaged in the processing of sardines, mackerel
and milk, and in manufacturing refined sugar and cooking oil and
packed noodle-based instant meals, shall be allowed a presumptive
input tax, creditable against the output tax, equivalent to four percent
(4%) of the gross value in money of their purchases of primary
agricultural products which are used as inputs to their production.

As used in this Subsection, the term "processing" shall mean
pasteurization, canning and activities which through physical or
chemical process alter the exterior texture or form or inner substance
of a product in such manner as to prepare it for special use to which
it could not have been put in its original form or condition.

•

Presumptive input tax credits are given for those engaged:

0

In the processing of sardines, mackerel, and milk; and

O

In manufacturing refined sugar, cooking oil, and packed
noodle-based instant meals.

•

The rate is 4% of the gross value in money.

•

They are given this 4% presumptive input tax because the goods
used in the said enumeration are VAT-exempt.

•

"Processing" means pasteurization, canning and activities which
through physical or chemical process alter the exterior texture
or form or inner substance of a product in such manner as to
prepare it for special use to which it could not have been put its
original form or condition.

Withholding of creditable value-added tax
Sec. 114. (C) Withholding of Value-added Tax. — The
Government or any of its political subdivisions, instrumentalities or
agencies, including government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) shall, before making payment on account of each purchase
of goods and services which are subject to the value-added tax
imposed in Sections 106 and 108 of this Code, deduct and withhold
a final value-added tax at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
payment thereof: Provided, That beginning January 1, 2021, the VAT
withholding system under this Subsection shall shift from final to a
creditable system: Provided, further, That the payment for lease

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

371

or use of properties or property rights to nonresident owners shall
be subject to twelve percent (12%) withholding tax at the time of
payment: Provided, finally, That payments for purchases of goods
and services arising from projects funded by Official Development
Assistance (ODA) as defined under Republic Act No. 8182, otherwise
known as the 'Official Development Assistance Act of 1996/ as
amended, shall not be subject to the final withholding tax system
as imposed in this Subsection. For purposes of this Section, the
payor or person in control of the payment shall be considered as the
withholding agent. (As amended by TRAIN)

VAT is withheld in two instances:

1.

In sales of goods and services to the Government (5%
withheld by the government)

2.

In payment for lease or use of properties to nonresident
owners (12% withheld by the lessee)

Before 2021, transactions with the government were subject to
5% final withholding VAT. The final withholding VAT represented
the net VAT payable for the seller. The remaining 7% accounts
for the standard input VAT for sales of goods or services to the
government or any of its political subdivisions, in lieu of the
actual input VAT directly attributable or ratably apportioned to
such sales.

O

Should actual input VAT attributable to sales to government
exceed 7% of gross payments, the excess may form part of
the sellers' expense or cost.

O

If the actual input VAT attributable to sale to government is
less than 7%, the difference should be counted as income.
•

O

Kaka sells to the Philippine Government his services as a
master for P100. The VAT is P12. The P5 is withheld by
the government, so the Government only pays him P107.

In this scheme, the government assumes that your input VAT
will be 7%. If it is 7%, then all is well.

■

But if the input VAT is higher than 7% (in Kaka's case, for
example it was PIO), then the excess of P3 will be treated
as an expense. It will form part of the expense column in
the income statement.

-

But if the Input VAT is smaller than 7% (for example,
Kaka only spent P5), then there is income on Kaka's side,
this will form part of his income.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

372

In both instances, Kaka will lose or be benefited only by
30% (rate of income tax) because it will form part of his
income and subject to income tax.

.

•

Beginning 2021, the VAT withholding system for transactions with
the government shall shift from final to a creditable system. (So
it'll all depend when you're reading this if the VAT withheld by the
government is final or creditable!)

•

Also, while government payments are subject to 5% VAT
withholding, the purchase of goods and services arising from
projects funded by the Official Development Assistance will not
be subject to final or creditable withholding taxes. (R.R. 13-2018)

•

In transactions with nonresidents, 12% will be withheld with
respect to the following payments:
1.

Lease or use of properties or property rights owned by
nonresidents, and

2.

Other services rendered in the Philippines by nonresidents.
(R.R. 16-2005)
The government did this as a matter of enforcement. How
will the Government run after the VAT of a nonresident,
right? So, they just make the payors withholding agents.

O

■

O

Liza lives in the condo owned by nonresident Catriona.
Liza will withhold P12 of the total amount (including
VAT) of the lease of P112. Liza will only pay Catriona
P100.

The one who remits the 12% to the government, when
he files his return, can state that he/she is entitled to an
input tax credit.

■

In Liza's case, she can ask for the input tax credit of
P12.

G. VAT Refunds or Tax Credits

Refunds or Tax Credits on Input Tax
Sec. 112. Refunds or Tax Credits of Input Tax. —

(A) Zero-Rated or Effectively Zero-Rated Sales. — Any VATregistered person, whose sales are zero-rated or effectively zerorated may, within two (2) years after the close of the taxable quarter
when the sales were made, apply for the issuance of a tax credit
certificate or refund of creditable input tax due or paid attributable to
such sales, except transitional input tax, to the extent that such input
tax has not been applied against output tax: Provided, however,

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

373

That in the case of zero-rated sales under Section 106(A)(2)(a)(l),
(2) and (B) and Section 108 (B)(1) and (2), the acceptable foreign
currency exchange proceeds thereof had been duly accounted for
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko Sentral
ng Pilipinas (BSP): Provided, further, That where the taxpayer is
engaged in zero-rated or effectively zero-rated sale and also in
taxable or exempt sale of goods of properties or services, and the
amount of creditable input tax due or paid cannot be directly and
entirely attributed to any one of the transactions, it shall be allocated
proportionately on the basis of the volume of sales: Provided, finally,
That for a person making sales that are zero-rated under Section
108(B)(6), the input taxes shall be allocated ratably between his
zero-rated and non-zero-rated sales.

(B) Cancellation of VAT Registration. — A person whose
registration has been cancelled due to retirement from or cessation
of business, or due to changes in or cessation of status under Section
106(C) of this Code may, within two (2) years from the date of
cancellation, apply for the issuance of a tax credit certificate for any
unused input tax which may be used in payment of his other internal
revenue taxes.

(C) Period within which Refund of Input Taxes shall be
Made. — In proper cases, the Commissioner shall grant a refund
for creditable input taxes within ninety (90) days from the date of
submission of the official receipts or invoices and other documents
in support of the application filed in accordance with Subsections (A)
and (B) hereof: Provided, That should the Commissioner find that
the grant of refund is not proper, the Commissioner must state in
writing the legal and factual basis for the denial.
In case of full or partial denial of the claim for tax refund, the taxpayer
affected may, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the decision
denying the claim, appeal the decision with the Court of Tax Appeals:
Provided, however, That failure on the part of any official, agent, or
employee of the BIR to act on the application within the ninety (90)day period shall be punishable under Section 269 of this Code.

(D) Manner of Giving Refund. — Refunds shall be made upon
warrants drawn by the Commissioner or by his duly authorized
representative without the necessity of being countersigned by the
Chairman, Commission on Audit, the provisions of the Administrative
Code of 1987 to the contrary notwithstanding: Provided, That
refunds under this paragraph shall be subject to post audit by the
Commission on Audit.
There are three instances where one can avail of a VAT refund:

1.

Zero-rated and effectively zero-rated sales

2.

Cessation of business or

3.

Cessation of VAT-status

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

374

•

Note: for zero-rated transactions, a taxpayer cannot apply for
the issuance of a refund for transitional input tax.

•

For zero-rated and effectively zero-rated sales of goods, properties
or services, the application should be filed within two years after
Hose of the taxable quarter when such sales were made.

•

O

The two-year period is reckoned from the close of the taxable
quarter when the relevant sales were made pertaining to
the input VAT regardless when the input tax was paid. (CIR
v. Mirant Pagbilao Corp., G.R. No. 172129, September 12,
2008)

O

Thus, when a zero-rated VAT taxpayer pays its input VAT
(for the purchase from its supplier) a year after the pertinent
transaction (its sale to its purchaser), said taxpayer only
has a year left to file a claim for refund or tax credit of the
unutilized creditable input VAT.

Summary of rules regarding the two-year prescriptive period for
input VAT refunds (CIR v. Mindanao II Geothermal Partnership,
G.R. No. 191498, January 15, 2014*):

Administrative claim (two-year period)
0

General rule: the administrative claim must be filed within
the two-year prescriptive period. The reckoning date of the
prescriptive period is the close of the taxable quarter when
the relevant sales were made.
■

i

Except for the period June 8, 2007 to September 12,
2008, which follows the Atlas Consolidated Mining and
Development Corporation v. CIR (G.R. No. 141104, June
8, 2007) doctrine that the reckoning date is the filing of
the VAT return and the payment of the tax.

0

The mandatory period for the CIR to process the refund Is
now 90 days (as compared to the pre-TRAIN 120-day period).

O

If the BIR does not act on the application within 90 days, then
the relevant official, agent, or employee shall be liable under
Section 269.

4The case summarized the rules from Atlas Consolidated Mining and
Development Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. 141104, June 8, 2007; CIR v. Alchi
Forging Company of Asia, Inc., G.R. No. 184823, October 6, 2010; and CIR v. San
Roque Power Corporation, G.R. No. 187485, February 12, 2013. Those cases talk
about the 120-day period, right? Well TRAIN has made the period 90 days, so the
notes above reflect this change.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

375

Judicial claim (90+30 day period)
O

The taxpayer can appeal in two ways:
■

File the judicial claim within thirty days after the CIR
denies the claim within the 90-day period, or

■

File the judicial claim within thirty days from the expiration
of the 90-day period if the CIR does not act within the 90day period.

The 30-day period always applies, whether there is denial or
inaction on the part of the CIR.
O

General rule: the 30-day period to appeal is both mandatory
and jurisdictional, i.e., if you do not follow the 30-day period,
your claim for refund will be dismissed by the CTA.

-

Except for premature judicial filings between December
10, 2003 and October 5, 2010 where BIR Ruling No. DA489-03 was still in force. Late judicial filing is absolutely
prohibited.

O

Note: the two-year prescriptive period only applies to the
filing of the administrative claim. The filing of the judicial
claim follows the 90-30 day period.

O

IMPORTANT: These rules only apply to claims for credit or
refund of input tax. Why not to refunds in general?

«

The Court added that the rules under Sections 204(C)
and 229 as cross-referred to Section 112 do not apply as
they only cover erroneous payments or illegal collections
of taxes which is not the case for refund of unutilized
input VAT.

•

Unutilized input VAT are not taxes paid erroneously or
collected illegally.

The application for VAT refund/tax credit must be accompanied
by complete supporting documents (the BIR provides a checklist
for this). The taxpayer must likewise attach a statement under
oath attesting to the completeness of the submitted documents.
No other documents shall be accepted from the taxpayer in the
course of the refund/tax credit evaluation. Without the complete
supporting documents, the application will be denied. (RMC 542014)
O

Because of RMC 54-2014, all claims must be filed with
complete supporting documents. (Pilipinas Total Gas, Inc. v.
CIR, G.R. No. 207112, Decembers, 2015)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

376

O

The 90-day period begins from the date of submission of the
official receipts or invoices and other documents in support
of the refund application. The application is considered to
have been filed only upon submission of these supporting
documents. (R.R. 26-2018)

The taxpayer claiming the refund must comply with the invoicing
and accounting requirements mandated by the Tax Code, as well
as the revenue regulations implementing them.
O

Hence, when the official receipts presented as evidence to
prove input tax is not in the name of the taxpayer, the input
tax pertaining to such official receipts cannot be given as a
refund or credit. (Bonifacio Water Corporation v. CIR, G.R.
No. 175142, July 22, 2013)

o

Similarly, when the official receipts issued by the taxpayer
engaged in zero-rated sales do not have "zero-rated"
stamped or printed on its official receipts, then the taxpayer
cannot claim for input tax pertaining to such sales. (Western
Mindanao Power Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. 181136, June
13, 2012)

o

VAT receipts and invoices are not interchangeable. If a
taxpayer interchanges them and files for a refund, this will be
rejected for not complying with the invoicing requirements.
(Team Energy v. CIR, G.R. No. 197663, March 14, 2018)

For cessation of business, a VAT-registered person whose
registration has been cancelled due to retirement from or
cessation of business, or due to changes in or cessation of status
under Section 106(C), may within two years from the date of
cancellation, apply for the issuance of a tax credit certificate for
any unused input tax which he may use in payment of his other
internal revenue taxes.
o

Provided, that he shall be entitled to a refund if he has no
internal revenue tax liabilities against which the tax credit
certificate may be utilized.

o

The "date of cancellation" is the date of the issuance of the tax
clearance by the BIR, after full settlement of all tax liabilities
relating to the cessation of the business or the change of
status of the taxpayer. (R.R. 13-2018)

o

The filing of the claim shall be made only after completion of
the mandatory audit of internal revenue liabilities covering
the immediately preceding taxable year and the short period
return and the issuance of the applicable tax clearance by the
BIR. (R.R. 13-2018)

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

377

More on cessation of business or change of status as VATregistered person (R.R. 16-2005):
O

O

Properties originally intended for sale or use in business and
capital goods existing at the time of the following are subject
to output tax:

■

Change of business activity from VAT taxable to VATexempt status.

•

Approval of a request for cancellation of registration due
to reversion to exempt status.

■

Approval of a request for cancellation of registration due
to reversion to exempt status for persons who voluntarily
registered to be VAT taxpayers.

Not subject to output tax:
•

Change of control of a corporation by the acquisition
of the controlling interest of such corporation by
another stockholder or group of stockholders. The
goods or properties will not be considered sold,
bartered, etc.

■

Change in the trade or corporate name of the business.

•

Merger or consolidation of corporations. The unused input
tax of the dissolved corporation shall be absorbed by the
surviving or new corporation.

Wreck Corporation Is a domestic corporation engaged in the
business of importing, refining and selling petroleum products.
During the period from September 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014,
Wreck Corporation imported 225 million liters of Jet A-l aviation
fuel and paid the excise taxes thereon. Seventy-five percent (75%)
of the total volume of aviation fuel imported were actually sold to
International carriers of Philippine and foreign registries for their
use or consumption outside of the Philippines in the period from
November 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014. Wreck Corporation did not
pass on to the international carriers the excise taxes it paid on the
Importation of petroleum products.

On June 25, 2015, Wreck Corporation filed an administrative claim
for refund or issuance of tax credit certificate amounting to the
excise taxes it had paid on the importation of 225 million liters of Jet
A-l aviation fuel.
If you were the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, will you grant
Wreck Corporation's administrative claim for refund or Issuance of
tax credit certificate? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

378

Suggested answer:
No, I will not. Under the Tax Code, creditable input tax of VATregistered taxpayers can be refunded if these are attributable to
zero-rated sales. It doesn't appear that Wreck Corporation is a VATregistered taxpayer which incurred input VAT that can be subject to
a refund for zero-rated sales. It incurred excises taxes, which is not
the subject of a refund for zero-rated sales.

NOTE: The following bar exam Q&As have not been updated to reflect the
new 90-day period. It would've been too unwieldy to change the answers. So
just take note that these Q&As were still under the old pre-TRAIN 120-day
period regime.

=

Gangwam Corporation (GC) filed its quarterly tax returns for the
calendar year 2012 as follows:
First quarter - April 25, 2012

Second quarter - July 23, 2012

Third quarter - October 25, 2012
Fourth quarter - January 27, 2013
On December 22, 2013, GC filed with the Bureau of Internal Revenue
(BIR) an administrative claim for refund of its unutilized input ValueAdded Tax (VAT) for the calendar year 2012. After several months of
inaction by the BIR on its claim for refund, GC decided to elevate its
claim directly to the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) on April 22, 2014.

i

In due time, the CTA denied the tax refund relative to the input VAT
of GC for the first quarter of 2012, reasoning that the claim was filed
beyond the two-year period prescribed under Section 112(A) of the
National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC).

a)
!

Is the CTA correct?

b) Assuming that GC filed its claim before the CTA on February 22,
2014, would your answer be the same? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) No, the CTA Is wrong. Jurisprudence states that the
administrative claim must be filed within two years from the dose
of the taxable quarter when the relevant sales were made. In this
case, the administrative claim was filed well within two years from
the dose of the first quarter. Hence, the CTA is wrong.
b) If GC filed its claim before the CTA on February 22, 2014, Its
claim should be dismissed for prematurity. Jurisprudence states that
for judicial claims of refund for unutilized input VAT, the taxpayer
must wait for the 120-day period (for the CIR to decide) to expire
before elevating its claim to the CTA. It is only upon the expiration of
■

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

379

the 120-day period can the taxpayer file its claim within 30 days to
the CTA. The 30-day period is mandatory and jurisdictional. Filing on
February 22, 2014 is premature because it is still within the 120-day
period for the CIR to decide.

For calendar year 2011, FFF, Inc., a VAT-registered corporation,
reported unutilized excess input VAT in the amount of Pl,000,000.00
attributable to its zero-rated sales. Hoping to impress his boss, Mr.
G, the accountant of FFF, Inc., filed with the Bureau of Internal
Revenue (BIR) on January 31, 2013 a claim for tax refund/credit
of the Pl,000,000.00 unutilized excess input VAT of FFF, Inc. for
2011. Not having received any communication from the BIR, Mr. G
filed a Petition for Review with the CTA on March 15, 2013, praying
for the tax refund/credit of the Pl,000,000.00 unutilized excess
input VAT of FFF, Inc. for 2011.
a)

Did the CTA acquire jurisdiction over the Petition of FFF, Inc.?

b) Discuss the proper procedure and applicable time periods for
administrative and judicial claims for refund/credit of unutilized
excess input VAT. (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) The CTA does not acquire jurisdiction over the Petition of FFF,
Inc. The Petition was filed prematurely. The BIR has 120 days to
rule on the administrative claim. Upon expiration of the 120 days (or
from denial by the BIR), the taxpayer has 30 days to elevate to the
CTA. The Supreme Court has ruled that this 120+30 day period is
mandatory and jurisdictional. In this case, FFF, Inc. filed outside the
period, hence, the CTA has no jurisdiction.
b) The taxpayer has two years from the close of the taxable
quarter when the relevant sales were made to file an administrative
claim for refund with the BIR. The BIR has 120 days to rule on the
administrative claim. Upon the expiration of the 120 days (or from
the denial by the BIR), the taxpayer has 30 days to file a petition
with the CIR. The two-year period only applies to the administrative
claim. The judicial claim with the CIR must be within the 30-day
period.
i.

i'

a) Explain the procedure for claiming refunds or tax credits of input
Value Added Tax (VAT) for zero-rated or effectively zero-rated sales
under Sec. 112 of the National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC) from
the filing of an application with the CIR up to the CTA.

b) Explain the procedure for claiming refunds of tax erroneously or
illegally collected under Sec. 229 of the NIRC from the filing of the
claim for refunds with the CIR up to the CTA. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) To claim refunds or tax credits for zero-rated sales, the taxpayer
must first file an administrative claim with the CIR within two years

J9JC9B0M

380

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

from the end of the taxable quarter when the relevant sales were
made. The CIR has 120 days to rule on the claim. The taxpayer then
has 30 days, from the decision of the CIR or from the expiration of
the 120 day period if the CIR does not act, to file a judicial claim with
the CTA, even if this is beyond the two-year period. This 120+30 day
rule is mandatory and jurisdictional.

I
=

b) To claim refunds for erroneously or illegally collected taxes, the
taxpayer must file both the administrative claim and the judicial claim
within two years from the payment of the tax. The administrative
claim is mandatory and the CTA will dismiss the case without it.

Amor Powers, Inc. (API) is a domestic corporation registered with
the BIR as a value-added taxpayer. API incurred excess input VAT in
the amount of P500,000,000.00 on August 3, 2008. Hence, it filed
with the BIR an administrative claim for the refund or credit of these
input taxes on August 15, 2010. Without waiting for the CIR to act on
its claim, API filed a Petition for Review with the CTA on September
15, 2010 before the lapse of two years after the dose of the taxable
quarter concerned.
In its Comment on the Petition, the CIR argues that API's Petition
should be dismissed as it was filed before the lapse of the 120day period given to the CIR by Sec. 112(D) of the NIRC, which
became effective on January 1, 1998. For the CIR, the 120-day
period is mandatory and jurisdictional so that any suit filed before its
expiration is premature and, therefore, dismissible.

I
I

API, on the other hand, invokes BIR Ruling No. DA-489-O3 issued
by the CIR on December 10, 2003 in answer to a query posed by
the Department of Finance regarding the propriety of the actions
taken by Lazl Bay Resources Development, Inc., which filed an
administrative claim for refund with the CIR and, before the lapse
of the 120-day period from its filing, filed a judicial claim with the
CTA. BIR Ruling No. DA-489-03 stated that the taxpayer-claimant
need not wait for the lapse of the 120-day period before it could seek
Judicial relief with the CTA.

I
i

i

Will API's Petition for Review prosper? Decide with reasons. (2016
Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: API's Petition for Review will prosper. The SC
has held that premature judicial filings between December IO, 2003
and October 5, 2010 are allowed as an exception to the 120+30 day
rule because of BIR Ruling No. DA-489-03. In this case, API filed its
Petition for Review on September 5, 2010, well within the exception
period; hence, it will prosper.

H. VAT on Real Properties
The sales of the following real properties are subject to VAT:

o

Those held for sale to customers in the ordinary course of
trade or business;

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

381

O

Those held for lease in the ordinary course of trade or
business; and

O

Those used in the trade or business of the seller (as it is
incidental to the taxpayer's main business) (R.R. 4-2007)

The sale, transfer, or disposal of two or more adjacent lots, house
and lots, or other residential dwellings is also subject to VAT
when:
O

it is within a 12-month period,

O

in favor of one buyer from the same seller,

O

for the purpose of utilizing the lots, house and lots, or other
residential dwellings as one residential area,

O

where the aggregate value of the adjacent properties exceeds

O

•

Pl,919,500 for residential lots and

«

P3,199,200 for residential house and lots or other
dwellings. (R.R. 13-2012)

NOTE: Beginning 2021, the VAT exemption for the sale of real
properties shall only apply to the:
■

sale of real properties not primarily held for sale to
customers or held for lease in the ordinary course of
trade or business;

•

sale of real property utilized for socialized housing as
defined under R.A. 7279;

•

sale of house and lot, and other residential dwellings with
selling price of not more than P2,000,000 (to be adjusted
every 3 years depending on the Consumer Price Index).
(See discussion on VAT-exempt transactions)

•

A real estate dealer is any person engaged in the business of
buying, developing, selling, exchanging real property as principal
and holding himself out as a full or part-time dealer of real estate.
(R.R. 16-2005)

•

A sale on installment of real property by a real estate dealer
shall be subject to the 12% VAT on the installment payments,
including interest and penalties, actually and/or constructively
received by the dealer.
o

Sale of real property on installments means sales by a real
estate dealer, the initial payments of which in the year of sale
do not exceed 25% of the gross selling price.
-

If the initial payments exceed 25% of the selling price,
the transaction shall be considered a cash sale with a

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

382

VAT at the time of the sale. This is a sale on a deferred
payment basis.

Initial payments are the payments
O

which the seller received before and upon the execution of
the instrument of sale, and

O

payments which he expects or is scheduled to receive in
cash or property (other than evidence of indebtedness of the
purchaser) during the taxable year of the sale or disposition.

O

It will include more than the down payment in the year of
sale.

O

It will not include the amount of mortgage on the real property
sold which was already there at the time of sale and which
was assumed by the buyer,
«

EXCEPT when such mortgage exceeds the cost or other
basis of the property to the seller, in which case the
excess shall form part of the initial payments.

For example, the mortgage assumed by the buyer was P600K,
and the cost to the seller was just P500K. The P100K excess will
be included as "initial payment."
The gross selling price is whichever is highest of the:
O

Consideration In the deed of sale;

o

Zonal value, per CIR; and

o

The fair market value per real property declaration with the
provincial or city assessor.

Take note that it is the agreed consideration that is used to
determine the initial payments, while it is the highest among
the consideration, zonal value and FMV which Is used for the
computation of the VAT.

VAT on Lease
All forms of property for lease, whether real or personal, are
liable to VAT except when the gross annual sales do not exceed
P3,000,000, In which case they will be exempt. (See discussion
on VAT-exempt transactions)
Lease of property shall be subject to VAT regardless of the place
where the contract of lease or licensing agreement was executed
if the property leased or used is located in the Philippines.

See also rules just mentioned when the lessor is a nonresident.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

383

In a lease contract, the advance payment by the lessee may be:

1.

A loan to the lessor from the lessee, or

2.

Option money for the property, or

3.

Security deposit to insure the faithful performance of certain
obligations of the lessee to the lessor, or

4.

Pre-paid rental.
O

If the advanced payment is #1, 2 or 3, not subject to VAT.

o

If the advanced payment is #4, then such payment is
taxable to the lessor in the month when it was received,
irrespective of the accounting method employed by the
lessor.

o

If the security deposit (#3) is applied to rental, then it
shall be subject to VAT at the time of its application. (R.R.
16-2005)

On September 17, 2015, Data Realty, Inc., a real-estate corporation
duly organized and existing under Philippine law, sold to Jenny Vera
a condominium unit at Freedom Residences in Malabon City with an
area of32.31 square meters for a contract price of P4,213,000.00.
The condominium unit had a zonal value amounting to P2,877,000.00
and fair market value amounting to P550,000.00.
a)

Is the transaction subject to value-added tax and documentary
stamp tax? Explain your answer.

b)

Would your answer be the same if the property was sold by
a bank In a foreclosure sale? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar
Exam)

Suggested answer:

a)

Yes, It's still subject to VAT as the condo is held for sale to
customers in the ordinary course of trade or business of the real
estate corporation. Further, the contract price pushes the gross
sales of the seller above the P3,000,000 VAT threshold. Hence,
the sale is subject to VAT. (Answer reflects the amendment by
TRAIN)

b)

My answer will be the same even if It was sold by a bank In
a foreclosure sale. Under R.R. 9-2012, properties sold through
Involuntary sale under circumstances which warrant the
Imposition of VAT will still be subject to VAT. In this case, the
condo is an ordinary asset whose normal sale would be subject
to VAT. Hence, the involuntary sale should be subject to VAT as
well.

1

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

384

Koko's primary source of income is his employment with the
government. He earns extra from the land he inherited from his
parents, and which land he has been leasing to a private, nonstock,
non-profit school since 2005.

Last January, the school offered to buy the land from Koko for an
amount equivalent to its zonal value plus 15% of such zonal value.
Koko agreed but required the school to pay, in addition to the
purchase price, the 12°/o VAT. The school refused Koko's proposal
to pass on the VAT contending that it was an entity exempt from
such tax. Moreover, it said that Koko was not regularly engaged
in the real estate business and, therefore, was not subject to VAT.
Consequently, Koko should not charge any VAT to the school.

I

a)

Is the contention of the school correct?

b)

Will your answer be the same if Koko signed up as a VATregistered person only in 2017? (2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

I.

a)

The school is wrong. VAT is an indirect tax, hence the liability
lies with Koko, not the school. The school may not use its tax
exempt status to refuse to shoulder the VAT, as jurisprudence
has stated that the tax exemption of the buyer does not exempt
him or her from the payment of indirect taxes. The sale of the
property is subject to VAT, as the land had been held for lease
in the ordinary course of Koko's trade or business. Hence, the
school's contention is wrong.

b)

The answer will be the same, as the sale Is subject to VAT in
the first place—with or without registration. If Koko does not
register as a VAT-registered person, the Tax Code states that
the sale will still be subject to VAT as if he were a VAT-registered
person but without the benefit of input tax credits.

Administrative Provisions

KA 7" Registration
•

Every taxpayer subject to the VAT must register with the BIR as
a VAT taxpayer and pay an annual registration fee of P500 for
every separate and distinct establishment, including facility types
where the business is conducted.

•

Every taxpayer not subject to VAT but subject to the excise
tax or percentage tax must register with the BIR and pay an
annual registration fee of P500 for every separate and distinct
establishment where the business is conducted.

o

VAT exempt persons under Section 109 who did not opt to
be registered as VAT taxpayers must register as non-VAT
taxpayers.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

385

Mandatory registration
Sec. 236. (G) — Persons required to register for Value-Added
Tax —
1) Any person, who in the course of trade or business, sells, barters
or exchanges goods or properties, or engages in the sale or exchange
of services, shall be liable to register for VAT if:

(a) His gross sales or receipts for the past twelve (12) months,
other than those that are exempt under Section 109(A) to (BB),
have exceeded Three million pesos (P3,000,000); or

tl

(b) There are reasonable grounds to believe that his gross sales
or receipts for the next twelve (12) months, other than those
that are exempt under Section 109(A) to (BB), will exceed Three
million pesos (P3,000,000).
2) Every person who becomes liable to be registered under
paragraph (1) of this Subsection shall register with the Revenue
District Office which has jurisdiction over the head office or
branch of that person, and shall pay the annual registration fee
prescribed in Subsection (B) hereof. If he fails to register, he
shall be liable to pay the tax under Title IV as if he were a VATregistered person, but without the benefit of input tax credits for
the period in which he was not properly registered. (As amended
by TRAIN)

Any person who, in the course of trade or business, sells, barters
or exchanges goods or properties, or engages in the sale or
exchange of services shall be liable to register for VAT if:
1.

His gross sales or receipts for the past 12 months, other than
those exempt under Section 109(A) to (BB), have exceeded
P3,000,000; or

2. There are reasonable grounds to believe that his gross sales

or receipts for the next 12 months, other than those exempt
under Section 109(A) to (BB), will exceed P3,000,000.

If a person who is mandated to register does not, he shall:

o

Be liable to pay the tax as if he were a VAT-registered person,
and

o

Without the benefit of input tax credits.

J
l|

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

386

Optional registration

Sec. 236. (H) Optional Registration for Value-Added Tax of
Exempt Person. —
(1) Any person who is not required to register for value-added
tax under Subsection (G) hereof may elect to register for valueadded tax by registering with the Revenue District Office that has
jurisdiction over the head office of that person, and paying the
annual registration fee in Subsection (B) hereof.

(2) Any person who elects to register under this Subsection shall not
be entitled to cancel his registration under Subsection (F)(2) for the
next three (3) years.

Provided, That any person taxed under Section 24(A)(2)(b) and
24(A)(2)(c)(2)(a) of the NIR.C who elected to pay the eight percent
(8%) tax on gross sales or receipts shall not be allowed to avail of
this option.
For purposes of Title IV of this Code, any person who has registered
value-added tax as a tax type in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection (C) hereof shall be referred to as a ’VAT-registered
person' who shall be assigned only one Taxpayer Identification
Number (TIN). (As amended by TRAIN)

•

Any person who is not required to registered as a VAT taxpayer
may register for the VAT. He or she, however, cannot cancel his
or her registration for the next three years.

o

However, if an individual has elected to pay the 8% income
tax on gross receipts/sales, then that person may not register.

Cancellation of VAT registration

Sec. 236. (F) Cancellation of VAT registration. —

(1) A VAT-registered person may cancel his registration for VAT if:
(a) he makes written application and can demonstrate to the
Commissioner's satisfaction that his gross sales or receipts for the
following 12 months, over than those that are exempt under Section
109 (A) to (V), will not exceed (Pl,500,000), or
(b) he has ceased to carry on his trade or business, and does not
expect to recommence any trade or business within the next twelve
months.

The cancellation of registration will be effective from the first day of
the following month.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

387

TRAIN did not amend this provision. However, it should be read
to reflect the P3,000,000 VAT threshold (and not the Pl,500,000
written in the codal).
Compliance requirements
Sec. 113. Invoicing and Accounting Requirements for VATRegistered Persons. —

(A) Invoicing Requirements. — A VAT-registered person shall
issue:

(1) A VAT invoice for every sale, barter or exchange of goods or
properties; and
(2) A VAT official receipt for every lease of goods or properties, and
for every sale, barter or exchange of services.

(B) Information Contained in the VAT Invoice or VAT Official
Receipt. — The following information shall be indicated in the VAT
invoice or VAT official receipt:
(1) A statement that the seller is a VAT-registered person, followed
by his taxpayer's identification number (TIN);
(2) The total amount which the purchaser pays or is obligated to pay
to the seller with the indication that such amount includes the valueadded tax: Provided, That:
(a) The amount of the tax shall be shown as a separate
item in the invoice or receipt;

If the sale is exempt from value-added tax, the term
(b)
"VAT-exempt sale" shall be written or printed prominently on
the invoice or receipt;
If the sale is subject to zero percent (0%) value(c)
added tax, the term "zero-rated sale" shall be written or
printed prominently on the invoice or receipt;
If the sale involves goods, properties or services some
(d)
of which are subject to and some of which are VAT zero-rated
or VAT-exempt, the invoice or receipt shall clearly indicate the
breakdown of the sale price between its taxable, exempt and
zero-rated components, and the calculation of the value-added
tax on each portion of the sale shall be shown on the invoice or
receipt: Provided, That the seller may issue separate invoices or
receipts for the taxable, exempt, and zero-rated components of
the sale;

(3) The date of transaction, quantity, unit cost and description of the
goods or properties or nature of the service; and
(4) In the case of sales in the amount of one thousand pesos
(Pl,000) or more where the sale or transfer Is made to a VAT-

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

388

registered person, the name, business style, if any, address and
taxpayer identification number (TIN) of the purchaser, customer or
client.
(C) Accounting Requirements. — Notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 233, all persons subject to the value-added tax under
Sections 106 and 108 shall, in addition to the regular accounting
records required, maintain a subsidiary sales journal and subsidiary
purchase journal on which the daily sales and purchases are
recorded. The subsidiary journals shall contain such information as
may be required by the Secretary of Finance.

A VAT-registered person shall issue:

1.

A VAT invoice for every sale, barter, or exchange of goods or
properties; and

2.

A VAT official receipt for every lease of goods or properties,
and for every sale, barter or exchange of services

If the sale is exempt from VAT, the term "VAT-exempt sale" shall
be written or printed prominently on the invoice or receipt.
If the sale is subject to 0%, the term "zero-rated sale" shall be
written or printed prominently on the invoice or receipt.

If the sale involves some which are subject to VAT and some
which are zero-rated or VAT-exempt, the invoice or receipt shall
clearly indicate the breakdown of the sale price between the
taxable, exempt and zero-rated components.
o

The calculation of the VAT on each portion of the sale shall be
shown on the invoice or receipt.

o

But the seller may issue separate invoices or receipts for the
taxable, exempt and zero-rated components of the sale.

The date of the transaction, quality, unit cost and description of
the goods or properties or nature of the services must also be
indicated.
When the sale is Pl,000 or more to a VAT-registered person, the
name, business style, address and TIN of the purchaser, customer
or client must also be placed in the receipt or invoice.

What must be contained in the VAT receipt?
o

Statement that seller is a VAT-registered person, followed by
his TIN

o

Total consideration indicating that such amount includes the
VAT, which tax shall be shown as a separate item

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

389

O

If VAT-exempt or zero-rated, must also be indicated as either
"VAT-EXEMPT SALE" or "ZERO-RATED SALE"

O

Clear breakdown of VAT, VAT-zero rated or VAT-exempt where
applicable, or separate invoices or receipts for the same

o

Date of the transaction, quantity, unit cost, and description of
the goods or properties or nature of the service

o

In case of sales of Pl,000 or more where the sale or transfer
is made to a VAT-Registered person, the name, business style
if any, address and TIN of the purchaser, customer or client
shall be indicated

VAT-liable taxpayers must have:
o

Subsidiary sales journal, and

o

Subsidiary purchases journal

■

In addition to the regular books of accounts

Issuing Erroneous VAT invoice or VAT official receipt

Sec. 113. (D) Consequence of Issuing Erroneous VAT Invoice
or VAT Official Receipt. —
If a person who is not a VAT-registered person issues an invoice or
receipt showing his Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), followed
by the word "VAT":
(a) The issuer shall, in addition to any liability to other percentage
taxes, be liable to:
(1) The tax imposed in Section 106 or 108 without the benefit of any
input tax credit; and
(II) A 50% surcharge under Section 248(B) of this code;

(b) The VAT shall, if the other requisite information required
under Subsection (B) hereof is shown on the invoice or receipt, be
recognized as an input tax credit to the purchaser under Section 110
of this Code.

(2) If a VAT-registered person issues a VAT invoice or VAT official
receipt for a VAT-exempt transaction, but fails to display prominently
on the invoice or receipt the term "VAT-exempt Sale," the issuer shall
be liable to account for the tax imposed in Section 106 or 108 as if
Section 109 did not apply.

(E) Transitional Period. — Notwithstanding Subsection (B) hereof,
taxpayers may continue to issue VAT invoices and VAT official receipts
for the period July 1, 2005 to December 31, 2005, in accordance with
Bureau of Internal Revenue administrative practices that existed as
of December 31, 2004.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

390

If a person who is NOT a VAT-registered person issues an invoice
or receipt showing his TIN followed by the word "VAT," the issuer
shall be:

•

1.

Liable for the percentage tax due on his transaction

2.

Liable for the VAT, without credit for any input tax, and

3.

Subject to a 50% surcharge.

o

VAT shall be recognized as an input tax credit to the
purchaser under Section 110, provided the requisite
information required in invoices or receipts are shown on
the invoices or receipts.

o

If a VAT-registered person issues a VAT invoice or official
receipt for a VAT-exempt transaction, but fails to display
prominently on the invoice or receipt the term "VATexempt sale," he shall be subject to the VAT, as if Section
109 on exempt transactions did not apply.

o

Meaning, he has to pay VAT.

For zero-rated transactions, the failure to print the word "zerorated" on the VAT invoices or official receipts is fatal to claims for
a refund or credit of unutilized input VAT on the zero-rated sales.
(Northern Mindanao Power Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. 185115,
February 18, 2015)

If the VAT is erroneously billed in the invoice, the total invoice
amount shall be presumed to be comprised of the gross selling
price/gross receipts plus the correct amount of the VAT.
The output tax shall be computed by multiplying the total amount
In the invoice by a fraction using the rate of VAT as the numerator
and 100% plus the rate of the VAT as the denominator.

R.R. 8-1999 states the penalties for violation of the requirement
that output tax on sale of goods and services should not be
separately indicated in the sales invoice or official receipt.
o

The amount appearing in the sales in voices/receipts Is thus
deemed inclusive of the Value-Added Tax due thereon.

o

The penalty for violation of the said requirement is a fine of
not less than One Thousand Pesos (Pl,000) but not more
than Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000), and imprisonment of
not less than two (2) years but not more than four (4) years.

J9JC9B0M

VALUE-ADDED TAX

391

MMM, Inc., a domestic telecommunications company, handles
incoming telecommunications services for non-resident foreign
companies by relaying international calls within the Philippines. To
broaden the coverage of its telecommunications services throughout
the country, MMM, Inc. entered into various interconnection
agreements with local carriers. The non-resident foreign corporations
pay MMM, Inc. in US dollars inwardly remitted through Philippine
banks, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas.

MMM, Inc. filed its Quarterly VAT Returns for 2000. Subsequently,
MMM, Inc. timely filed with the BIR an administrative claim for the
refund of the amount of P6,321,486.50, representing excess input
VAT attributable to its effectively zero-rated sales in 2000. The BIR
ruled to deny the claim for refund of MMM, Inc. because the VAT
official receipts submitted by MMM, Inc. to substantiate said claim
did not bear the words "zero-rated" as required under Section 4.1081 of Revenue Regulations (RR) No. 7-95. On appeal, the CTA division
and the CTA en banc affirmed the BIR ruling.
MMM, Inc. appealed to the Supreme Court arguing that the NIRC
itself did not provide for such a requirement. RR No. 7-95 should
not prevail over a taxpayer's substantive right to claim tax refund
or credit.
a)

Rule on the appeal of MMM, Inc.

b) Will your answer in (a) be any different if MMM, Inc. was claiming
refund of excess input VAT attributable to its effectively zero-rated
sales in 2012? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) The appeal will not prosper. Jurisprudence (particularly,
Panasonic Communications v. CIR, G.R. No. 178090, February 8,
2010 [Note: I don't recommend citing the actual names of cases in
the bar exam; doing it here for academic purposes]) has stated that
R.R. 7-95 was a valid exercise of administrative rule-making power
by the CIR.
b) My answer will not be different. R.A. 9337, which took effect
In 2005, has actually made it explicit that the word "zero-rated"
must appear In official receipts or invoices pertaining to zero-rated
transactions.

Return and Payment of VAT
Sec. 114. Return and Payment of Value-Added Tax. —

(A) In General. — Every person liable to pay the value-added tax
imposed under this Title shall file a quarterly return of the amount of
his gross sales or receipts within twenty-five (25) days following the
close of each taxable quarter prescribed for each taxpayer: Provided,

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

392

however, That VAT-registered persons shall pay the value-added
tax on a monthly basis: Provided, finally, That beginning January 1,
2023, the filing and payment required under this Subsection shall be
done within twenty-five (25) days following the close of each taxable
quarter.

(B) Where to File the Return and Pay the Tax. — Except as the
Commissioner otherwise permits, the return shall be filed with and
the tax paid to an authorized agent bank. Revenue Collection Officer
or duly authorized city or municipal Treasurer in the Philippines
located within the revenue district where the taxpayer is registered
or required to register. (As amended by TRAIN)

Every person liable to pay VAT shall file a quarterly return of the
amount of his quarterly gross sales or receipts within 25 days
following the close of the taxable quarter using the latest version
of Quarterly VAT Return.

The VAT-registered persons shall pay the VAT on a monthly basis.
Starting 2023, the filing and payment of VAT shall be done within
25 days following the close of each taxable quarter.
Power of the Commissioner

Sec. 115. Power of the Commissioner to Suspend the Business
Operations of a Taxpayer. — The Commissioner or his authorized
representative Is hereby empowered to suspend the business
operations and temporarily close the business establishment of any
person for any of the following violations:

(a) In the case of a VAT-registered Person. —
(1) Failure to issue receipts or invoices;

(2) Failure to file a value-added tax return as required
under Section 114; or
(3) Understatement of taxable sales or receipts by thirty
percent (30%) or more of his correct taxable sales or receipts
for the taxable quarter.
(b)

Failure of any Person to Register as Required under Section 236. —

The temporary closure of the establishment shall be for the duration
of not less than five (5) days and shall be lifted only upon compliance
with whatever requirements prescribed by the Commissioner in the
closure order.

J9JC9B0M

PERCENTAGE TAXES
(Quick Hits Notes)
•

Percentage taxes are business taxes based on gross sales or
receipts.
o

Gross sales or receipts means cash actually or constructively
received.

•

The seller is generally liable for percentage taxes.

•

Generally, if a taxpayer is exempt from VAT, he or she is liable for
3% percentage tax.
o

There are other kinds of percentage taxes with different rates
(like those imposed on common carriers, franchises, banks,
finance companies, amusement places, etc.) but these are
outside the coverage of the Bar syllabus.

L
,1

Remember, qualified self-employed individuals and professionals
availing of the 8% income tax on gross sales and/or receipts are
exempt from 12% VAT and 3% percentage tax under Section 116,
NIRC.
j

EXCISE TAXES
(Quick Hits Notes)
Excise taxes are another kind of business tax.
o

Excise taxes in the NIRC are different from the excise or
privilege tax that's also mentioned in old tax cases—those
are imposed on the enjoyment of a privilege or the practice
of a profession or business.
•

It's confusing because they have the same name. *eye
roll*

Excise taxes apply to:
o

Goods manufactured or produced in the Philippines for
domestic sales or consumption or for another disposition;
and

o

Things imported.

Hence, excise taxes are applicable only to:
393

I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

394

•

Manufacturers, and

•

Importers.

There are two kinds of excise taxes, namely:
O

Specific tax, and

O

Ad valorem tax
•

Specific taxes are those based on weight or volume
capacity or any other physical unit of measurement.
•

•

Examples: those applied to alcohol and tobacco
products, petroleum

Ad valorem taxes are those based on the selling price or
other specified value of the article.
•

Examples: automobiles,
jewelry and perfume

non-essential

goods like

Excise tax is basically an indirect tax imposed on the consumption
of a specified list of goods or products.

The tax is directly levied on the manufacturer upon removal
of the taxable goods from the place of production but in
reality, the tax is passed on to the end consumer as part of
the selling price of the goods sold.

O

•

The main difference with VAT (which is also an indirect
tax) is the ability of the buyer to claim a refund.

■

In VAT, zero-rated buyers have express statutory basis
which allows them to claim refunds for the VAT passed on
them by their suppliers.

•

In excise tax, buyers cannot claim refunds because there
is no statutory basis. Hence, it Is only the statutory
taxpayer who can claim a refund.

Who pays the excise tax? Who's the statutory taxpayer?
o

For manufactured goods, the manufacturer or producer.
•

o

But, if they are removed from the place of production
without paying the tax, the owner or person having
possession thereof shall be liable.

For imported goods, the importer or the owner.

■

But, for tax-free articles brought or imported by persons
exempt from tax which are subsequently sold in the
Philippines to non-exempt persons, the purchasers shall

J9JC9B0M

PERCENTAGE TAXES
(Qu ic k Hit s No t e s )

395

be considered the importers and will have to pay the duty
and tax due on such importation.

When should the excise taxes be paid?
O

For locally manufactured goods, pay prior to the removal of
the article from the place of production.

O

For imported goods, pay prior to the release of the article
from customs custody.
■i

i

i

I;

k.

I

i

J9JC9B0M

DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAXES
(Quick Hits Notes)

Documentary stamp taxes (DST) is an internal revenue tax
imposed upon documents, instruments, and other papers listed
in the NIRC.
While DST is imposed on the certain documents, it is actually
imposed on the underlying transaction rather than the
document. In a way, it's an excise tax levied on the privilege
granted to a taxpayer to enter into certain transactions.

o

•

This is the other kind of excise tax that we mentioned in
the previous page.

Who pays for it?

o

DST is paid by the person making, signing, issuing, accepting
or transferring the document.
•

EXCEPT:

•

Whenever one party to the taxable document enjoys
an exemption from the tax, the other party who is not
exempt shall be the one directly liable for DST.

When should it be paid?
o

Should be filed and paid within five days after the close of
the month when the document was made, signed, issued, or
accepted.
■

Basically, you file and pay for DST within the first five
days of the month following the date of the documents.

•

Example: Shares of stock were issued on March 30.
You have to pay the DST before April 5.

What happens if you don't stamp the taxable document and pay
the DST for it? What happens to the documents?
o

It will NOT affect the validity of the transaction or contract.

396

J9JC9B0M

DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAXES
(Qu ic k Hit s No t es )

O

397

However, there will be two legal implications:
•

The document will not be recorded, nor will the record of
transfer be admitted as evidence in court; and

•

A notary public is not allowed to add his jurat or
acknowledgment to the document.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT’S REMEDIES
Tax laws are simply words on a piece of parchment (or a tablet
if you're techie); to enforce them, the government must be given
powers to bring these words into concrete actions and the cash into
the treasury. The law provides the government a number of remedies,
which can be used to ensure that it gets sufficient money into its
coffers to keep the government machinery moving.
When it comes to national taxes, the main player is the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, with the Commissioner of Internal Revenue sitting
on the throne in Agham Road, ruling as the hand of the Secretary of
Finance and the President. Too much? Okay, let's begin then. Let's
take a look at the powers of the BIR and the CIR.

Powers of the BIR

A.

Sec. 2. Powers and Duties of the Bureau of Interna! Revenue.
— The Bureau of Internal Revenue shall be under the supervision
and control of the Department of Finance and its powers and duties
shall comprehend the assessment and collection of all national
internal revenue taxes, fees, and charges, and the enforcement of
all forfeitures, penalties, and fines connected therewith, including the
execution of judgments in all cases decided in its favor by the Court
of Tax Appeals and the ordinary courts. The Bureau shall give effect
to and administer the supervisory and police powers conferred to it by
this Code or other laws.
Sec. 3. Chief Officials of the Bureau of Interna! Revenue. —
The Bureau of Internal Revenue shall have a chief to be known as
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, hereinafter referred to as the
Commissioner and four (4) assistant chiefs to be known as Deputy
Commissioners.

The BIR has the power and duty
o

to assess and collect all taxes, fees, and charges,

o

to enforce all forfeitures, penalties, and fines In connection
therewith,

*

this includes execution of judgments in all cases decided
in its favor

398

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

399

Power to interpret tax laws and decide tax cases
I

Sec. 4. Power of the Commissioner to Interpret Tax Laws and
to Decide Tax Cases. — The power to interpret the provisions of
this Code and other tax laws shall be under the exclusive and original
jurisdiction of the Commissioner, subject to review by the Secretary
of Finance. The power to decide disputed assessments, refunds of
internal revenue taxes, fees or other charges, penalties imposed in
relation thereto, or other matters arising under this Code or other laws
or portions thereof administered by the Bureau of Internal Revenue
is vested in the Commissioner, subject to the exclusive appellate
jurisdiction of the Court of Tax Appeals.

The CIR has the exclusive power to

o

Interpret the NIRC and other tax laws, subject to review by
the Secretary of Finance; and

o

Decide:

Disputed assessments,
Refunds of internal revenue taxes, fees, penalties,
Other matters arising from the NIRC, subject to review
by the CTA.

■
■

The Secretary of Finance has the power to affirm, revise, modify,
or set aside rulings and issuances of the BIR/CIR.
o

•

But the Secretary of Finance does not have the power over
disputed assessments, refunds, penalties, or other matters
arising under the NIRC. (The CTA has exclusive appellate
jurisdiction over these cases.) (DOF Order No. 007-02)

All rulings issued before January 1, 1998 will no longer have any
binding effect. (R.R. 5-2012)
o

o

These rulings are only valid to:
-

The taxpayer who was issued the ruling, and

•

Covering the specific transaction which is the subject of
the transaction. (RMC 22-2012)

Hence, all BIR rulings issued prior to January 1, 1998 are not
to be used:
■

as precedent by any taxpayer to secure rulings or in
support of their position against any assessment, and

*

by any BIR action lawyer in issuing new rulings for request
for rulings involving current business transactions. (RMC
22-2012)

I

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

400

Since the CIR has exclusive and original jurisdiction to interpret tax
laws, taxpayers acting in good faith should not be made to suffer
for adhering to general interpretative rules of the Commissioner
interpreting tax laws, should such interpretation later turn out to
be erroneous and be reversed by the Commissioner or this Court.
(CIR v. San Roque, G.R. No. 187485, February 12, 2013)
O

o

A general interpretative rule issued by the CIR may be relied
upon by taxpayers from the time the rule is issued up to
its reversal by the Commissioner or this Court. (CIR v. San
Roque, G.R. No. 187485, February 12, 2013)

Not all revenue regulations require public hearings or consultations
or even the registration with the UP Law Center. Revenue
regulations which merely interpret the law and give nothing else
than what the law prescribes do not need public hearings and
registration with the UP Law Center. (Association of International
Shipping Lines, Inc. v. Secretary of Finance, G.R. No. 222239,
January 15, 2020, where the validity of R.R. 15-2013 was on the
table,)

Power to obtain information and to summon and examine

Sec. 5. Power of the Commissioner to Obtain Information,
and to Summon, Examine, and Take Testimony of Persons. —
In ascertaining the correctness of any return, or in making a return
when none has been made, or in determining the liability of any
person for any internal revenue tax, or in collecting any such liability,
or in evaluating tax compliance, the Commissioner is authorized:

(A) To examine any book, paper, record, or other data which may be
relevant or material to such inquiry;
(B) To obtain on a regular basis from any person other than the
person whose internal revenue tax liability is subject to audit
or investigation, or from any office or officer of the national and
local governments, government agencies and instrumentalities,
including the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and government-owned or
-controlled corporations, any information such as, but not limited to,
costs and volume of production, receipts or sales and gross incomes
of taxpayers, and the names, addresses, and financial statements of
corporations, mutual fund companies, insurance companies, regional
operating headquarters of multinational companies, joint accounts,
associations, joint ventures or consortia and registered partnerships,
and their members: Provided, That the Cooperative Development
Authority shall submit to the Bureau a tax incentive report, which
shall include information on the income tax, value-added tax, and
other tax incentives availed of by cooperatives registered and
enjoying incentives under Republic Act No. 6938, as amended:
Provided, further, That the information submitted by the Cooperative

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

401

Development Authority to the Bureau shall be submitted to the
Department of Finance and shall be included in the database
created under Republic Act No. 10708, otherwise known as 'The
Tax Incentives Management and Transparency Act (TIMTA).' (as
amended by TRAIN)

(C) To summon the person liable for tax or required to file a return,
or any officer or employee of such person, or any person having
possession, custody, or care of the books of accounts and other
accounting records containing entries relating to the business of
the person liable for tax, or any other person, to appear before the
Commissioner or his duly authorized representative at a time and
place specified in the summons and to produce such books, papers,
records, or other data, and to give testimony;
(D) To take such testimony of the person concerned, under oath, as
may be relevant or material to such inquiry; and
(E) To cause revenue officers and employees to make a canvass from
time to time of any revenue district or region and inquire after and
concerning all persons therein who may be liable to pay any internal
revenue tax, and all persons owning or having the care, management
or possession of any object with respect to which a tax is imposed.
The provisions of the foregoing paragraphs notwithstanding, nothing
in this Section shall be construed as granting the Commissioner the
authority to inquire into bank deposits other than as provided for in
Section 6(F) of this Code.

The Commissioner is authorized by law to do a whole host of
things in

O

ascertaining the correctness of any return, or

O

making a return when none has been made, or

O

collecting any such liability, or

O

evaluating tax compliance, or

O

In determining the liability of any person for tax.

The CIR is authorized to:

O

examine any document which may be relevant or material to
an inquiry;

O

obtain information from a third party in relation to an
investigation or audit of a taxpayer;

O

summon the taxpayer or any person holding records of the
taxpayer to appear before the CIR and produce documents;

O

take testimonies of the person concerned;

O

cause BIR employees to canvass around and inquire on
persons who may be liable for any internal revenue tax.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

402

•

The law allows the BIR access to all relevant or material records
and data in the person of the taxpayer. In fact, the BIR can accept
documents which cannot be admitted in a judicial proceeding
where the Rules of Court are strictly observed. (Fitness by Design
v. CIR, G.R. No. 177982, October 17, 2008)

•

Taxpayers must preserve their books of accounts for a period of
10 years from the deadline to file the return or from the date of
actual filing, whichever is later. (R.R. 17-2013)
O

After a period of five years, taxpayers have the option of
retaining an electronic copy of their books of accounts,
subject to the maintenance of an Electronic Storage System.
(R.R. 5-2014)

Power to make assessments and inquire into bank deposits

Sec. 6. Power of the Commissioner to Make assessments and
Prescribe additional Requirements for Tax Administration and
Enforcement. —

(A) Examination of Returns and Determination of Tax Due. —
After a return has been filed as required under the provisions of this
Code, the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative may
authorize the examination of any taxpayer and the assessment of the
correct amount of tax: Provided, however; That failure to file a return
shall not prevent the Commissioner from authorizing the examination
of any taxpayer.
Any return, statement of declaration filed in any office authorized to
receive the same shall not be withdrawn: Provided, That within three
(3) years from the date of such filing, the same may be modified,
changed, or amended: Provided, further, That no notice for audit
or investigation of such return, statement or declaration has In the
meantime been actually served upon the taxpayer.

(B) Failure to Submit Required Returns, Statements, Reports
and other Documents. — When a report required by law as a basis
for the assessment of any national internal revenue tax shall not be
forthcoming within the time fixed by laws or rules and regulations
or when there is reason to believe that any such report is false,
incomplete or erroneous, the Commissioner shall assess the proper
tax on the best evidence obtainable.
In case a person fails to file a required return or other document at
the time prescribed by law, or willfully or otherwise files a false or
fraudulent return or other document, the Commissioner shall make or
amend the return from his own knowledge and from such information
as he can obtain through testimony or otherwise, which shall be prima
facie correct and sufficient for all legal purposes.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

403

(C) Authority to Conduct Inventory-taking, surveillance
and to Prescribe Presumptive Gross Sales and Receipts. —
The Commissioner may, at any time during the taxable year, order
inventory-taking of goods of any taxpayer as a basis for determining
his internal revenue tax liabilities, or may place the business operations
of any person, natural or juridical, under observation or surveillance
if there is reason to believe that such person is not declaring his
correct income, sales or receipts for internal revenue tax purposes.
The findings may be used as the basis for assessing the taxes for the
other months or quarters of the same or different taxable years and
such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct.
When it is found that a person has failed to issue receipts and invoices
in violation of the requirements of Sections 113 and 237 of this Code,
or when there is reason to believe that the books of accounts or other
records do not correctly reflect the declarations made or to be made
in a return required to be filed under the provisions of this Code, the
Commissioner, after taking into account the sales, receipts, income
or other taxable base of other persons engaged in similar businesses
under similar situations or circumstances or after considering other
relevant information may prescribe a minimum amount of such gross
receipts, sales and taxable base, and such amount so prescribed
shall be prima facie correct for purposes of determining the internal
revenue tax liabilities of such person.
(D) Authority to Terminate Taxable Period. — When it shall come
to the knowledge of the Commissioner that a taxpayer is retiring from
business subject to tax, or is intending to leave the Philippines or to
remove his property therefrom or to hide or conceal his property,
or is performing any act tending to obstruct the proceedings for the
collection of the tax for the past or current quarter or year or to
render the same totally or partly ineffective unless such proceedings
are begun immediately, the Commissioner shall declare the tax period
of such taxpayer terminated at any time and shall send the taxpayer
a notice of such decision, together with a request for the immediate
payment of the tax for the period so declared terminated and the tax
for the preceding year or quarter, or such portion thereof as may be
unpaid, and said taxes shall be due and payable immediately and shall
be subject to all the penalties hereafter prescribed, unless paid within
the time fixed in the demand made by the Commissioner.

(E) Authority of the Commissioner to Prescribe Real Property
Values. — The Commissioner is hereby authorized to divide the
Philippines into different zones or areas and shall, upon mandatory
consultation with competent appraisers both from the private and
public sectors, and with prior notice to affected taxpayers, determine
the fair market value of real properties located in each zone or area,
subject to automatic adjustment once every three (3) years through
rules and regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance based on the
current Philippine valuation standards: Provided, That no adjustment
in zonal valuation shall be valid unless published in a newspaper of

J9JC9B0M

404

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

general circulation in the province, city or municipality concerned,
or in the absence thereof, shall be posted in the provincial capitol,
city or municipal hall and in two (2) other conspicuous public places
therein: Provided, further, That the basis of any valuation, including
the records of consultations done, shall be public records open to
the inquiry of any taxpayer. For purposes of computing any internal
revenue tax, the value of the property shall be, whichever is the
higher of:
(1) the fair market value as determined by the Commissioner; or
(2) the fair market value as shown in the schedule of values of the
Provincial and City Assessors. (As amended by TRAIN)
(F) Authority of the Commissioner to Inquire into Bank Deposit
Accounts and Other Related Information Heid by Financial
Institutions. — Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Republic
Act No. 1405, Republic Act No. 6426, otherwise known as the Foreign
Currency Deposit Act of the Philippines, and other general and special
laws, the Commissioner is hereby authorized to inquire into the bank
deposits and other related information held by financial institutions
of:

(1) A decedent to determine his gross estate.

(2) Any taxpayer who has filed an application for compromise of his
tax liability under Sec. 204 (A)(2) by reason of financial incapacity to
pay his tax liability.

In case a taxpayer files an application to compromise the payment of
his tax liabilities on his claim that his financial position demonstrates
a clear inability to pay the tax assessed, his application shall not be
considered unless and until he waives in writing his privilege under
Republic Act No. 1405, Republic Act No. 6426, otherwise known as
the Foreign Currency Deposit Act of the Philippines, or under other
general or special laws, and such waiver shall constitute the authority
of the Commissioner to inquire into the bank deposits of the taxpayer.
(3) A specific taxpayer or taxpayers subject of a request for the
supply of tax information from a foreign tax authority pursuant to an
international convention or agreement on tax matters to which the
Philippines is a signatory or a party of: Provided, That the information
obtained from the banks and other financial institutions may be used
by the Bureau of Internal Revenue for tax assessment, verification,
audit and enforcement purposes.

In case of request from a foreign tax authority for tax Information held
by banks and financial institutions, the exchange of information shall
be done in a secure manner to ensure confidentiality thereof under
such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Secretary
of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.
The Commissioner shall provide the tax information obtained from
banks and financial institutions pursuant to a convention or agreement

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

405

upon request of the foreign tax authority when such requesting foreign
tax authority has provided the following information to demonstrate
the foreseeable relevance of the information to the request:

(a) The identity of the person under examination or investigation;
(b) A statement of the information being sought including its nature
and the form in which the said foreign tax authority prefers to receive
the information from the Commissioner;
(c) The tax purpose for which the information is being sought;

(d) Grounds for believing that the information requested is held in
the Philippines or is in the possession or control of a person within the
jurisdiction of the Philippines;
(e) To the extent known, the name and address of any person
believed to be in possession of the requested information;
(f) A Statement that the request is in conformity with the law and
administrative practices of the said foreign tax authority, such that
if the requested information was within the jurisdiction of the said
foreign tax authority then it would be able to obtain the information
under its law or in the normal course of administrative practice and
that it is conformity with a convention or international agreement;
and

(g) A statement that the requesting foreign tax authority has
exhausted all means available in its own territory to obtain the
Information, except those that would give rise to disproportionate
difficulties.
The Commissioner shall forward the information as promptly as
possible to the requesting foreign tax authority. To ensure a prompt
response, the Commissioner shall confirm receipt of a request in
writing to the requesting tax authority and shall notify the latter of
deficiencies in the request, if any, within sixty (60) days from the
receipt of the request.
If the Commissioner is unable to obtain and provide the information
within ninety (90) days from the receipt of the request, due to
obstacles encountered in furnishing the information or when the
bank or financial institution refuses to furnish the information, he
shall Immediately inform the requesting tax authority of the same,
explaining the nature of the obstacles encountered or the reasons of
refusal.

The term 'foreign tax authority,' as used herein, shall refer to the tax
authority or tax administration of the requesting State under the tax
treaty or convention to which the Philippines is a signatory or a party
of.

(G) Authority to Accredit and Register Tax Agents. — The
Commissioner shall accredit and register, based on their professional
competence, integrity and moral fitness, individuals and general

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

406

professional partnerships and their representatives who prepare and
file tax returns, statements, reports, protests, and other papers with
or who appear before, the Bureau for taxpayers. Within one hundred
twenty (120) days from January 1, 1998, the Commissioner shall
create national and regional accreditation boards, the members of
which shall serve for three (3) years, and shall designate from among
the senior officials of the Bureau, one (1) chairman and two (2)
members for each board, subject to such rules and regulations as the
Secretary of Finance shall promulgate upon the recommendation of
the Commissioner.
Individuals and general professional partnerships and their
representatives who are denied accreditation by the Commissioner
and/or the national and regional accreditation boards may appeal such
denial to the Secretary of Finance, who shall rule on the appeal within
sixty (60) days from receipt of such appeal. Failure of the Secretary
of Finance to rule on the Appeal within the prescribed period shall
be deemed as approval of the application for accreditation of the
appellant.

(H) Authority of the Commissioner to Prescribe Additional
Procedural or Documentary Requirements. — The Commissioner
may prescribe the manner of compliance with any documentary
or procedural requirement in connection with the submission or
preparation of financial statements accompanying the tax returns.

The CIR is also authorized to:
o

conduct inventory-taking as a basis for determining the
taxpayer's internal revenue tax liabilities; or

o

place the business of any persons under observation or
surveillance.

-

The findings may be used to assess taxes and may be
used to prescribe a minimum amount of gross receipts,
sales, and taxable base (which will be considered prima
facie correct for determining tax liabilities).

The CIR is also authorized to divide the Philippines into different
zones and compute the fair market value.
o

For purposes of computing any internal revenue tax, the
value of the property shall be, whichever is the HIGHER of:

■

The FMV as determined by the CIR; or

■

The FMV as shown in the schedule of values of the
Provincial and City Assessors.

NOTE: Prescribing real property values and dividing
the Philippines into zones must done upon consultation

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

407

with competent appraisers both from the public and
private sectors. It cannot be done unilaterally. (CIR v.
Aquafresh Seafoods, Inc., G.R. No. 170389, October
20, 2010)
O

Before the CIR prescribes real property values, TRAIN now
requires mandatory consultation with private and public
sectors and prior notice to affected taxpayers.
The values are subject to automatic adjustments once
every three years, but the adjustments have to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation to be
valid.

•

The rule on the "best evidence obtainable" (Section 6[B]) applies
when a tax report is required by law for the purpose of assessment
and it is not available or when the tax report is incomplete or
fraudulent. (Sy Po v. CTA, G.R. No. 81446, August 18, 1998)

O

The failure of the taxpayers to present their books of accounts
for examination is a reason for the CIR to resort to his powers.

O

The law allows the BIR access to all relevant or material
records and data in the person of the. taxpayer. It places no
limit or condition on the type or form of the medium by which
the record subject to the order of the BIR is kept. The purpose
of the law is to enable the BIR to get at the taxpayer's records
in whatever form they may be kept. (CIR v. Hantex Trading
Co, Inc., G.R. No. 136975, March 31, 2005)

•

HOWEVER, this does not give the CIR the authority to
use mere photocopies of records or documents. Such
photocopies are mere scraps of paper and have no
probative value for any deficiency income assessments
against a taxpayer.

•

The rule that assessments are presumed correct and in
good faith only applies when such assessment was based
on sufficient evidence. (CIR v. Hantex)

Bank deposits can be examined by the CIR, in the following
Instances:
O

A decedent to determine his gross estate, or

O

Any taxpayer who has filed an application for compromise
based on financial incapacity, or

O

Pursuant to an international convention or tax agreement,
which the Philippines is a signatory of. (R.A. 10021)

J9JC9B0M

408

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Read with the amendment to Section 71 and Section 270,
NIRC.5
May the bank deposits — peso and foreign currency of the an individual
taxpayer be disclosed by a commercial bank to the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue, in connection with a tax investigation being
conducted by revenue officials, without violating the relevant bank
secrecy laws? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No, there are only three instances wherein the
CIR may inquire into the bank deposits of a taxpayer: to determine
the gross estate of a decedent, in applications for compromise based
on financial incapacity, and pursuant to an international convention
or tax agreement where the Philippines is a signatory and there has
been a corresponding request from a foreign jurisdiction. Absent any
of these cases, the CIR may not inquire into the bank deposits of a
taxpayer.

SSEC. 71. Disposition of Income Tax Returns, Publication of Lists of Taxpayers
and Filers. — After the assessment shall have been made, as provided in this Title,
the returns, together with any corrections thereof which may have been made
by the Commissioner, shall be filed in the Office of the Commissioner and shall
constitute public records and be open to inspection as such upon the order of the
President of the Philippines, under rules and regulations to be presented by the
Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner.
"The Commissioner may, in each year, cause to be prepared and published in
any newspaper the lists containing the names and addresses of persons who have
filed income tax returns.
"Income tax returns of specific taxpayers subject of a request for exchange
of information by a foreign tax authority pursuant to an international convention
or agreement on tax matters to which the Philippines is a signatory or a party of,
shall be open to inspection upon the order of the President if the Philippines under
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner.
SEC. 270. Unlawful Divulgence of Information. — Except as provided In
Sections 6(F) and 71 of this Code and Section 26 of Republic Act No. 6388, any
officer or employee of the Bureau of Internal Revenue who divulges to any person
or makes known in any other manner than may be provided by law information
regarding the business, income, or estate of any taxpayer, the secrets, operation,
style or work, or apparatus of any manufacturer or producer, or confidential
information regarding the business of any taxpayer, knowledge of which was
acquired by him in the discharge of his official duties, shall, upon conviction for
each act or omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos
(P50,000) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000), or suffer
imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more than five (5) years, or
both.
"Any officer or employee of the Bureau of Internal Revenue who divulges or
makes known in any other manner to any person other than the requesting foreign
tax authority information obtained from banks and financial institutions pursuant
to Section 6(F), knowledge or information acquired by him in the discharge of
his official duties, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000), or suffer imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more
than five (5) years, or both.

J9JC9B0M

409

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

In 2011, the Commissioner of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) requested in writing the Commissioner of Internal Revenue
to get the information from a bank In the Philippines, regarding
the deposits of a U.S. Citizen residing in the Philippines, who is
under examinations by the officials of the US IRS, pursuant to the
US-Philippine Tax Treaty and other existing laws. Should the BIR
Commissioner agree to obtain such information from the bank and
provide the same to the IRS? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Yes, R.A. 10021 has amended the NIRC to allow
the CIR to inquire into the bank deposits upon request of a foreign
taxing authority. The case falls squarely into this amendment.

Authority to delegate power
Sec. 7. Authority of the Commissioner to Delegate Power. —
The Commissioner may delegate the powers vested in him under
the pertinent provisions of this Code to any or such subordinate
officials with the rank equivalent to a division chief or higher, subject
to such limitations and restrictions as may be imposed under rules
and regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner: Provided, however, That the
following powers of the Commissioner shall not be delegated:

(a) The power to recommend the promulgation of rules
regulations by the Secretary of Finance;

and

(b) The power to issue rulings of first impression or to reverse,
revoke or modify any existing ruling of the Bureau;
(c) The power to compromise or abate, under Sec. 204(A) and (B)
of this Code, any tax liability: Provided, however, That assessments
issued by the regional offices involving basic deficiency taxes of Five
hundred thousand pesos (P500,000) or less, and minor criminal
violations, as may be determined by rules and regulations to be
promulgated by the Secretary of finance, upon recommendation of
the Commissioner, discovered by regional and district officials, may be
compromised by a regional evaluation board which shall be composed
of the Regional Director as Chairman, the Assistant Regional Director,
the heads of the Legal, Assessment and Collection Divisions and the
Revenue District Officer having jurisdiction over the taxpayer, as
members; and

(d) The power to assign or reassign internal revenue officers to
establishments where articles subject to excise tax are produced or
kept.
The CIR may delegate the power to assess taxes to his
subordinates. (Republic v. Hizon, G.R. No. 130430, December
13, 1999, where the power to approve the filing of a tax collection
case was considered delegable.)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

410

But the CIR cannot delegate the power:

O

■

To recommend the promulgation of rules and regulations
by the Secretary of Finance,

•

To issue rulings of first impression or to reverse, revoke
or modify any existing ruling of the Bureau,
•

■

To compromise or abate any tax liability,
•

■

There is authority which states that a ruling of first
impression issued by the Deputy Commissioner is
invalid (as only the CIR can issue such), and thus,
not protected by the provision on non-retroactivity
of rulings (Section 246, NIRC). (CIR v. San Roque,
J. Leonen concurring and dissenting opinion; Metro
Pacific Corporation v. CIR, CTA Case No. 8318, June
11, 2014)
But if P500,000 or less, he can delegate

To assign or reassign officers to establishments where
excise tax articles are produced or kept.

Note that the CIR or his duly authorized representative may
delegate and authorize the examination of any taxpayer and the
assessment of the correct amount of tax.
O

Unless authorized by the CIR, a revenue officer cannot
examine a taxpayer. The authority is embodied in a Letter of
Authority (LOA).

O

Without the LOA, an assessment or examination by a revenue
officer is a nullity. Due process requires that revenue officers
secure a LOA before examining and assessing a taxpayer.
(Medicard Philippines, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 222743, April 5,
2017)

O

Speaking of LOAs, a LOA should cover a taxable period not
exceeding one taxable year. It cannot cover the audit of
unverified prior years. If the audit includes more than one
taxable period, the other periods or years shall be specifically
identified. (CIR v. DLSU, G.R. No. 196596, November 9,
2016)
*

But having a LOA that covers a specific taxable year and
unverified prior years does not make the LOA void. The
assessment for the specific taxable year indicated in the
LOA is valid. (CIR v. DLSU)

The CIR may also delegate the power to approve and recommend
the filing of criminal cases under the NIRC. It is not a nondelegable function. (People v. Valeriano, G.R. No. 199480,
October 12, 2016)

J9JC9B0M

411

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

Duty of the CIR to ensure provision and distribution of forms, receipts,
etc.
Sec. 8. Duty of the Commissioner to Ensure the Provision and
Distribution of Forms, Receipts, Certificates, and Appliances,
and the Acknowledgment of Payment of Taxes. —

(A) Provision and Distribution to Proper Officials. — It shall
be the duty of the Commissioner, among other things, to prescribe,
provide, and distribute to the proper officials the requisite licenses
internal revenue stamps, labels all other forms, certificates, bonds,
records, invoices, books, receipts, instruments, appliances and
apparatus used in administering the laws falling within the jurisdiction
of the Bureau.

For this purpose, internal revenue stamps, strip stamps and labels
shall be caused by the Commissioner to be printed with adequate
security features.
Internal revenue stamps, whether of a bar code or fusion design,
shall be firmly and conspicuously affixed on each pack of cigars and
cigarettes subject to excise tax in the manner and form as prescribed
by the Commissioner, upon approval of the Secretary of Finance.

(B) Receipts for Payment Made. — It shall be the duty of the
Commissioner or his duly authorized representative or an authorized
agent bank to whom any payment of any tax is made under the
provision of this Code to acknowledge the payment of such tax,
expressing the amount paid and the particular account for which such
payment was made in a form and manner prescribed therefor by the
Commissioner.

B.

Tax Assessment

The first government remedy is its power to issue deficiency tax
assessments.

Sec. 56. Payment and Assessment of Income
Individuals and Corporation. —

Tax for

(A) Payment of Tax. —
(1) In General. — The total amount of tax imposed by this Title
shall be paid by the person subject thereto at the time the return
Is filed. In the case of tramp vessels, the shipping agents and/or
the husbanding agents, and in their absence, the captains thereof
are required to file the return herein provided and pay the tax due
thereon before their departure. Upon failure of the said agents or
captains to file the return and pay the tax, the Bureau of Customs is
hereby authorized to hold the vessel and prevent its departure until
proof of payment of the tax is presented or a sufficient bond is filed
to answer for the tax due.

J9JC9B0M

412

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(2) Installment of Payment. — When the tax due is in excess of
Two thousand pesos (P2,000), the taxpayer other than a corporation
may elect to pay the tax in two (2) equal installments in which case,
the first installment shall be paid at the time the return is filed and
the second installment, on or before July 15 following the close of
the calendar year. If any installment is not paid on or before the date
fixed for its payment, the whole amount of the tax unpaid becomes
due and payable, together with the delinquency penalties.
(3) Payment of Capital Gains Tax. — The total amount of tax
imposed and prescribed under Sections 24(c), 24(D), 27(E)(2),
28(A)(8)(c) and 28(B)(5)(c) shall be paid on the date the return
prescribed therefor is filed by the person liable thereto: Provided,
That if the seller submits proof of his intention to avail himself of
the benefit of exemption of capital gains under existing special
laws, no such payments shall be required: Provided, further, That
in case of failure to qualify for exemption under such special laws
and implementing rules and regulations, the tax due on the gains
realized from the original transaction shall immediately become due
and payable, subject to the penalties prescribed under applicable
provisions of this Code: Provided, finally. That if the seller, having
paid the tax, submits such proof of intent within six (6) months
from the registration of the document transferring the real property,
he shall be entitled to a refund of such tax upon verification of his
compliance with the requirements for such exemption.

In case the taxpayer elects and is qualified to report the gain by
installments under Section 49 of this Code, the tax due from each
installment payment shall be paid within (30) days from the receipt
of such payments.
No registration of any document transferring real property shall be
effected by the Register of Deeds unless the Commissioner or his
duly authorized representative has certified that such transfer has
been reported, and the tax herein imposed, if any, has been paid.
(B) Assessment and Payment of Deficiency Tax. — After
the return is filed, the Commissioner shall examine it and assess
the correct amount of the tax. The tax or deficiency income tax
so discovered shall be paid upon notice and demand from the
Commissioner.

As used in this Chapter, In respect of a tax imposed by this Title, the
term "deficiency" means:

(1) The amount by which the tax imposed by this Title exceeds the
amount shown as the tax by the taxpayer upon his return; but the
amount so shown on the return shall be increased by the amounts
previously assessed (or collected without assessment) as a deficiency,
and decreased by the amount previously abated, credited, returned
or otherwise repaid in respect of such tax; or
(2) If no amount is shown as the tax by the taxpayer upon this
return, or if no return is made by the taxpayer, then the amount by

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

413

which the tax exceeds the amounts previously assessed (or collected
without assessment) as a deficiency; but such amounts previously
assessed or collected without assessment shall first be decreased
by the amounts previously abated, credited returned or otherwise
repaid in respect of such tax.
Sec. 71. Disposition of Income Tax Returns, Publication of
Lists of Taxpayers and Filers. — After the assessment shall have
been made, as provided in this Title, the returns, together with any
corrections thereof which may have been made by the Commissioner,
shall be filed in the Office of the Commissioner and shall constitute
public records and be open to inspection as such upon the order of
the President of the Philippines, under rules and regulations to be
presented by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner.

The Commissioner may, in each year, cause to be prepared and
published in any newspaper the lists containing the names and
addresses of persons who have filed income tax returns.
Income tax returns of specific taxpayers subject of a request for
exchange of information by a foreign tax authority pursuant to an
international convention or agreement on tax matters to which the
Philippines is a signatory or a party of, shall be open to inspection
upon the order of the President if the Philippines under rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner. (As amended by R.A. 10021)
Sec. 228. Protesting an Assessment.
X

x

X

The taxpayers shall be informed in writing of the law and the facts
on which the assessment is made; otherwise, the assessment shall
be void.

There are two kinds of assessment:

1.

Self-assessment (Section 56[A]): when the taxpayer computes
his own liability, files his return, and pays the tax based on his
computation

2.

Deficiency assessment (Section 56[B]): this occurs upon discovery
of the BIR that the self-assessment was either deficient, or when
no return was made by the taxpayer

•

An assessment (deficiency) is an official action by an administrative
officer to determine the tax due of the taxpayer.

It consists of:
o

A computation of the amount of tax that must be paid by the
taxpayer,

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

414

Coupled with a demand to pay the tax within a specified period
of time. (CIR v. Pascor Realty and Development Corporation,
G.R. No. 128315, June 19, 1999)

O

Since it is a demand to pay, the final assessment notice
(FAN) must indicate the definite amount of tax to be paid
and the due date for the payment. Without the definite
amount or the date when the tax must be paid, it is not a
valid demand and Is therefore an invalid assessment. (CIR
v. Fitness by Design, Inc., G.R. No. 215957, November 9,
2016)

•

To be valid, the assessment must be in writing and must inform
the taxpayer of the law and the facts on which the assessment is
made. Otherwise, the assessment is void.
O

Hence, the advice of tax deficiency, given by the CIR to an
employee of the taxpayer, as well as the preliminary five-day
letter, are not valid substitutes for the mandatory notice in
writing of the legal and factual bases of the assessment. (CIR
v. Enron Subic Power Corporation, G.R. No. 166387, January
19, 2009)
■

O

The law requires that the legal and factual bases of the
assessment be stated in the formal letter of demand and
assessment notice, not in any other document or paper
issued by the CIR.
•

But see Samar-I Electric Cooperative v. CIR (G.R.
No. 193100, December 10, 2014), which stated that
when the legal and factual bases can be found in a
series of correspondence between the BIR and the
taxpayer (and not in the formal letter of demand
and final assessment notice), there was substantial
compliance with the requirements of Section 228, as
the taxpayer was informed In writing.

•

CIR v. Fitness by Design, Inc. has also added that
the basis for allegations of fraud (needed to extend
the prescriptive period to 10 years, instead of three)
must also be indicated in the FAN to give the taxpayer
a chance to refute them.

Similarly, an affidavit, which was executed by revenue
officers stating the tax liabilities of a taxpayer and attached
to a criminal complaint for tax evasion, cannot be deemed a
valid assessment (not having been received by the taxpayer
and thus, the taxpayer was not informed of the law and facts
on which the assessment was made). (CIR v. Pascor Realty
and Development Corporation, G.R. No. 128315, June 19,
1999)

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

415

The power to issue an assessment is with the CIR. However, he
can authorize any revenue officer to conduct an examination or
assessment.
O

Before the delegated revenue officer can conduct said
examination or assessment, there must a dear grant of
authority. This grant is embodied in a Letter of Authority
or LOA. (CIR v. Sony Philippines, Inc., G.R. No. 178697,
November 17, 2010)
•

Without the LOA, an assessment or examination is a
nullity. Due process requires that revenue officers secure
a LOA before examining and assessing a taxpayer.
(Medicard Philippines, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 222743, April
5, 2017)

■

The LOA cannot be for "unverified prior years." The other
periods or years should be specifically indicated in the
LOA.

•

But, like mentioned earlier, having a LOA that covers
a specific taxable year and unverified prior years does
not make the LOA void. The assessment for the specific
taxable year indicated in the LOA remains valid. (CIR v.
DLSU, G.R. No. 196596, November 9, 2016)

Tax assessments by tax examiners are presumed correct and
made in good faith. The taxpayer has the duty to prove otherwise.
(Sy Po v. CTA, G.R. No. 81446, August 18, 1998)
O

O

However, assessments cannot be based on mere presumptions
on the part of the government.
•

There must be a minimum effort on the government
before the presumption of correctness sets in. (CIR v.
Benipayo, G.R. No. L-13656, January 31, 1962, wherein
the Court said that a charge of fraud against a taxpayer
Is a serious one and must be supported by clear and
convincing proof).

■

It must also be based on sufficient proof and not on
documents with no probative value. (CIR v. Hantex
Trading Co., Inc., G.R. No. 136975, March 31, 2005)

The presumption of regularity in the performance of the
Commissioner's official duties, such as complying with the
assessment procedure, cannot stand in the face of positive
evidence of irregularity or failure to perform a duty. (CIR v.
Avon Products Manufacturing, Inc., G.R. Nos. 201398-99,
Octobers, 2018)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

416

Mandamus does not lie to compel the CIR to impose a tax
assessment not found by him to be proper. (Meratco Securities
Corp. v. Savellano, G.R. No. L-36181, October 23, 1982, where
an informer wanted his reward)

The notices (preliminary assessment notice, final letter of
demand, final assessment notice, final decision on a disputed
assessment) may be served in the following modes:
O

Personal service (by personal delivery to known address of
taxpayer) — this is the preferred mode of service;

O

Substituted service (by leaving the notice with someone at
taxpayer's known address); or

O

Service by mail.
•

Service to the tax agent shall be deemed service to the
taxpayer. (R.R. 18-2013)

In 2010, pursuant to a Letter of Authority (LA) issued by the Regional
Director, Mr. Abcede was assessed deficiency income taxes by the
BIR for the year 2009. He paid the deficiency. In 2011, Mr. Abcede
received another LA for the same year 2009, this time from the
National Investigation Division, on the ground that Mr. Abcede's
2009 return was fraudulent.

Mr. Abcede contested the LA on the ground that he can only be
investigated once in a taxable year. Decide. (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Mr. Abcede is correct. For income tax purposes,
examination and inspection shall be made only once in a taxable
year, except in fraud, Irregularity or mistakes, as determined by the
Commissioner (among others). In this case, there is no indication
that the fraud was determined by the Commissioner. Hence, as the
case does not fall under the exception, the genera! rule will apply.6

6SEC. 235. Preservation of Books and Accounts and Other Accounting
Records. — All the books of accounts, including the subsidiary books and other
accounting records of corporations, partnerships, or persons, shall be preserved
by them for a period beginning from the last entry In each book until the last day
prescribed by Section 203 within which the Commissioner is authorized to make
an assessment. The said books and records shall be subject to examination and
inspection by internal revenue officers: Provided, That for income tax purposes,
such examination and inspection shall be made only once in a taxable year, except
in the following cases:
Fraud, irregularity or mistakes, as determined by the Commissioner;
(a)
(b) The taxpayer requests reinvestigation; (c) Verification of compliance with
withholding tax laws and regulations; (d) Verification of capital gains tax liabilities;
and (e) In the exercise of the Commissioner's power under Section 5(B) to obtain
information from other persons in which case, another or separate examination
and inspection may be made. Examination and inspection of books of accounts and

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

417

Prescription of the government's right to assess
Sec. 203. Period of Limitation Upon Assessment and Collection.
— Except as provided in Section 222, internal revenue taxes shall
be assessed within three (3) years after the last day prescribed by
law for the filing of the return, and no proceeding in court without
assessment for the collection of such taxes shall be begun after the
expiration of such period: Provided, That in a case where a return is
filed beyond the period prescribed by law, the three (3)-year period
shall be counted from the day the return was filed. For purposes of
this Section, a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for
the filing thereof shall be considered as filed on such last day.
Sec. 222. Exceptions as to Period of Limitation of Assessment
and Collection of Taxes. —

(a) In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax
or of failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding
in court for the collection of such tax may be filed without assessment,
at any time within ten (10) years after the discovery of the falsity,
fraud or omission: Provided, That in a fraud assessment which has
become final and executory, the fact of fraud shall be judicially taken
cognizance of in the civil or criminal action for the collection thereof.

(b) If before the expiration of the time prescribed in Section 203 for
the assessment of the tax, both the Commissioner and the taxpayer
have agreed in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may
be assessed within the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon
may be extended by subsequent written agreement made before the
expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
(c) Any internal revenue tax which has been assessed within the
period of limitation as prescribed in paragraph (a) hereof may be
collected by distraint or levy or by a proceeding in court within five (5)
years following the assessment of the tax.

other accounting records shall be done in the taxpayer's office or place of business
or in the office of the Bureau of Internal Revenue. All corporations, partnerships
or persons that retire from business shall, within ten (10) days from the date of
retirement or within such period of time as may be allowed by the Commissioner
In special cases, submit their books of accounts, including the subsidiary books
and other accounting records to the Commissioner or any of his deputies for
examination, after which they shall be returned. Corporations and partnerships
contemplating dissolution must notify the Commissioner and shall not be dissolved
until cleared of any tax liability.
Any provision of existing general or special law to the contrary notwithstanding,
the books of accounts and other pertinent records of tax-exempt organizations or
grantees of tax Incentives shall be subject to examination by the Bureau of Internal
Revenue for purposes of ascertaining compliance with the conditions under which
they have been granted tax exemptions or tax incentives, and their tax liability, if
any.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

418

(d) Any internal revenue tax, which has been assessed within the
period agreed upon as provided in paragraph (b) hereinabove, may
be collected by distraint or levy or by a proceeding in court within
the period agreed upon in writing before the expiration of the five
(5)-year period. The period so agreed upon may be extended by
subsequent written agreements made before the expiration of the
period previously agreed upon.

(e) Provided, however, That nothing in the immediately preceding and
paragraph (a) hereof shall be construed to authorize the examination
and investigation or inquiry into any tax return filed in accordance
with the provisions of any tax amnesty law or decree.

•

Assessments made beyond the prescriptive period are not binding
on the taxpayer. (Tupaz v. Ulep, G.R. No. 127777, October 1,
1999)

•

General Rule: The right to assess must be exercised within three
years from:
O

The day the return was actually filed, or

0

From the last day for filing the return (if the return was filed
before the last day prescribed by law),
■

whichever is later.

•

Why "whichever is later"? To benefit the government,
so they have more time to make the assessment on
the taxpayer.

Exceptions:

1.

False or fraudulent return with intent to evade taxes: within
10 years from discovery of the falsity or fraud

2.

Failure or omission to file a return: within 10 years after
discovery of failure or omission to file the return

3.

Waiver of statute of limitations in writing, which must be made
before the expiration of the three-year period of assessment
of taxes: period agreed upon

Our tax law provides a statute of limitations in the collection of
taxes to safeguard taxpayers from any unreasonable examination,
investigation or assessment. Thus, it should be liberally construed
in order to afford protection to the taxpayers.
o

As a corollary, the exceptions to the law on prescription
should perforce be strictly construed. (CIR v. BF Goodrich
Phils., Inc., G.R. No. 104171, February 24, 1999, wherein
the Court said that the negligence or oversight on the part

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

419

of the BIR with regard to make timely assessments cannot
prejudice taxpayers, considering that the prescriptive period
was precisely intended to give them peace of mind.)
O

Note however that surtax on excess profits (IAET) does not
prescribe there being no law providing a prescriptive period
therefore. (CIR v. Ayala Securities Corporation, G.R. No.
L-29485, November 21, 1980)

The prescriptive period applies to all internal revenue taxes,
which includes withholding taxes. (CIR v. La Flor dela Isabela,
G.R. 211289, January 14, 2019, where the assessment against
the withholding agent was deemed prescribed by the SC. In this
case, the CIR erroneously argued that withholding taxes were
more like penalties and therefore not included in the prescriptive
period rules.)
Prescriptive period

•

In computing years, months, and days, follow the rules under the
Administrative Code of 1987, not the Civil Code.7

o

•

A year shall be understood to be twelve calendar months.
Hence, the end of a three-year period from April 15, 2014 is
on April 14, 2017. (CIR v. Primetown Property Group, Inc.,
G.R. No. 162155, August 28, 2007)*

In determining if prescription to assess has indeed set in, the
important date to remember is the date when the demand letter
or notice is released, mailed or sent by the CIR to the taxpayer.
(Basilan Estates, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-22492, September 5,
1967)
O

Provided the release was effected before prescription sets
In, the assessment Is deemed made on time — even if the
taxpayer actually receives it after the prescriptive period.

O

However, the fact that the assessment notice was mailed
before prescription period sets in must be proved with
substantial evidence by the CIR. The presumption that a

’SECTION 31. Legal Periods. — "Year" shall be understood to be twelve
calendar months; "month" of thirty days, unless it refers to a specific calendar
month in which case It shall be computed according to the number of days the
specific month contains; "day," to a day of twenty-four hours and; "night" from
sunrise to sunset.
•A calendar month is "a month designated in the calendar without regard
to the number of days it may contain." It Is the "period of time running from the
beginning of a certain numbered day up to, but not including, the corresponding
numbered day of the next month, and if there is not a sufficient number of days in
the next month, then up to and including the last day of that month."

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

420

letter duly directed and mailed was received in the regular
course of mail cannot be applied if there is no substantial
evidence to prove that the notice was indeed sent.

•

O

Moreso, if the taxpayer makes a direct denial of receipt of a
mailed demand letter, such denial shifts the burden to the
Government to prove that such letter was indeed received
by the taxpayer. (Republic v. CA, G.R. No. L-38540, April 30,
1987)

■

O

Deficiency income tax assessments cannot be enforced
where the tax collector cannot prove that said assessments
were served on the taxpayer. (Nava v. CIR, G.R. No.
L-19470, January 30, 1965)

This is an exception to the general rule that there is a
presumption of receipt of the demand letter by the
taxpayer. (But again, for the presumption to arise, the
government has to at least show with substantial evidence
that the demand was sent on time.)

If the date on which the assessment is due to prescribe falls on
a Saturday, the following day being a Sunday, it is understood
that the Government has until the next succeeding business
day or Monday within which to assess the tax. (CIR v. Western
Pacific Corporation, G.R. No. L-18804, May 27, 1965)

Returns as the starting point of the prescriptive period

•

In order that the filing of a return may serve as the starting point
of the period for the making of an assessment, the return must
be as substantially complete as to include the needed details on
which the full assessment may be made. {Republic v. Marsman
Development Company [MDC], G.R. No. L-18956, April 27, 1972,
wherein MDC failed to show when the returns were actually
made, and assuming that they did file a return, they also failed
to show that the return was substantially complete. Hence, the
Court ruled that the 10-year period would apply, as there was a
"failure to file a return")

If the taxpayer files an amended return which is substantially
different from the original return, the period of prescription of the
right to issue the deficiency assessment should be counted from
the filing of the amended return, and not the original return. (CIR
v. Phoenix Assurance Co., Ltd., G.R. No. L-19727, May 20, 1965)
O

To hold otherwise would pave the way for taxpayers to evade
the payment of taxes by simply reporting in their original
return heavy losses and amending the same after the CIR has
lost his authority to assess the proper tax.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

421

If the taxpayer files the wrong return, it is as though he filed no
return at all. This is true even if all the necessary information was
reflected in the erroneous return. In situations like this, the 10year prescriptive period will apply. (Butuan Sawmill, Inc. v. CA,
G.R. No. L-20601, February 28, 1966, wherein Butuan filed an
income tax return for sales tax purposes).

It is incumbent upon a taxpayer who wants to avail of the defense
of prescription to prove that he indeed submitted a return. If he
fails to do so, the conclusion should be that no such return was
filed, in which case the Government has 10 years within which to
make the corresponding assessments. (Taligaman Lumber Co.,
Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-15716, March 31, 1962)
Fraud, falsity, and the imposition of the 10-year period

•

Fraud is a question of fact and the circumstances constituting fraud
must be alleged and proved in the court. Fraud is never lightly to
be presumed because it is a serious charge. Hence, if fraud is not
proven, the Government cannot use the 10-year period to make
the assessment. (CIR v. Ayala Securities Corporation, G.R. No.
L-29485, March 31, 1976)
O

It is not enough that fraud is alleged in the complaint, it
must be established. (Republic v. Lim De Yu, G.R. L-17438,
April 30, 1964, wherein the BIR was not even sure of the net
income of the taxpayer)

O

Claiming fictitious expenses as deductions is a proof of falsity
or fraud in the income tax return. (Tan Guan v. CTA, G.R.
L-23676, April 27, 1967)

O

An honest mistake as to the valuation of property cannot be
indicative of fraud. (Republic v. Heirs of Jalandoni, G.R. No.
L-18384, September 20, 1965)

There is a difference between "false return" and "fraudulent
return." (Aznar v. CTA, G.R. No. L-20569, August 23, 1974)
O

"False return" merely implies deviation from the truth. It is
usually due to mistake, carelessness, or ignorance.

O

"Fraudulent return" implies intentional or deceitful entry with
intent to evade the taxes due.

O

Be It false or fraudulent, what's the point? Either way, the
period to assess will be 10 years anyway. So, why make a
distinction?
•

The importance lies in the application of the penalty
surcharge. Remember, Aznar also teaches that actual
fraud, not constructive fraud, is subject to the 50%

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

422

penalty surcharge. For the surcharge to apply, it must
be intentional fraud, consisting of deception willfully and
deliberately done or resorted to in order to induce another
to give up some legal right.
Negligence, whether slight or gross, is not equivalent to
the fraud with intent to evade the tax contemplated by
law.
The legal implications of Aznar are the following:

•

Just because the 10-year period kicks in, it doesn't
necessarily mean that the taxpayer will be slapped
with the penalty surcharge. This is what happened
in Aznar — the taxpayer was adjudged to have filed
a false return, but not a fraudulent one. So, the 10year period applies, but he wasn't slapped with the
penalty surcharge.

•

If you were the government and you want to use the
10-year period, it will be easier to impute falsity in
the part of the taxpayer. Falsity is easier to prove
than fraud.

•

The 30% threshold we will learn (or review) in
surcharges doesn't necessarily apply when it comes
to prescription purposes, as it merely raises a
presumption of fraud — which must in the end be
proven by the government.

The basis for allegations of fraud must be stated in the final
assessment notice. (CIR v. Fitness by Design, Inc., G.R. No.
215957, November 9, 2016)
O

It is incumbent on the CIR to clearly state the allegations of
fraud to aid the taxpayer in filling an effective protest. (CIR v.
Fitness by Design, Inc., although I would've liked an explicit
declaration that a FAN will be void without the allegations of
fraud.)

Waivers
Sec. 222
(b) If before the expiration of the time prescribed in Section 203 for
the assessment of the tax, both the Commissioner and the taxpayer
have agreed in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may
be assessed within the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon
may be extended by subsequent written agreement made before the
expiration of the period previously agreed upon.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

423

(d) Any internal revenue tax, which has been assessed within the
period agreed upon as provided in paragraph (b) hereinabove, may
be collected by distraint or levy or by a proceeding in court within
the period agreed upon in writing before the expiration of the five
(5)-year period. The period so agreed upon may be extended by
subsequent written agreements made before the expiration of the
period previously agreed upon.

Waivers apply to both assessments and collection. So, let's tackle
them together.

•

Why go for a waiver?
O

It is sometimes advisable to do so to allow the BIR to fix their
jeopardy assessments (which are usually excessive.)

The taxpayer and the government may extend by mutual
agreement in writing the prescriptive period for the assessment
and collection of taxes.

A waiver of the statute of limitations under the NIRC, to a certain
extent, is a derogation of the taxpayer's right to security against
prolonged and unscrupulous investigations and must therefore
be carefully and strictly construed. (Philippine Journalists, Inc. v.
CIR, G.R. No. 162852, December 16, 2004)
In 2016, the BIR replaced the previous requirements for a valid
waiver (which were previously found in RMO 20-90) with the
following guidelines in RMO 14-2016:
O

The waiver may be, but not necessarily, in the form previously
prescribed in RMO 20-90 or RDAO 05-01. Failure to follow the
forms will not invalidate the waiver, as long as the following
are complied with (it seems these are the new requisites of a
valid waiver):
•

The waiver should be executed before the expiration of
the period to assess or collect taxes.

•

The date of execution shall be specifically indicated in the
waiver.

-

The waiver shall be signed by the taxpayer or his duly
authorized representative. For corporations, the waiver
must be signed by any of its responsible officials.

•

The taxpayer is charged with the burden of ensuring
the waivers are validly executed by its authorized
representative. The authority of the representative
who participated in the audit or investigation shall
not be contested to invalidate the waiver.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

424

.

The expiry date of the period agreed upon to assess/
collect after the regular three-year period should be
indicated.

The waiver need not specify the particular taxes to be
assessed or the amount thereof.

O

■

But for waivers of collection, the particular taxes should
be indicated.

O

It is sufficient that the waiver is in writing. It need not be
notarized.

O

The waiver shall take legal effect and be binding on the
taxpayer upon its execution thereof.

O

The taxpayer has the duty to submit the duly executed waiver
to the relevant BIR officer.

•

The BIR officer shall indicate acceptance of the waiver by
signing the same.
•

■

•

Both the execution of the waiver and the acceptance
must be done prior to the expiration of the period to
assess or collect.

The taxpayer must retain a copy of the accepted waiver.

Take note of CIR v. Next Mobile (G.R. No. 212825, December
7, 2015), where the Supreme Court upheld waivers that did
not comply with either RMO 20-90 or RDAO 05-01 because the
taxpayer was estopped from questioning the validity of five
waivers executed by an unauthorized agent. The Court held that
the taxpayer deliberately executed defective waivers and could
therefore no longer question their validity.
0

Next Mobile does not seem to overturn CIR v. Kudos Metal
Corporation (G.R. No. 178087, May 5, 2010), where the SC
invalidated a waiver signed by an unauthorized company
representative), as the Court still recognized the general rule
that a waiver that does not comply with BIR regulations (then
RMO 20-90 and RDAO 05-01) is invalid. The Court treated
Next Mobile as an exception to the rule "due to its peculiar
circumstances."

•

The taxpayer's waiver of statute of limitations does not cover
taxes that have already prescribed. (Republic v. Lim De Yu, G.R.
L-17438, April 30, 1964)

•

The waiver must not reduce the prescriptive period granted by
law to the detriment of the state. (Republic v. Lopez, G.R. No.
L-18007, March 30, 1963)

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

425

What if the waiver was invalid (like the CIR didn't sign it) but the
taxpayer still paid within the extended period provided by the
waiver, what happens?
O

Taxpayer is estopped from questioning the waiver. It had
impliedly admitted the validity of the said waivers. Had it
believed that the waiver was invalid and that the period to
assess had effectively prescribed, the taxpayer could have
refused to make any payment based on any assessment
against it. (RCBC v. CIR, G.R. No. 170257, September 7,
2011)

•

But see CIR v. Standard Chartered Bank (G.R. No.
192173, July 29, 2015) where the taxpayer impugned
the validity of a waiver and made partial payments of the
assessed deficiency tax. The SC said that the taxpayer is
not estopped as it did not waive the defense of prescription
as regards the tax deficiencies and continued to raise the
defense of prescription during trial.

The requisites for a valid waiver of the three-year (3-year)
prescriptive period for the BIR to assess taxes due in the taxable
year are prescribed by Revenue Memorandum Order (RMO) No. 2090:

n

1. The waiver must be in the proper form prescribed by RMO 2090.

2. The waiver must be signed by the taxpayer himself or his
duly authorized representative. In the case of a corporation, the
waiver must be signed by any of its responsible officials. In case
the authority is delegated by the taxpayer to a representative, such
delegation should be in writing and duly notarized.

3.

The waiver should be duly notarized.

4. The CIR or the revenue official authorized by him must sign
the waiver Indicating that the BIR has accepted and agreed to the
waiver. The date of such acceptance by the BIR should be indicated.
However, before signing the waiver, the CIR or the revenue
official authorized by him must make sure that the waiver is in the
prescribed form, duly notarized, and executed by the taxpayer or his
duly authorized representative.
5. Both the date of execution by the taxpayer and date of
acceptance by the Bureau should be before the expiration of the
period of prescription or before the lapse of the period agreed upon
in case a subsequent agreement is executed.

6. The waiver must be executed In three copies, the original copy
to be attached to the docket of the case, the second copy for the
taxpayer and the third copy for the Office accepting the waiver. The
fact of receipt by the taxpayer of his/her file copy must be indicated

J9JC9B0M

426

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

in the original copy to show that the taxpayer was notified of the
acceptance of the BIR and the perfection of the agreement.
After being assessed by the BIR with alleged deficiency income taxes,
WV Corporation (VW) through Enrique, its President, executed a
waiver of the prescriptive period. The waiver was signed by Revenue
District Officer (RDO) Alfredo. However, the waiver did not state the
date of execution by the taxpayer and date of acceptance by the
BIR. Enrique was also not furnished a copy of the waiver by the BIR.
VW claims that the waiver is void due to non-compliance with RMO
20-90. Hence, the period for assessment had already prescribed.
Moreover, since the assessment involves P2 million, the waiver
should have been signed by the CIR and instead of a mere RDO. On
the other hand, the BIR contends that the requirements of RMO No.
20-90 are merely directory; that the execution of the waiver by VW
was a renunciation of its right to invoke prescription and that the
government cannot be estopped by the mistakes committed by its
revenue officers. Is VW liable? Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: VW is not liable because the waiver is invalid.
The Supreme Court has held that a waiver that does not comply with
BIR regulations is invalid. In this case, the waiver does not comply
with RMO 20-90 because it did not state the date of execution and
the date of acceptance by the BIR. The taxpayer was also not given
a copy of the waiver. As the waiver was invalid, the period to assess
was not extended.

The period to assess can likewise be suspended under Section
223. However, we will tackle this in the section on collection. It'll
be easier to understand it then because by that time, you'll have a
clearer understanding of the bigger picture.
C.

Imposition of Penalties

CHAPTER I
ADDITIONS TO TAX

Sec. 247. General Provisions. —
(a) The additions to the tax or deficiency tax prescribed In this
Chapter shall apply to all taxes, fees and charges imposed in this
Code. The amount so added to the tax shall be collected at the same
time, in the same manner and as part of the tax.

(b) If the withholding agent is the Government or any of
its agencies, political subdivisions or instrumentalities, or a
government-owned or controlled corporation, the employee thereof
responsible for the withholding and remittance of the tax shall be
personally liable for the additions to the tax prescribed herein.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

427

(c) The term "person,"as used in this Chapter, includes an officer or
employee of a corporation who as such officer, employee or member
is under a duty to perform the act in respect of which the violation
occurs.
Penalties and interests apply to ALL taxes, fees and charges
imposed by the NIRC.

Tax laws imposing penalties for delinquencies are intended to
hasten tax payments by punishing evasions or neglect of duty in
respect thereof.
O

It is mandatory to collect penalty and interest at the stated
rate in case of delinquency.

O

The intention of the law is to discourage delay in the payment of
taxes due the Government and, in this sense, the penalty and
interest are not penal but compensatory for the concomitant
use of the funds by the taxpayer beyond the date when he is
supposed to have paid them to the Government. (Philippine
Refining Company v. CA, G.R. No. 118794, May 8, 1996)

Civil penalties

Sec. 248. Civil Penalties. —

(A) There shall be imposed, in addition to the tax required to be paid,
a penalty equivalent to twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount due,
in the following cases:

(1) Failure to file any return and pay the tax due thereon as required
under the provisions of this Code or rules and regulations on the date
prescribed; or

(2) Unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner, filing a return
with an Internal revenue officer other than those with whom the
return is required to be filed; or
(3) Failure to pay the deficiency tax within the time prescribed for its
payment in the notice of assessment; or
(4) Failure to pay the full or part of the amount of tax shown on any
return required to be filed under the provisions of this Code or rules
and regulations, or the full amount of tax due for which no return is
required to be filed, on or before the date prescribed for its payment.

(B) In case of willful neglect to file the return within the period
prescribed by this Code or by rules and regulations, or in case a
false or fraudulent return is willfully made, the penalty to be imposed

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

428

shall be fifty percent (50%) of the tax or of the deficiency tax, in
case, any payment has been made on the basis of such return before
the discovery of the falsity or fraud: Provided, That a substantial
underdeclaration of taxable sales, receipts or income, or a substantial
overstatement of deductions, as determined by the Commissioner
pursuant to the rules and regulations to be promulgated by the
Secretary of Finance, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a false
or fraudulent return: Provided, further, That failure to report sales,
receipts or income in an amount exceeding thirty percent (30%) of
that declared per return, and a claim of deductions in an amount
exceeding (30%) of actual deductions, shall render the taxpayer
liable for substantial underdeclaration of sales, receipts or income or
for overstatement of deductions, as mentioned herein.

•

Civil penalties can be divided into two categories — those with a
25% surcharge, and those with a 50% surcharge.

•

A penalty of 25% on the amount due will be imposed in the
following cases:
1.

Failure to file any return AND pay the tax due;

2.

Filing a return with an internal revenue officer other than
those with whom the return is required to be filed;

3.

Failure to pay the deficiency tax within the time prescribed in
the notice of assessment;

4.

Failure to pay the full or part of the amount of tax stated in
the return (or full amount when no return is required) on or
before the date prescribed for its payment.

o

•

Note: There is NO 25% surcharge when you file on time,
pay the full amount stated in the return, but subsequently
find out that the return filed and the amount paid was
erroneous. See situation 4.1 and 4.2 below.

A penalty of 50% of the deficiency tax will be imposed in the
following cases:

1.

Willful neglect to file a return within the period prescribed by
law

2.

False or fraudulent return is willfully made
a.

There is a prima facie evidence of a false and fraudulent
return when there is substantial underdeclaration of
taxable income orsubstantial overstatement of deductions
(failure to declare an amount exceeding 30% for taxable
income or actual deductions)

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

429

i.

This was used in CIR v. Gonzalez (G.R. No. 177279,
October 13, 2010) where the SC held that there
was prima facie evidence of a false return, therefore
placing the case into one of the exceptions in Section
235 (books to be examined only once a year).

ii.

And was also used in CIR v. Asalus Corporation (G.R.
No. 221590, February 22, 2017), wherein the CIR
was able to show that the amount of undeclared
VATable sales in a taxpayer's VAT returns was more
than 30% and therefore push the prescriptive period
from three years to 10 years.

Note on willful neglect: if the taxpayer voluntarily files the return,
without notice from the BIR, only 25% surcharge shall be imposed
for late filing and late payment of the tax.

o

o

But if the taxpayer files the return only after prior notice in
writing from the BIR, then the 50% surcharge will be imposed.

•

In other words, no demand on the BIR and the taxpayer
pays, albeit late, 25%.

•

With demand by the BIR, 50%.

If your significant other doesn't mind you because he/she's in
law school, is that considered willful neglect?

The 25% surcharge for non-payment of the sales tax is not
imposable where such non-payment arose from a legitimate
dispute on whether an article is subject or not to the sales tax.
{CIR v. Republic Cement, G.R. No. L-35668, August 10, 1983,
wherein Republic Cement's erroneous payment was based on the
original stand of the BIR regarding the classification of cement.
CIR should have abated the surcharge. Read with R.R. 13-2001
on abatement)
o

Where Imposition of a tax statute was controversial, the
taxpayer may not be held liable to pay surcharge and interest.
It should be liable only for tax proper and should not be held
liable for the surcharge and interest. (Cagayan Electric v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-60126, September 25, 1965)

Willful neglect to file the required tax return or the fraudulent
intent to evade the payment of taxes, considering that the same
is accompanied by legal consequences, cannot be presumed.
(CIR v. Air India, G.R. No. 72443, January 29, 1988)
o

The fraud contemplated by law is actual and not constructive.
It must be intentional fraud, consisting of deception willfully
and deliberately done or resorted to in order to induce another

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

430

to give up some legal right. Negligence, whether slight or
gross, is not equivalent to the fraud with intent to give up
some legal right. (Aznar v. CTA, G.R. No. L-20569, August
23, 1974)
Delinquency tax v. Deficiency tax
•

Delinquency tax pops up when the taxpayer fails:
0

To pay the amount of the tax due on any return required to
be filed (/.e.z the taxpayer filed a return but did not pay the
entire amount written in the return); or

0

To pay the deficiency tax on the date appearing in the demand
of the CIR.
•

•

Delinquent taxes can be collected administratively via
distraint or levy or by judicial action. {Sections 205-207,
NIRC)

Deficiency tax is the:
O

Amount by which the tax imposed by law as determined by
the CIR or his representative exceeds the amount shown as
the tax by the taxpayer in his return, or

0

If no amount is shown by the taxpayer, or if no return is
made, then the amount by which the tax as determined by
the CIR or his representative exceeds the amounts previously
assessed (or collected without assessment) as a deficiency.
•

Deficiency taxes must be assessed prior to collection, as
the deficiency has to be determined first.

Interest
Sec. 249. Interest. —
(A) In General. — There shall be assessed and collected on any
unpaid amount of tax, interest at the rate of double the legal interest
rate for loans or forbearance of any money in the absence of an
express stipulation as set by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas from the
date prescribed for payment until the amount is fully paid: Provided,
That in no case shall the deficiency and the delinquency interest
prescribed under Subsections (B) and (C) hereof, be imposed
simultaneously.

(B) Deficiency Interest. — Any deficiency in the tax due, as the
term is defined in this Code, shall be subject to the interest prescribed
in Subsection (A) hereof, which interest shall be assessed and

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

431

collected from the date prescribed for its payment until the full
payment thereof, or upon issuance of a notice and demand by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, whichever comes earlier, (as
amended by TRAIN)

(C) Delinquency Interest. — In case of failure to pay:

(1) The amount of the tax due on any return to be filed, or

(2) The amount of the tax due for which no return is required, or
(3) A deficiency tax, or any surcharge or interest thereon on the due
date appearing in the notice and demand of the Commissioner, there
shall be assessed and collected on the unpaid amount, interest at
the rate prescribed in Subsection (A) hereof until the amount is fully
paid, which interest shall form part of the tax.
(D) Interest on Extended Payment. — If any person required to
pay the tax is qualified and elects to pay the tax on installment under
the provisions of this Code, but fails to pay the tax or any installment
hereof, or any part of such amount or installment on or before
the date prescribed for its payment, or where the Commissioner
has authorized an extension of time within which to pay a tax or
a deficiency tax or any part thereof, there shall be assessed and
collected interest at the rate hereinabove prescribed on the tax or
deficiency tax or any part thereof unpaid from the date of notice and
demand until it is paid.

There are four kinds of interest in this article:

o

General interest;

o

Deficiency;

o

Delinquency; and

o

Extended Payment interest.

TRAIN has lowered the interest from 20% to double the current
legal interest rate (which is 6%). So, the interest to be imposed
is now 12%.
Moreover, TRAIN has specifically stated that deficiency and
delinquency interest shall not be imposed simultaneously.

For general interest, the interest on unpaid taxes is 12% per
annum on any unpaid amount of tax from the date prescribed fQE
payment until the amount is fully paid.
For deficiency interest, the rate is 12% per annum on any
deficiency in the tax due, which interest shall be assed and
collected from the date prescribed for its payment until either full
payment thereof or upon issuance of a notice and demand by the

J9JC9B0M

I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

432

Commissioner or his authorized representative, whichever comes
first. (R.R. 21-2018)

For riAiinquencv interest. 12% per annum on the unpaid amount
in case of failure to pay:
O

Amount of tax due on any return required to be filed, or

O

Amount of tax due for which no return is required, or

O

Deficiency tax, or any surcharge or interest thereon on the
due date appearing in the notice and demand of the CIR, until
the amount is fully paid, which interest shall form part of the
tax. (R.R. 21-2018)

For interest on extended payment, the rate is 12% per annum.
O

This is imposed when a taxpayer is qualified and elects to
pay the tax on installment, but fails to pay the tax or any
installment thereof, or pays it beyond the period of payment;
or

O

CIR has authorized an extension of time within which pay a
tax or a deficiency tax or any part thereof.

Let's look at some situations based on R.R. 12-1999, as amended by
TRAIN

1.

Late filing and late payment of the tax; no BIR intervention/
demand

Lovely Lee Ji-eun forgot to file on April 15. She filed on June 30
after she woke up in a cold sweat and realized her error.
Penalties:

25% surcharge for late filing and late payment

12% general interest from date due up to time paid
Result: Pay the tax due + penalties

2.

Tax return filed on time, but filed through an Internal revenue
officer other than with whom the return is required to be filed.
(Paid in the wrong venue)

Blooming Lee Ji-eun paid on April 15, but she got distracted by
her work in a hotel for the dead and paid to the wrong agent
bank.
Penalties: 25% surcharge only

No interest charge because he paid on time, just at
the wrong place

Result: Pay the surcharge (no need to pay the tax due)

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

3.

433

Late filing and late payment due to taxpayer's willful neglect; i.e.,
did not file, then BIR notified her to pay by a certain time, and
only then did she file and pay her tax.

Lee Ji-eun didn't file on April 15. She didn't care until a demand
letter was sent to her by the BIR to pay by June 30. She paid on
June 30.
Penalties: 50% surcharge

12% general interest from date due (not from
demand) up to time paid
Result: Pay tax, plus penalties

4.

Penalty or penalties for deficiency tax

As a rule, no surcharge is imposed on deficiency tax and on the
basic tax. However, if the amount due inclusive of penalties is not
paid on or before the due date stated on the demand letter, the
corresponding surcharge will be imposed.
4.1

Paid on time, error in computation resulting to deficiency
tax.

Lee Ji-eun filed her income tax return on time (April 15) and paid
P100,000. Upon pre-audit, it was discovered that there was an
error in computation. The correct amount due was P120,000. She
was assessed for deficiency income tax in a letter of demand and
assessment notice, telling her to pay by June 30. She did.
Penalties: 12% deficiency interest imposed on the deficiency tax
from date due up to time paid

No surcharge (Note here that the there are no grounds
for the imposition of the 25% surcharge)

4.2

Paid on time,
deficiency tax.

BIR disallowed deductions resulting to

Seri's Choice, Inc. filed its return and paid on time tax amounting to
P100,000. BIR disallowed its deductions, so their taxable income
went back up like a paraglider swept up by a freak tornado. Seri's
Choice, Inc. was sent a FAN stating that the correct amount due
was P170,000. They failed to protest. BIR sent them a formal
demand telling them to pay by June 30. They did.
Penalties:

12% deficiency interest imposed on deficiency tax
from date due up to time paid
No surcharge (No statutory basis for imposition of the
25% surcharge)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

434

4.3

Paid on time, but return found to be false and fraudulent
resulting to deficiency tax.

McJunahld's, Inc. filed its return on time in April 15 and paid
P175,000 for its income tax (it declared a P500,000 net taxable
income). However, the BIR discovered that it did not report a
taxable income of another P500,000 — a clear case of false and
fraudulent return. This amounted to a deficiency income tax of
another P175,000. They were informed by a PAN, but they failed
to protest. A formal letter of demand and assessment notice was
issued to them on May 31 demanding them to pay by June 30.
They paid.

Penalties: 50% surcharge (deficiency tax is the base)
12% deficiency interest imposed on deficiency tax
from date due up to time paid
5. Late payment of deficiency tax assessed
In general, the deficiency tax assessed shall be paid by the
taxpayer within the time prescribed in the notice and demand,
otherwise, such payer shall be liable for the delinquency interest
incident to the late payment.
Based on 4.3, the amount due (the deficiency assessed plus
the penalties) imposed on McJunahld's was P304,771.67. The
corporation did not pay on June 30, the deadline for the payment
of the assessment. As such, the corporation shall be considered
late in payment of the said assessment. They pay on July 31.

Penalties: 25% surcharge on the P304,771.67 (deficiency tax,
i.e, unpaid amount supposed to be paid on June 30)
12% delinquency interest imposed on the P304,
771.67 (i.e., total unpaid amount due on June 30),
from the day after the payment was due until time of
actual payment

In a case like this, he feels the full force of the law.
First, a 50% surcharge was imposed on him for his fraudulent
return, to be computed from the deficiency tax assessed by the
BIR.
Second, 12% deficiency interest was also imposed on the
deficiency tax assessed by the BIR.

Third, because of his late payment of the deficiency tax and the
corresponding penalties, a 25% surcharge is now imposed on
him based on the total unpaid amount he was supposed to pay.
(Statutory basis; Section 248[A]3, NIRQ

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

435

Fourth, 12% delinquency interest is imposed on the total unpaid
amount he was supposed to pay on June 30.
(Note the difference of the base of the two interest impositions:

The deficiency interest imposition, computed from April 15 to
June 30, is computed based on the deficiency tax.

l|

The delinquency interest imposition, computed from July 1 to July
31, is computed based on the total unpaid amount due on the
prescribed date of payment [June 30])
6.

Computation of 12°/o interest per annum in case of partial or
installment payment of a tax liability. (Based on Section 249,
NIRC)
If a taxpayer requests to pay his income tax liability in installment
and the request is approved, no 25% surcharge shall be imposed
for the late payment of the tax since its deadline for payment has
been duly extended.

However, 12% interest per annum for the extended payment shall
be imposed if the taxpayer does not pay on time, computed based
on the diminishing balance of the "unpaid amount," pursuant to
Section 249(D).

If

If the taxpayer's request for extension of the period within which
to pay is made on or before the deadline prescribed for payment
of the tax due, no 25% surcharge.

o

But if the request is made after the deadline prescribed for
payment, the taxpayer is already late in payment, in which
case, the 25% surcharge shall be imposed, even if payment
of the delinquency be allowed in partial amortization.

Illustration

Actual Liability:
PIO,000,ooo

Arianne

Basis

Betheildah

Basis

1

I.

On April 15,
paid:

5,000,000

1. Late, but
unilaterally
pays the
balance

No
surcharge

12%
interest

0

Filed on
time, but
error in
computation, no BIR
demand.

25%
surcharge

12%
interest

Late
filing, late
payment,
no BIR
demand.

436

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

2. BIR
demands to
pay on June
30, so paid
on June 30

No
surcharge

3. BIR
demands to
pay on June
30, but paid
on July 31

•

•

I

J9JC9B0M

12%
deficiency
interest

25%
surcharge
on unpaid
amount
12%
delinquency
interest
on unpaid
amount

Still filed on
time and error in computation.
BIR demands, but
paid on time
required by
BIR, so 248
(A3) no application.

BIR
demands
but does
NOT pay
on time
required
by BIR,
248 (A3)
applies.

25%
surcharge
12%
deficiency
interest

25%
surcharge
on unpaid
amount

12%
delinquency
interest
on unpaid
amount

Late filing,
late payment. BIR
demands,
but paid
on time
required
by BIR, so
248 (A3)
no application.
BIR
demands
but does
NOT pay
on time
required
by BIR,
248 (A3)
applies.

Analyzing the chart, if you compare situation 1 and situation 2,
they are identical, there is no additional violation. Why?
0

Because surcharge is imposed on deficiency tax (plus
penalties) only when it is NOT paid by the date indicated on
the demand period.

O

So, if you pay within the period in the demand letter, you
will not incur the additional 25% surcharge on the unpaid
deficiency tax (plus penalties),

Also note that there is no 25% surcharge when you file and pay
on time but it is subsequently discovered that there was an error.
Only the interest will be imposed in that case.

Sec. 250. Failure to File Certain Information Returns. — In the
case of each failure to file an information return, statement or list,
or keep any record, or supply any information required by this Code
or by the Commissioner on the date prescribed therefor, unless it Is
shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause and not to willful
neglect, there shall, upon notice and demand by the Commissioner,
be paid by the person failing to file, keep or supply the same, One
thousand pesos (Pl,000) for each failure: Provided, however, That
the aggregate amount to be imposed for all such failures during a
calendar year shall not exceed Twenty-five thousand pesos (P25,000).
Sec. 251. Failure of a Withholding Agent to Collect and Remit
Tax. — Any person required to withhold, account for, and remit any

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

437

tax imposed by this Code or who willfully fails to withhold such tax,
or account for and remit such tax, or aids or abets in any manner to
evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other
penalties provided for under this Chapter, be liable upon conviction
to a penalty equal to the total amount of the tax not withheld, or not
accounted for and remitted.
Sec. 252. Failure of a Withholding Agent to refund Excess
Withholding Tax. — Any employer/withholding agent who fails or
refuses to refund excess withholding tax shall, in addition to the
penalties provided in this Title, be liable to a penalty to the total
amount of refunds which was not refunded to the employee resulting
from any excess of the amount withheld over the tax actually due
on their return.

D. Criminal Action and Other Penalties
Sec. 205. Remedies for the Collection of Delinquent Taxes. —
The civil remedies for the collection of internal revenue taxes, fees or
charges, and any increment thereto resulting from delinquency shall
be:
XXX

(b) By civil or criminal action.
xxx
The judgment in the criminal case shall not only impose the penalty
but shall also order payment of the taxes subject of the criminal case
as finally decided by the Commissioner.

Sec. 220. Form and Mode of Proceeding in Actions Arising
under this Code. — Civil and criminal actions and proceedings
Instituted in behalf of the Government under the authority of this
Code or other law enforced by the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall
be brought in the name of the Government of the Philippines and shall
be conducted by legal officers of the Bureau of Internal Revenue but
no civil or criminal action for the recovery of taxes or the enforcement
of any fine, penalty or forfeiture under this Code shall be filed in court
without the approval of the Commissioner.

No criminal action for the recovery of taxes shall be filed without
the approval of the CIR.
O

However, this required approval can be delegated to and
issued by subordinate officials because the approval of filing
of a criminal action is not one of the non-delegable functions
of the CIR under Section 7 of the NIRC. (People v. Valeriano,
G.R. No. 199480, October 12, 2016, where the Regional

■

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

438

Director of a Revenue Region recommended the filing of a
criminal case against the accused.)
•

The judgment in the criminal case shall not only impose the
penalty, but shall also order payment of the taxes subject of the
criminal case as finally decided by the Commissioner.

•

A criminal complaint is instituted not to demand payment, but to
penalize the taxpayer for violation of the Tax Code. (CIR v. Pascor
Realty and Development Corporation, G.R. No. 128315, June 29,
1999)

•

Acquittal of taxpayer in a criminal case does not exonerate him from
tax liability. His legal duty to pay taxes cannot be affected by his
attempt to evade payment. Said obligation is not a consequence
of the felonious acts charged in the criminal proceeding, nor is it
a mere civil liability arising from a crime that could be wiped out
by the judicial declaration of non-existence of the criminal acts
charged. (Republic v. Patanao, G.R. No. L-22356, July 21, 1967)

•

I

J9JC9B0M

O

Civil liability to pay taxes arises from the fact that, for
instance, one has engaged himself in business. His civil
liability to pay taxes arises not because of any felony but
upon the taxpayer's failure to pay taxes.

0

The criminal liability arises upon failure of the debtor to
satisfy his civil obligation.

Computation and assessment of deficiency taxes is not a
prerequisite for criminal prosecution under the NIRC. Hence,
protesting an assessment cannot stop criminal prosecution under
the NIRC. (Ungab v. Cusi, G.R. No. L-41919, May 30, 1980)
0

When fraudulent tax returns are involved, a proceeding in
court after the collection of such tax may be begun even
without assessment, as can be gleaned from Section 222(A).
(Adamson v. CA, G.R. No. 120935, May 21, 2009)

o

A crime Is complete when the violator has knowingly and
willfully filed a fraudulent return, with intent to evade and
defeat the tax. The perpetration of the crime is grounded
upon knowledge on the part of the taxpayer that he has made
an inaccurate return, and the government's failure to discover
the error and promptly to assess has no connection with the
commission of the crime. (Ungab v. Cusi, G.R. No. L-41919,
May 30, 1980)

•

NOTE however that for criminal prosecution to proceed
before assessment, there must be a prima facie showing
of a wilful attempt to evade taxes. If there was none, then
the criminal case may not be filed without the computation

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

439

and assessment of taxes. {CIR v. CA & Fortune Tobacco
Corporation & Lucio Tan, G.R. No. 119322, June 4, 1996,
where the Court noted that there was a real issue on
what amount of taxes were meant to be paid; hence,
there was no willful attempt to evade taxes)

Willful blindness doctrine: A taxpayer can no longer raise
the defense that the errors on their tax returns are not their
responsibility or that it is the fault of the accountants they hired.
O

Intent to defraud need not be shown for a conviction of tax
evasion.

O

The only thing that needs to be proven is that the taxpayer
was aware of his obligation to file the tax return but he
nevertheless voluntarily, knowingly, and intentionally failed
to file the required returns. (People v. Kintanar, C.T.A. E.B.
No. 006, December 3, 2010, affirmed by the Supreme Court
in G.R. No. 196340; but compare with People v. Judy Anne
Santos, CTA Criminal Case No. 0-012, January 16, 2013)

Based on the Affidavit of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue
(CIR), an Information for failure to file income tax return under
Section 255 of the National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC) was filed
by the Department of Justice (DOJ) with the Manila Regional Tria!
Court (RTC) against XX, a Manila resident.

XX moved to quash the Information on the ground that the RTC
has no jurisdiction in view of the absence of a formal deficiency tax
assessment issued by the CIR.
Is a prior assessment necessary before an Information for violation
of Section 255 of the NIRC could be filed in court? Explain. (2010
Bar Exam)

i

i

Suggested answer: No. Jurisprudence states that an assessment is
not necessary before a criminal case can be filed. A criminal case
is based on the fraudulent intent and criminal acts of the taxpayer.
The crime Is complete when the taxpayer fraudulently fails to file his
return, with intent to evade tax. An assessment is not needed.

Explain the following statement:
The acquittal of the taxpayer In a criminal action under the Tax Code
does not necessarily result In a exoneration of said taxpayer from his
civil liability to pay taxes. (2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Gladly. A taxpayer's legal duty to pay taxes
cannot be affected by his attempt to evade payment. Said obligation
is not a consequence of the felonious acts charged in the criminal

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

440

proceeding, nor is it a mere civil liability arising from a crime that
could be wiped out by the judicial declaration of non-existence of the
acts charged. Hence, an acquittal does not necessarily result in the
exoneration of the taxpayer from his civil liability to pay taxes.

The BIR Commissioner, in his relentless enforcement of the Run
After Tax Evaders (RATE) program, filed with the Department of
Justice (DOJ) charges against a movie and television celebrity.
The Commissioner alleged that the celebrity earned around PhP 50
million in fees from product endorsements in 2016 which she failed to
report in her income tax and VAT returns for said year. The celebrity
questioned the proceeding before the DOJ on the ground that she
was denied due process since the BIR never issued any Preliminary
Assessment Notice (PAN) or a Final Assessment Notice (FAN), both
of which are required under Section 228 of the NIRC whenever the
Commissioner finds that proper taxes should be assessed.

Is the celebrity's contention tenable? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No. Jurisprudence states that an assessment is
not necessary before a criminal case can be filed. A criminal case is
based on the fraudulent intent and criminal acts of the taxpayer. An
assessment is not needed.

I
=

I

The BIR assessed Kosco, Inc., an importer of food products,
deficiency income and value-added taxes, plus 50% surcharge after
determining that Kosco, Inc. had under-declared its sales by an
amount exceeding 30% of that declared in its income tax and VAT
returns. Kosco, Inc. denied the alleged under-declaration, protested
the deficiency assessment for income and value-added taxes and
challenged the imposition of the 50% surcharge on the ground that
the surcharge may only be imposed if Kosco, Inc. fails to pay the
deficiency taxes within the time prescribed for their payment in the
notice of assessment.
(a) Is the imposition of the 50% surcharge proper?

(b) If your answer to a) Is yes, may Kosco, Inc. enter Into a
compromise with the BIR for reduction of the amount of surcharge
to be paid? (2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

Yes, it is proper. Under the Tax Code, an underdeclaration of
more than 30% constitutes substantial underdeclaration which,
in turn, is prima facie evidence of the filing of a false or fraudulent
return which is subject to the 50% surcharge.

b)

Yes, Kosco may still enter into a compromise. Under the
Tax Code, what may not be compromised are criminal tax
fraud cases which have been confirmed by the CIR or his/her
representatives. In this case, the fraud is merely prima facie and
hence not yet confirmed by the CIR.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

441

Prescription in Criminal Cases
I
Sec. 281. Prescription for Violations of any Provision of this
Code. — All violations of any provision of this Code shall prescribe
after five (5) years.

Prescription shall begin to run from the day of the commission of the
violation of the law, and if the same be not known at the time, from
the discovery thereof and the institution of judicial proceedings for its
investigation and punishment.

I

i

The prescription shall be interrupted when proceedings are instituted
against the guilty persons and shall begin to run again if the
proceedings are dismissed for reasons not constituting jeopardy.

i

The term of prescription shall not run when the offender is absent
from the Philippines.

The prescriptive period for criminal cases is five years. When
it begins to run depends on the nature of the violation of the
taxpayer:

o

If failure or refusal to pay taxes due: from the service of final
notice and demand for payment of the deficiency taxes upon
the taxpayer.

o

If filing of false or fraudulent returns: from the discovery and
institution of judicial proceedings for its investigation and
punishment.

•

In the latter case, isn't this one-sided in favor of the
Government? Yes, it is. It would seem that cases of
fraudulent/false returns are practically imprescriptible for
as long as the period from the discovery and institution of
judicial proceedings for its investigation and punishment,
up to the filing of the information in court does not exceed
five years. But, that is what the law says. (Lim, Sr. v. CA,
G.R. No. L-48134, October 18, 1990)

Informer's reward

Sec. 282. Informer's Reward to Persons Instrumental in the
Discovery of Violations of the National Internal Revenue Code
and in the Discovery and Seizure of Smuggled Goods. —
(A) For Violations of the National Internal Revenue Code. —
Any person, except an internal revenue official or employee, or other
public official or employee, or his relative within the sixth degree of
consanguinity, who voluntarily gives definite and sworn information,

!

J9JC9B0M

1

442

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

not yet in the possession of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, leading
to the discovery of frauds upon the internal revenue laws or violations
of any of the provisions thereof, thereby resulting in the recovery of
revenues, surcharges and fees and/or the conviction of the guilty
party and/or the imposition of any of the fine or penalty, shall be
rewarded in a sum equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the revenues,
surcharges or fees recovered and/or fine or penalty imposed and
collected or One Million Pesos (Pl,000,000) per case, whichever is
lower.

The same amount of reward shall also be given to an informer
where the offender has offered to compromise the violation of
law committed by him and his offer has been accepted by the
Commissioner and collected from the offender: Provided, That should
no revenue, surcharges or fees be actually recovered or collected,
such person shall not be entitled to a reward: Provided, further, That
the information mentioned herein shall not refer to a case already
pending or previously investigated or examined by the Commissioner
or any of his deputies, agents or examiners, or the Secretary of
Finance or any of his deputies or agents: Provided, finally, That the
reward provided herein shall be paid under rules and regulations
issued by the Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the
Commissioner.

(B) For Discovery and Seizure of Smuggled Goods. — To
encourage the public to extend full cooperation in eradicating
smuggling, a cash reward equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the fair
market value of the smuggled and confiscated goods or One Million
Pesos (Pl,000,000) per case, whichever is lower, shall be given to
persons instrumental in the discovery and seizure of such smuggled
goods.
The cash rewards of informers shall be subject to income tax,
collected as a final withholding tax, at a rate of ten percent (10%).

The provisions of the foregoing Subsections notwithstanding, all
public officials, whether incumbent or retired, who acquired the
information in the course of the performance of their duties during
their incumbency, are prohibited from claiming informer's reward.
•

The law provides rewards for informers.

•

An informer is any qualified person who voluntarily provides
definite and sworn information not yet in the possession of the
BIR nor of public knowledge, leading to the discovery of frauds
upon the NIRC, resulting to the recovery of revenues and fees
and/or conviction of the guilty party and/or imposition of any fine
or penalty. (R.R. 16-2010)

•

The Information must be novel and subsequently prove effective.
(Lihaylihay v. Treasurer of the Philippines, G.R. No. 192223,
July 23, 2018, where a self-proclaimed descendant of Lapu-

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

443

Lapu claimed to have tipped off the BIR to the gold stolen by the
dictator Marcos)
The grant of an informer's reward for the discovery, conviction,
and punishment of tax offenses is a discretionary quasi-judicial
matter that cannot be the subject of a writ of mandamus. It is not
a legally mandated ministerial duty. (Lihayiihay v. Treasurer)
The following are disqualified to avail of the Informer's Reward:

O

A BIR official or any other incumbent public official or
employee;

O

Relative within the 6th civil degree of consanguinity of a BIR
official or employee, or other public official or employee;

O

Though already retired separated from service, BIR
officials or employees or other public officers who acquired
the information in the course of their duties during their
incumbency. (R.R. 16-2010)

Below are the codal provisions for the different crimes under the
NIRC.
CHAPTER II
CRIMES, OTHER OFFENSES AND FORFEITURES

Sec. 253. General Provisions. —

(a) Any person convicted of a crime penalized by this Code shall,
in addition to being liable for the payment of the tax, be subject to
the penalties imposed herein: Provided, That payment of the tax
due after apprehension shall not constitute a valid defense in any
prosecution for violation of any provision of this Code or in any action
for the forfeiture of untaxed articles.

(b) Any person who willfully aids or abets in the commission of a
crime penalized herein or who causes the commission of any such
offense by another shall be liable in the same manner as the principal.
(c) If the offender is not a citizen of the Philippines, he shall be
deported immediately after serving the sentence without further
proceedings for deportation.

If he is a public officer or employee, the maximum penalty prescribed
for the offense shall be imposed and, in addition, he shall be dismissed
from the public service and perpetually disqualified from holding any
public office, to vote and to participate in any election.

If the offender is a Certified Public Accountant, his certificate as a
Certified Public Accountant shall, upon conviction, be automatically
revoked or cancelled.

J9JC9B0M

444

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(d) In the case of associations, partnerships or corporations, the
penalty shall be imposed on the partner, president, general manager,
branch manager, treasurer, officer-in-charge, and the employees
responsible for the violation.

(e) The fines to be imposed for any violation of the provisions of
this Code shall not be lower than the fines imposed herein or twice
the amount of taxes, interest and surcharges due from the taxpayer,
whichever is higher.

SEC. 254. Attempt to Evade or Defeat Tax. — Any person who
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax imposed
under this Code or the payment thereof shall, in addition to other
penalties provided by law, upon conviction thereof, be punished with
a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000) but
not more than Ten million pesos (P10,000,000), and imprisonment
of not less than six (6) years but not more than ten (10) years:
Provided, That the conviction or acquittal obtained under this Section
shall not be a bar to the filing of a civil suit for the collection of taxes.
(As amended by TRAIN)
Sec. 255. Failure to File Return, Supply Correct and Accurate
Information, Pay Tax Withhold and Remit Tax and Refund
Excess Taxes Withheld on Compensation. — Any person required
under this Code or by rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
to pay any tax, make a return, keep any record, or supply correct the
accurate information, who willfully fails to pay such tax, make such
return, keep such record, or supply correct and accurate information,
or withhold or remit taxes withheld, or refund excess taxes withheld
on compensation, at the time or times required by law or rules and
regulations shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than Ten
thousand pesos (PIO,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than
one (1) year but not more than ten (10) years.

Any person who attempts to make it appear for any reason that he
or another has in fact filed a return or statement, or actually files a
return or statement and subsequently withdraws the same return
or statement after securing the official receiving seal or stamp of
receipt of internal revenue office wherein the same was actually filed
shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine of not less than
Ten thousand pesos (P10,000) but not more than Twenty thousand
pesos (P20,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than one (1)
year but not more than three (3) years.

Sec. 256. Pena! Liability of Corporations. — Any corporation,
association or general co-partnership liable for any of the acts or
omissions penalized under this Code, in addition to the penalties
imposed herein upon the responsible corporate officers, partners,
or employees shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be
punished by a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000)
but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000).

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

445

Sec. 257. Penal Liability for Making False Entries, Records or
Reports, or Using Falsified or Fake Accountable Forms. —
(A) Any financial officer or independent Certified Public Accountant
engaged to examine and audit books of accounts of taxpayers under
Section 232(A) and any person under his direction who:

(1) Willfully falsifies any report or statement bearing on any
examination or audit, or renders a report, including exhibits,
statements, schedules or other forms of accountancy work which
has not been verified by him personally or under his supervision or
by a member of his firm or by a member of his staff in accordance
with sound auditing practices; or
(2) Certifies financial statements of a business enterprise containing
an essential misstatement of facts or omission in respect of the
transactions, taxable income, deduction and exemption of his client;
or
(B) Any person who:

(1) Not being an independent Certified Public Accountant according
to Section 232(B) or a financial officer, examines and audits books of
accounts of taxpayers; or
(2) Offers to sign and certify financial statements without audit; or
(3) Offers any taxpayer the use of accounting bookkeeping records
for internal revenue purposes not in conformity with the requirements
prescribed in this Code or rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder; or
(4) Knowingly makes any false entry or enters any false or fictitious
name in the books of accounts or record mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs; or

(5) Keeps two (2) or more sets of such records or books of accounts;
or
(6) In any way commits an act or omission, in violation of the
provisions of this Section; or
(7) Fails to keep the books of accounts or records mentioned in
Section 232 in a native language, English or Spanish, or to make a
true and complete translation as required in Section 234 of this Code,
or whose books of accounts or records kept in a native language,
English or Spanish, and found to be at material variance with books
or records kept by him in another language; or

(8) Willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any
tax imposed under this Code, or knowingly uses fake or falsified
revenue official receipts, Letters of Authority, certificates authorizing
registration, Tax Credit Certificates, Tax Debit Memoranda and other
accountable forms shall, upon conviction for each act or omission,
be punished by a fine not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000)
but not more than One hundred pesos (P100,000) and suffer

I !
I-

i|

J9JC9B0M

1

446

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more than six
(6) years.

If the offender is a Certified Public Accountant, his certificate as
a Certified Public Accountant shall be automatically revoked or
cancelled upon conviction.
In the case of foreigners, conviction under this Code shall result in
his immediate deportation after serving sentence, without further
proceedings for deportation.
Sec. 258. Unlawful Pursuit of Business. — Any person who carries
on any business for which an annual registration fee is imposed
without paying the tax as required by law shall, upon conviction for
each act or omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Five
thousand pesos (P5,000) but not more than Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than six (6) months
but not more than two (2) years: Provided, That in the case of a
person engaged in the business of distilling, rectifying, repacking,
compounding or manufacturing any article subject to excise tax, he
shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be punished by a fine
of not less than Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000) but not more than
Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less
than two (2) years but not more than four (4) years.

Sec. 259. Illegal Collection of Foreign Payments. — Any person
who knowingly undertakes the collection of foreign payments as
provided under Section 67 of this Code without having obtained a
license therefor, or without complying with its implementing rules
and regulations, shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be
punished by a fine of not less than Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000)
but not more than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) and suffer
imprisonment of not less than one (1) year but not more than two
(2) years.

Sec. 260. Unlawful Possession of Cigarette Paper in Bobbins
or Rolls, Etc. — It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
possession cigarette paper in bobbins or rolls, cigarette tipping paper
or cigarette filter tips, without the corresponding authority therefor
issued by the Commissioner.
Any person, Importer, manufacturer of cigar and cigarettes, who
has been found guilty under this Section, shall, upon conviction for
each act or omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Twenty
thousand pesos (P20,000) but not more than One hundred thousand
pesos (P100,000) and suffer imprisonment for a term of not less
than six (6) years and one (1) day but not more than twelve (12)
years.

Sec. 261. Unlawful Use of Denatured Alcohol. — Any person
who for the purpose of manufacturing any beverage, uses denatured
alcohol or alcohol specially denatured to be used for motive power
or withdrawn under bond for Industrial uses or alcohol knowingly
misrepresented to be denatured to be unfit for oral intake or who

!

I

4

>

r
i

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

447

knowingly sells or offers for sale any beverage made in whole or in
part from such alcohol or who uses such alcohol for the manufacture
of liquid medicinal preparations taken internally, or knowingly sells
or offers for sale such preparations containing as an ingredient such
alcohol, shall upon conviction for each act or omission be punished
by a fine of not less than Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000) but
not more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000) and suffer
imprisonment for a term of not less than six (6) years and one (1)
day but not more than twelve (12) years.
Any person who shall unlawfully recover or attempt to recover by
distillation or other process any denatured alcohol or who knowingly
sells or offers for sale, conceals or otherwise disposes of alcohol
so recovered or redistilled shall be subject to the same penalties
imposed under this Section.
Sec. 262. Shipment or Removal of Liquor or Tobacco Products
under False Name or Brand or as an Imitation of any Existing
or Otherwise Known Product Name or Brand. — Any person
who ships, transports or removes spirituous, compounded or
fermented liquors, wines or any manufactured products of tobacco
under any other than the proper name or brand known to the trade
as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the cask, bottle
or package containing the same or as an imitation of any existing or
otherwise known product name or brand or causes such act to be
done, shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be punished
by a fine of not less than Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000) but
not more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000) and suffer
imprisonment of not less than six (6) years and one (1) day but not
more than twelve (12) years.
Sec. 263. Unlawful Possession or Removal of Articles Subject
to Excise Tax without Payment of the Tax. — Any person who
owns and/or is found in possession of imported articles subject
to excise tax, the tax on which has not been paid in accordance
with law, or any person who owns and/or is found in possession of
imported tax-exempt articles other than those to whom they are
legally issued shall be punished by:

(a) A fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
but not more than Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) and
Imprisonment of not less than sixty (60) days but not more than one
hundred (100) days if the appraised value, to be determined in the
manner prescribed In Republic Act No. 10863, otherwise known as
the 'Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA),' including duties
and taxes, of the articles does not exceed Two hundred fifty thousand
pesos (P250,000.00) (as amended by R.A. 11467)

(b) A fine of not less than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000) but not more
than Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000) and suffer imprisonment of
not less than two (2) years but not more than four (4) years, if the
appraised value, to be determined in the manner prescribed in the
Tariff and Customs Code, including duties and taxes, of the articles

I

I

I

J9JC9B0M

448

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

exceeds One thousand pesos (Pl,000) but does not exceed Fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000);
(c) A fine of not less than Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000) but not
more than Sixty thousand pesos (P60,000) and suffer imprisonment
of not less than four (4) years but not more than six (6) years, if the
appraised value, to be determined in the manner prescribed in the
Tariff and Customs Code, including duties and taxes of the articles is
more than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) but does not exceed One
hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000); or

(d) A fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000) but not
more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000) and suffer
imprisonment of not less than ten (10) years but not more than
twelve (12) years, if the appraised value, to be determined in the
manner prescribed in the Tariff and Customs Code, including duties
and taxes, of the articles exceeds One hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P150,000).
Any person who is found in possession of locally manufactured
articles subject to excise tax, the tax on which has not been paid
in accordance with law, or any person who is found in possession
of such articles which are exempt from excise tax other than those
to whom the same is lawfully issued shall be punished with a fine
of not less than (10) times the amount of excise tax due on the
articles found but not less than Five hundred pesos (P500) and suffer
imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more than four
(4) years.

Any manufacturer, owner or person in charge of any article subject to
excise tax who removes or allows or causes the unlawful removal of
any such articles from the place of production or bonded warehouse,
upon which the excise tax has not been paid at the time and in the
manner required, and any person who knowingly aids or abets in
the removal of such articles as aforesaid, or conceals the same after
illegal removal shall, for the first offense, be punished with a fine of
not less than ten (10) times the amount of excise tax due on the
articles but not less than One thousand pesos (Pl,000) and suffer
imprisonment of not less than one (1) year but not more than two
(2) years.
The mere unexplained possession of articles subject to excise tax,
the tax on which has not been paid in accordance with law, shall be
punishable under this Section.

SEC. 263-A. Selling of Heated Tobacco Products and Vapor
Products at a Price Lower Than the Combined Excise and
Value-Added Taxes. — Any person who sells heated tobacco
products and vapor products at a price lower than the combined
excise and value-added taxes shall be punished with a fine of not less
than ten (10) times the amount of excise tax plus value-added tax
due but not less than Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00)
nor more than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), and

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

449

Imprisonment of not less than four (4) years but not more than six
(6) years, (as amended by R.A. 11467)

Sec. 264. Failure or refusal to Issue Receipts or Sales or
Commercial Invoices, Violations related to the Printing of
such Receipts or Invoices and Other Violations. —

(a) Any person who, being required under Section 237 to issue
receipts or sales or commercial invoices, fails or refuses to issue
such receipts of invoices, issues receipts or invoices that do not
truly reflect and/or contain all the information required to be shown
therein, or uses multiple or double receipts or invoices, shall, upon
conviction for each act or omission, be punished by a fine of not less
than One thousand pesos (Pl,000) but not more than Fifty thousand
pesos (P50,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than two (2)
years but not more than four (4) years.

(b) Any person who commits any of the acts enumerated hereunder
shall be penalized with a fine of not less than Five hundred thousand
pesos (P500,000) but not more than Ten million pesos (PIO,000,000),
and imprisonment of not less than six (6) years but not more than
ten (10) years:

i:

II'

(1) Printing of receipts or sales or commercial invoices without
authority from the Bureau of Internal Revenue; or

(2) Printing of double or multiple sets of invoices or receipts;
(3) Printing of unnumbered receipts or sales or commercial invoices,
not bearing the name, business style, Taxpayer Identification
Number, and business address of the person or entity; or
(4) Printing of other fraudulent receipts or sales or commercial
invoices, (as amended by TRAIN)
SEC. 264-A. Failure to Transmit Sales Data Entered on
Cash Register Machine (CRM)/Point of Sales System (POS)
Machines to the BIR's Electronic Sales Reporting System.
— Any taxpayer required to transmit sales data to the Bureau's
electronic sales reporting system but fails to do so, shall pay, for
each day of violation, a penalty amounting to one-tenth of one
percent (1/10 of 1%) of the annual net income as reflected in the
taxpayer's audited financial statement for the second year preceding
the current taxable year for each day of violation or Ten thousand
pesos (P10,000), whichever is higher; Provided, That should the
aggregate number of days of violation exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days within a taxable year, an additional penalty of permanent
closure of the taxpayer shall be imposed: Provided, further, That if
the failure to transmit Is due to force majeure or any causes beyond
the control of the taxpayer the penalty shall not apply, (as amended
by TRAIN)
SEC. 264-B. Purchase, Use, Possession, Sale or Offer to
Sell, Installment, Transfer, Update, Upgrade, Keeping or
Maintaining of Sales Suppression Devices. — Any person who

li

J9JC9B0M

450

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

shall purchase, use, possess, sell or offer to sell, install, transfer,
update, upgrade, keep, or maintain any software or device designed
for, or is capable of: (a) suppressing the creation of electronic records
of sale transactions that a taxpayer is required to keep under existing
tax laws and/or regulations; or (b) modifying, hiding, or deleting
electronic records of sales transactions and providing a ready means
of access to them, shall be punished by a fine of not less than Five
hundred thousand pesos (P500,000) but not more than Ten million
pesos (PIO,000,000), and suffer imprisonment of not less than
two (2) years but not more than four (4) years: Provided, That a
cumulative suppression of electronic sales record in excess of the
amount of Fifty million pesos (P50,000,000) shall be considered as
economic sabotage and shall be punished in the maximum penalty
provided for under this provision, (as amended by TRAIN)
Sec. 265. Offenses Relating to Stamps. — Any person who
commits any of the acts enumerated hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than Ten Million
pesos (P10,000,000) but not more than Five hundred million pesos
(P500,000,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than five (5)
years but not more than eight (8) years: (a) making, importing,
selling, using or possessing without express authority from the
Commissioner, any dye for printing or making stamps, labels,
tags or playing cards; (b) Erasing the cancellation marks of any
stamp previously used, or altering the written figures or letters or
cancellation marks on internal revenue stamps; (c) Possessing false,
counterfeit, restored or altered stamps, labels or tags or causing the
commission of any such offense by another; (d) Selling or offering
for sale any box or package containing articles subject to excise tax
with false, spurious or counterfeit stamps or labels or selling from
any such fraudulent box, package or container as aforementioned;
or (e) Giving away or accepting from another, or selling, buying or
using containers on which the stamps are not completely destroyed.

Provided, That the cumulative possession of false/counterfelt/
recycled tax stamps in excess of the amount of Fifty million pesos
(P50,000,000.00) shall be punishable by a fine of Five hundred
million pesos (P500,000,000.00) or up to ten (10) times the value
of the illegal stamps seized, whichever is higher, and imprisonment
of not less than ten (10) years but not more than fifteen (15) years.
(As amended by R.A. 11467)

Sec. 266. Failure to Obey Summons. — Any person who, being
duly summoned to appear to testify, or to appear and produce books
of accounts, records, memoranda or other papers, or to furnish
information as required under the pertinent provisions of this Code,
neglects to appear or to produce such books of accounts, records,
memoranda or other papers, or to furnish such information, shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than Five thousand
pesos (P5,000) but not more than ten thousand pesos (P10,000) and
suffer imprisonment of not less than one (1) year but not more than
two (2) years.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

451

Sec. 267. Declaration under Penalties of Perjury. — Any
declaration, return and other statement required under this Code,
shall, in lieu of an oath, contain a written statement that they are
made under the penalties of perjury. Any person who willfully files a
declaration, return or statement containing information which is not
true and correct as to every material matter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the penalties prescribed for perjury under the Revised
Penal Code.
Sec. 268. Other Crimes and Offenses. —

(A) Misdedaration or Misrepresentation of Manufacturers
Subject to Excise Tax. — Any manufacturer who, in violation of
the provisions of Title VI of this Code, misdeclares in the sworn
statement required therein or in the sales invoice, any pertinent
data or information shall be punished by a summary cancellation or
withdrawal of the permit to engage in business as a manufacturer of
articles subject to excise tax.
(B) Forfeiture of Property Used in Unlicensed Business or Dies
Used for Printing False Stamps, Etc. — All chattels, machinery,
and removable fixtures of any sort used in the unlicensed production
of articles subject to excise tax shall be forfeited.
Dies and other equipment used for the printing or making of any
internal revenue stamp, label or tag which is in imitation of or
purports to be a lawful stamp, label or tag shall also be forfeited.

(C) Forfeiture of Goods Illegally Stored or Removed. — Unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the Commissioner, all articles
subject to excise tax should not be stored or allowed to remain in the
distillery warehouse, bonded warehouse or other place where made,
after the tax thereon has been paid; otherwise, all such articles shall
be forfeited.
Articles withdrawn from any such place or from customs custody or
imported into the country without the payment of the required tax
shall likewise be forfeited.

CHAPTER III
PENALTIES IMPOSED ON PUBLIC OFFICERS
Sec. 269. Violations Committed by Government Enforcement
Officers. — Every official, agent, or employee of the Bureau of
Internal Revenue or any other agency of the Government charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of this Code, who is guilty
of any of the offenses herein below specified shall, upon conviction
for each act or omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000) but not more than One hundred thousand
pesos (P100,000) and suffer imprisonment of not less than ten (10)
years but not more than fifteen (15) years and shall likewise suffer
an additional penalty of perpetual disqualification to hold public
office, to vote, and to participate in any public election:

I
i

J9JC9B0M

452

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(a) Extortion or willful oppression through the use of his office
or willful oppression and harassment of a taxpayer who refused,
declined, turned down or rejected any of his offers specified in
paragraph (d) hereof;

(b) Knowingly demanding or receiving any fee, other or greater
sums that are authorized by law or receiving any fee, compensation
or reward, except as by law prescribed, for the performance of any
duty;
(c) Willfully neglecting to give receipts, as by law required, for any
sum collected in the performance of duty or willfully neglecting to
perform any other duties enjoined by law;

(d) Offering or undertaking to accomplish, file or submit a report or
assessment on a taxpayer without the appropriate examination of the
books of accounts or tax liability, or offering or undertaking to submit
a report or assessment less than the amount due the Government
for any consideration or compensation, or conspiring or colluding
with another or others to defraud the revenues or otherwise violate
the provisions of this Code;

(e) Neglecting or by design permitting the violation of the law by
any other person;
(f) Making or signing any false entry or entries in any book, or
making or signing any false certificate or return;

(g) Allowing or conspiring or colluding with another to allow the
unauthorized retrieval, withdrawal or recall of any return, statement
or declaration after the same has been officially received by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue;

(h) Having knowledge or information of any violation of this Code
or of any fraud committed on the revenues collectible by the Bureau
of Internal Revenue, failure to report such knowledge or information
to their superior officer, or failure to report as otherwise required by
law;
(I) Without the authority of law, demanding or accepting or
attempting to collect, directly or indirectly, as payment or otherwise
any sum of money or other thing of value for the compromise,
adjustment or settlement of any charge or complaint for any violation
or alleged violation of this Code; and
(j) Deliberate failure to act on the application for refunds within the
prescribed period provided under Section 112 of this Act.

paragraph
Provided, That the provisions of the foregoing
notwithstanding, any internal revenue officer for which a prima facie
case of grave misconduct has been established shall, after due notice
and hearing of the administrative case and subject to Civil Service
Laws, be dismissed from the revenue service: Provided, further, That
the term 'grave misconduct/ as defined in the Civil Service Law,

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

453

shall include the issuance of fake letters of authority and receipts,
forgery of signature, usurpation of authority and habitual issuance of
unreasonable assessments, (as amended by TRAIN)

Sec. 270. Unlawful Divulgence of Information. — Except as
provided in Sections 6(F) and 71 of this Code and Section 26 of
Republic Act No. 6388, any officer or employee of the Bureau of
Internal Revenue who divulges to any person or makes known in any
other manner than may be provided by law information regarding the
business, income, or estate of any taxpayer, the secrets, operation,
style or work, or apparatus of any manufacturer or producer, or
confidential information regarding the business of any taxpayer,
knowledge of which was acquired by him in the discharge of his
official duties, shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be
punished by a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000)
but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000), or
suffer imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more
than five (5) years, or both.
Any officer or employee of the Bureau of Internal Revenue who
divulges or makes known in any other manner to any person other
than the requesting foreign tax authority information obtained from
banks and financial institutions pursuant to Section 6(F), knowledge
or information acquired by him in the discharge of his official duties,
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than Fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000) but not more than One hundred thousand
pesos (P100,000), or suffer imprisonment of not less than two (2)
years but not more than five (5) years, or both.

Sec. 271. Unlawful Interest of Revenue Law Enforcers in
Business. — Any internal revenue officer who Is or shall become
interested, directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or
importation of any article subject to excise tax under Title VI of this
Code or in the manufacture or repair or sale, of any die for printing,
or making of stamps, or labels shall upon conviction for each act or
omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Five thousand pesos
(P5,000) but not more than Ten thousand pesos (PIO,000), or suffer
Imprisonment of not less than two (2) years and one (1) day but not
more than four (4) years, or both.

Sec. 272. Violation of Withholding Tax Provision. — Every officer
or employee of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines or
any of its agencies and instrumentalities, its political subdivisions, as
well as government-owned or controlled corporations, Including the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), who, under the provisions of this
Code or rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, is charged
with the duty to deduct and withhold any internal revenue tax and
to remit the same in accordance with the provisions of this Code and
other laws is guilty of any offense herein below specified shall, upon
conviction for each act or omission be punished by a fine of not less
than Five thousand pesos (P5,000) but not more than Fifty thousand
pesos (P50,000) or suffer imprisonment of not less than six (6)

J9JC9B0M

454

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

months and one (1) day but not more than two (2) years, or both:
(a) Failing or causing the failure to deduct and withhold any internal
revenue tax under any of the withholding tax laws and implementing
rules and regulations; (b) Failing or causing the failure to remit
taxes deducted and withheld within the time prescribed by law,
and implementing rules and regulations; and (c) Failing or causing
the failure to file return or statement within the time prescribed,
or rendering or furnishing a false or fraudulent return or statement
required under the withholding tax laws and rules and regulations.
Sec. 273. Penalty for Failure to Issue and Execute Warrant. —
Any official who fails to issue or execute the warrant of distraint or
levy within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time prescribed
in Section 207 or who is found guilty of abusing the exercise thereof
by competent authority shall be automatically dismissed from the
service after due notice and hearing.

CHAPTER IV

OTHER PENAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 274. Penalty for Second and Subsequent Offenses. — In
the case of reincidence, the maximum of the penalty prescribed for
the offense shall be imposed.
Sec. 275. Violation of Other Provisions of this Code or Rufes
and Regulations in General. — Any person who violates any
provision of this Code or any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Department of Finance, for which no specific penalty is provided by
law, shall, upon conviction for each act or omission, be punished
by a fine of not more than One thousand pesos (Pl,000) or suffer
imprisonment of not more than six (6) months, or both.

Sec. 276. Penalty for Selling, Transferring, Encumbering or
in Any Way Disposing of Property Placed Under Constructive
Distraint. — Any taxpayer, whose property has been placed under
constructive distraint, who sells, transfers, encumbers or in any way
disposes of said property, or any part thereof, without the knowledge
and consent of the Commissioner, shall, upon conviction for each act
or omission, be punished by a fine of not less than twice the value
of the property so sold, encumbered or disposed of but not less than
Five Thousand pesos (P5,000), or suffer imprisonment of not less
than two (2) years and one (1) day but not more than four (4) years,
of both.
Sec. 277. Failure to Surrender Property Placed Under Distraint
and Levy. — Any person having in his possession or under his
control any property or rights to property, upon which a warrant of
constructive distraint, or actual distraint and levy has been issued
shall, upon demand by the Commissioner or any of his deputies
executing such warrant, surrender such property or right to property
to the Commissioner or any of his deputies, unless such property or
right is, at the time of such demand, subject to an attachment or
execution under any judicial process.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

455

Any person who fails or refuses to surrender any of such property or
right shall be liable in his own person and estate to the Government in
a sum equal to the value of the property or rights not so surrendered
but not exceeding the amount of the taxes (including penalties and
interest) for the collection of which such warrant had been issued,
together with cost and interest if any, from the date of such warrant.

In addition, such person shall, upon conviction for each act or
omission, be punished by a fine of not less than Five thousand pesos
(P5,000), or suffer imprisonment of not less than six (6) months and
one (1) day but not more than two (2) years, or both.
Sec. 278. Procuring Unlawful Divulgence of Trade Secrets. —
Any person who causes or procures an officer or employee of the
Bureau of Internal Revenue to divulge any confidential information
regarding the business, income or inheritance of any taxpayer,
knowledge of which was acquired by him in the discharge of his
official duties, and which it is unlawful for him to reveal, and any
person who publishes or prints in any manner whatever, not provided
by law, any income, profit, loss or expenditure appearing in any
income tax return, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Two
thousand pesos (P2,000), or suffer imprisonment of not less than six
(6) months nor more than five (5) years, or both.

Sec. 279. Confiscation and Forfeiture of the Proceeds or
Instruments ofCrime. — In addition to the penalty imposed for the
violation of the provisions of Title X of this Code, the same shall carry
with it the confiscation and forfeiture in favor of the government of
the proceeds of the crime or value of the goods, and the instruments
or tools with which the crime was committed: Provided, however,
That if in the course of the proceedings, it is established that the
instruments or tools used in the illicit act belong to a third person,
the same shall be confiscated and forfeited after due notice and
hearing in a separate proceeding in favor of the Government if
such third person leased, let, chartered or otherwise entrusted the
same to the offender: Provided, further, That in case the lessee
subleased, or the borrower, charterer, or trustee allowed the use of
the instruments or tools to the offender, such instruments or tools
shall, likewise, be confiscated and forfeited: Provided, finally, That
property of common carriers shall not be subject to forfeiture when
used in the transaction of their business as such common carrier,
unless the owner or operator of said common carrier was, at the
time of the illegal act, a consenting party or privy thereto, without
prejudice to the owner's right of recovery against the offender in a
civil or criminal action.

!

II

I

I

Articles which are not subject of lawful commerce shall be destroyed.

Sec. 280. Subsidiary Penalty. — If the person convicted for
violation of any of the provisions of this Code has no property with
which to meet the fine imposed upon him by the court, or is unable
to pay such fine, he shall be subject to a subsidiary personal liability
at the rate of one (1) day for each Eight pesos and fifty centavos
(P8.50) subject to the rules established in Article 39 of the Revised
Penal Code.

■

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

456

Explain: Should the accused be found guilty beyond reasonable
doubt for violation of Section 255 of the Tax Code for failure to file
tax return or to supply correct information, the imposition of the civil
liability by the CTA should be automatic and no assessment notice
from the BIR is necessary. (2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The civil liability of the convicted felon should be
automatically imposed, even without the assessment notice. The Tax
Code states that a person convicted of a crime under the Tax Code
shall be liable for the payment of the tax.

After filing an Information for violation of Section 254 of the National
Interna! Revenue Code (Attempt to Evade or Defeat Tax) with the
CTA, the Public Prosecutor manifested that the People is reserving
the right to file the corresponding civil action for the recovery of the
civil liability for taxes. As counsel for the accused, comment on the
People's manifestation. (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The public prosecutor is wrong. CTA Rules state
that the filing of the criminal action shall necessarily carry with it the
filing of the civil action and no right to reserve the filing of the civil
action separately shall be allowed.

E.

Power of Collection

Collection in cases where the assessment is final and unappealable
•

Generally, the government can only file a proceeding in court to
collect once the assessment has become final and unappealable.
(Section 203, NIRC)

o

Except: in the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent
to evade tax or of failure to file a return, a judicial proceeding
for collection may be filed without assessment at any time
within 10 years after the discovery of the falsity, fraud, or
omission. (Section 222[a], NIRC)

The usual first step a taxpayer takes after an assessment Is
issued against him is to file an administrative protest with the BIR.
(Section 229, NIRC) The protest questions the assessment and
starts a process that begins with the BIR, goes to the CTA, and may
ultimately reach the Supreme Court. The BIR may summarily enforce
collection only when it has given the taxpayer administrative due
process, which includes the issuance of a valid assessment and the
denial of the taxpayer's protest. Because R.A. No. 9282, Section 11
states that no appeal taken to the CTA shall suspend the payment,
levy, distraint and/or sale of any property of the taxpayer for the
satisfaction of his tax liability, the BIR is free to collect once it denies
the protest. At this point, the assessment is final and unappealable

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

457

in the administrative level. The collection, however, may be held in
abeyance in the judicial level if the taxpayer appeals to the CTA and
the CTA suspends collection. We will learn more about protests in the
section on the remedies given to taxpayers. Keep that in mind for the
meantime.

•

•

Without a valid assessment, the BIR is barred from undertaking
any summary administrative remedies against the taxpayer. (CIR
v. Pilipinas Shell, C.R. No. 197945, July 9, 2018)

When there is no valid protest to an assessment, the assessment
shall become final and unappealable, and thus the tax shall be
collectible.
O

To be a valid protest, the claim against the assessment must
be substantiated.
•

The requirement for the Commissioner to rule on disputed
assessments before bringing an action for collection
is applicable only in cases where the assessment was
actually disputed, adducing reasons in support thereto.
(Dayrit v. Cruz, G.R. No. L-39910, September 26, 1988,
wherein the petitioners did not actually contest the
assessments by stating the basis — they did not submit
the required position paper.)

Failure to question the assessments will cause the said assessment
to lapse into finality. (Marcos II v. CA, G.R. No. 120880, June 5,
1997, wherein the Marcoses not only failed to file the required
estate tax return, but they also never questioned the assessments
served upon them.)
Once the assessment is final and executory, an action to collect
the tax assessed is akin to an action to enforce a judgment. Hence,
there can no longer be any inquiry on merits of the original case.
O

Thus, raising the defense of prescription in the case for
collection is of no merit. (Mambulao Lumber v. Republic, G.R.
No. L-37061, Septembers, 1984)

O

The taxpayer's failure to appeal to the CTA in due time makes
the assessment in question final, executory and demandable.
Thus, when the action for collection is instituted, the taxpayer
is already barred from disputing the correctness of the
assessment or invoking any defense that would reopen the
question of its tax liability on the merits. (Republic v. Lim
Tian Teng, G.R. No. L-21731, March 31, 1966)

O

A taxpayer who fails to contest the BIR assessment in the
CTA cannot contest the same in the action to collect. (Basa v.
Republic, G.R. No. L-45277, August 5, 1985)

I

iI
!

Ih!

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

458

The RTC can acquire jurisdiction over a claim for collection of
deficiency taxes only after the assessment made by the CIR has
become final and unappealable, not when there is still a pending
CTA case on the disputed assessment. (Yabes v. Flojo, G.R. No.
L-46954, July 20, 1982, wherein the Court ruled that the RTC did
not have jurisdiction because there was an appeal to the CTA of
the disputed assessment)
Modes of collection: civil remedies

CHAPTER II

CIVIL REMEDIES FOR COLLECTION OF TAXES

Sec. 205. Remedies for the Collection of Delinquent Taxes. —
The civil remedies for the collection of internal revenue taxes, fees or
charges, and any increment thereto resulting from delinquency shall
be:
(a) By distraint of goods, chattels, or effects, and other personal
property of whatever character, including stocks and other securities,
debts, credits, bank accounts and interest in and rights to personal
property, and by levy upon real property and interest in rights to real
property; and

(b) By civil or criminal action.

Either of these remedies or both simultaneously may be pursued in
the discretion of the authorities charged with the collection of such
taxes: Provided, however, That the remedies of distraint and levy
shall not be availed of where the amount of tax involve is not more
than One hundred pesos (P100).
The judgment in the criminal case shall not only impose the penalty
but shall also order payment of the taxes subject of the criminal case
as finally decided by the Commissioner.

The Bureau of Internal Revenue shall advance the amounts needed to
defray costs of collection by means of civil or criminal action, including
the preservation or transportation of personal property distrained and
the advertisement and sale thereof, as well as of real property and
improvements thereon.

The government is given two ways to collect:
O

Summary or administrative remedies, and

o

Judicial remedies (whether civil or criminal).

Collection by distraint and levy (among others) are known as the
summary, extrajudicial or administrative enforcement remedies.

o

They are distinguished from the judicial remedies of collection
by civil and criminal actions.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

459

However, the remedies of distraint and levy, as well as collection by
civil and criminal action may be pursued singly or independently
of each other or all of them simultaneously.

O

Remember that no criminal or civil case may be filed in court
without the approval of the CIR. (Section 220, NIRC)

Distraint is enforced on personal property; levy is enforced on
real property.

I

Distraint
There are two kinds of distraint:
o

ACTUAL distraint, wherein actual delinquency in tax payment
is necessary; and

o

CONSTRUCI1VE distraint, wherein no actual delinquency is
necessary.

Constructive distraint

i
i

Sec. 206. Constructive Distraint of the Property of a Taxpayer.
— To safeguard the interest of the Government, the Commissioner
may place under constructive distraint the property of a delinquent
taxpayer or any taxpayer who, in his opinion, is retiring from any
business subject to tax, or is intending to leave the Philippines or to
remove his property therefrom or to hide or conceal his property or to
perform any act tending to obstruct the proceedings for collecting the
tax due or which may be due from him.
The constructive distraint of personal property shall be affected by
requiring the taxpayer or any person having possession or control of
such property to sign a receipt covering the property distrained and
obligate himself to preserve the same intact and unaltered and not
to dispose of the same; In any manner whatever, without the express
authority of the Commissioner.

In case the taxpayer or the person having the possession and control
of the property sought to be placed under constructive distraint
refuses or fails to sign the receipt herein referred to, the revenue
officer effecting the constructive distraint shall proceed to prepare a
list of such property and, in the presence of two (2) witnessed, leave a
copy thereof in the premises where the property distrained is located,
after which the said property shall be deemed to have been placed
under constructive distraint.

Constructive distraint is resorted to when the CIR believes the
taxpayer:
o

Is retiring from any business subject to tax;

r

J9JC9B0M

■

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

460

O

Intends to leave the Philippines;

O

Intends to remove his property from the Philippines;

O

Intends to hide or conceal his property; or

O

Performs any act tending to obstruct the proceedings for
collecting the tax due.

•

As can be seen, there is no need for actual tax delinquency
for constructive distraint to apply.

How is constructive distraint effected?
O

O

The taxpayer will be required to sign a receipt covering the
property distrained and obligate himself to:
■

Preserve it intact and unaltered, and

•

Not dispose of it in any manner, without express authority
oftheCIR

If the taxpayer refuses, the officer will prepare a list of the
properties distrained and will leave a copy thereof in the
premises, in the presence of two witnesses.

Actual distraint
Procedure for actual distraint:

1.

Commencement of distraint proceedings

2.

Service of warrant of distraint

3.

Notice of sale of distrained property

4.

Release of distrained property, prior to sale

5.

Sale of property distrained

6.

Purchase by Government at sale upon distraint

Coda! provisions for the distraint process

Sec. 207. (A) Distraint of Personal Property. — Upon the failure
of the person owing any delinquent tax or delinquent revenue to
pay the same at the time required, the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative, If the amount involved is in excess of
One million pesos (Pl,000,000), or the Revenue District Officer, if
the amount involved Is One million pesos (Pl,000,000) or less, shall
seize and distraint any goods, chattels or effects, and the personal
property, including stocks and other securities, debts, credits, bank
accounts, and interests in and rights to personal property of such

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

461

persons; in sufficient quantity to satisfy the tax, or charge, together
with any increment thereto incident to delinquency, and the expenses
of the distraint and the cost of the subsequent sale.
A report on the distraint shall, within ten (10) days from receipt of the
warrant, be submitted by the distraining officer to the Revenue District
Officer, and to the Revenue Regional Director: Provided, That the
Commissioner or his duly authorized representative shall, subject to
rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Finance, upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, have the power to lift such
order of distraint: Provided, further, That a consolidated report by the
Revenue Regional Director may be required by the Commissioner as
often as necessary.

Actual distraint is resorted to upon the failure of the person owing
any delinquent tax or delinquent revenue to pay the same at the
time required.

The personal property of the person are actually seized by the
BIR.
Sec. 208. Procedure for Distraint and Garnishment. — The
officer serving the warrant of distraint shall make or cause to be made
an account of the goods, chattels, effects or other personal property
distrained, a copy of which, signed by himself, shall be left either with
the owner or person from whose possession such goods, chattels, or
effects or other personal property were taken, or at the dwelling or
place of business of such person and with someone of suitable age
and discretion, to which list shall be added a statement of the sum
demanded and note of the time and place of sale.

Stocks and other securities shall be distrained by serving a copy of
the warrant of distraint upon the taxpayer and upon the president,
manager, treasurer or other responsible officer of the corporation,
company or association, which issued the said stocks or securities.
Debts and credits shall be distrained by leaving with the person owing
the debts or having in his possession or under his control such credits,
or with his agent, a copy of the warrant of distraint. The warrant of
distraint shall be sufficient authority to the person owning the debts
or having In his possession or under his control any credits belonging
to the taxpayer to pay to the Commissioner the amount of such debts
or credits.
Bank accounts shall be garnished by serving a warrant of garnishment
upon the taxpayer and upon the president, manager, treasurer or
other responsible officer of the bank. Upon receipt of the warrant of
garnishment, the bank shall turn over to the Commissioner so much
of the bank accounts as may be sufficient to satisfy the claim of the
Government.

J9JC9B0M

462

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Sec. 209. Sale of Property Distrained and Disposition of
Proceeds. — The Revenue District Officer or his duly authorized
representative, other than the officer referred to in Section 208 of
this Code shall, according to rules and regulations prescribed by the
Secretary of Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner,
forthwith cause a notification to be exhibited in not less than two (2)
public places in the municipality or city where the distraint is made,
specifying the time and place of sale and the articles distrained. The
time of sale shall not be less than twenty (20) days after notice. One
place for the posting of such notice shall be at the Office of the Mayor
of the city or municipality in which the property is distrained.
Sec. 210. Release of Distrained Property Upon Payment Prior
to Sale. — If at any time prior to the consummation of the sale all
proper charges are paid to the officer conducting the sale, the goods
or effects distrained shall be restored to the owner.
Sec. 209 (CONTINUED) At the time and place fixed in such notice,
the said revenue officer shall sell the goods, chattels, or effects, or
other personal property, including stocks and other securities so
distrained, at public auction, to the highest bidder for cash, or with
the approval of the Commissioner, through duly licensed commodity
or stock exchanges.

In the case of stocks and other securities, the officer making the
sale shall execute a bill of sale which he shall deliver to the buyer,
and a copy thereof furnished the corporation, company or association
which issued the stocks or other securities. Upon receipt of the copy
of the bill of sale, the corporation, company or association shall make
the corresponding entry in its books, transfer the stocks or other
securities sold in the name of the buyer, and issue, if required to do
so, the corresponding certificates of stock or other securities.
Any residue over and above what is required to pay the entire claim,
including expenses, shall be returned to the owner of the property
sold. The expenses chargeable upon each seizure and sale shall
embrace only the actual expenses of seizure and preservation of the
property pending the sale, and no charge shall be imposed for the
services of the local internal revenue officer or his deputy.
Sec. 212. Purchase by Government at Sale Upon Distraint. —
When the amount bid for the property under distraint is not equal to
the amount of the tax or is very much less than the actual market
value of the articles offered for sale, the Commissioner or his deputy
may purchase the same In behalf of the national Government for the
amount of taxes, penalties and costs due thereon.

Property so purchased may be resold by the Commissioner or
his deputy, subject to the rules and regulations prescribed by the
Secretary of Finance, the net proceeds therefrom shall be remitted to
the National Treasury and accounted for as internal revenue.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

463

Levy of real property
•

The procedure for levy of real property is:

1.

Commencement of levy proceedings

2.

Service of warrant of levy

3.

Advertisement for sale

4.

Public sale of the property under levy

5.

Redemption of property sold

6.

Forfeiture to the Government for want of bidder

7.

Resale of real estate taken for taxes

8.

Further distraint and levy

i

Coda! provisions for the levy process

Sec. 207. (B) Levy on Real Property. — After the expiration of
the time required to pay the delinquent tax or delinquent revenue as
prescribed in this Section, real property may be levied upon, before
simultaneously or after the distraint of personal property belonging
to the delinquent. To this end, any internal revenue officer designated
by the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative shall
prepare a duly authenticated certificate showing the name of the
taxpayer and the amounts of the tax and penalty due from him. Said
certificate shall operate with the force of a legal execution throughout
the Philippines.

Levy shall be affected by writing upon said certificate a description
of the property upon which levy is made. At the same time, written
notice of the levy shall be mailed to or served upon the Register of
Deeds for the province or city where the property is located and upon
the delinquent taxpayer, or if he be absent from the Philippines, to
his agent or the manager of the business In respect to which the
liability arose, or if there be none, to the occupant of the property
In question.

In case the warrant of levy on real property is not issued before or
simultaneously with the warrant of distraint on personal property,
and the personal property of the taxpayer is not sufficient to satisfy
his tax delinquency, the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative shall, within thirty (30) days after execution of the
distraint, proceed with the levy on the taxpayer's real property.
Within ten (10) days after receipt of the warrant, a report on any
levy shall be submitted by the levying officer to the Commissioner
or his duly authorized representative: Provided, however, That
a consolidated report by the Revenue Regional Director may be
required by the Commissioner as often as necessary: Provided,

IIII11

J9JC9B0M

1

464

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

further, That the Commissioner or his duly authorized representative,
subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of
Finance, upon recommendation of the Commissioner, shall have
the authority to lift warrants of levy issued in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
•

Failure of the heirs to receive a copy of notices of levy does NOT
bar its effectivity since the taxpayer is in fact the estate. (Marcos
II v. CA, G.R. No. 120880, June 5, 1997)

Sec. 213. Advertisement and Sale. — Within twenty (20) days after
levy, the officer conducting the proceedings shall proceed to advertise
the property or a usable portion thereof as may be necessary to
satisfy the claim and cost of sale; and such advertisement shall cover
a period of a least thirty (30) days. It shall be effectuated by posting
a notice at the main entrance of the municipal building or city hall and
in public and conspicuous place in the barrio or district in which the
real estate lies and by publication once a week for three (3) weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or city where
the property is located. The advertisement shall contain a statement
of the amount of taxes and penalties so due and the time and place
of sale, the name of the taxpayer against whom taxes are levied, and
a short description of the property to be sold. At any time before the
day fixed for the sale, the taxpayer may discontinue all proceedings
by paying the taxes, penalties and interest. If he does not do so, the
sale shall proceed and shall be held either at the main entrance of the
municipal building or city hall, or on the premises to be sold, as the
officer conducting the proceedings shall determine and as the notice
of sale shall specify.

Within five (5) days after the sale, a return by the distraining or
levying officer of the proceedings shall be entered upon the records
of the Revenue Collection Officer, the Revenue District officer and
the Revenue Regional Director. The Revenue Collection Officer, in
consultation with the Revenue district Officer, shall then make out
and deliver to the purchaser a certificate from his records, showing
the proceedings of the sale, describing the property sold stating the
name of the purchaser and setting out the exact amount of all taxes,
penalties and interest: Provided, however, That in case the proceeds
of the sale exceeds the claim and cost of sale, the excess shall be
turned over to the owner of the property.
The Revenue Collection Officer, upon approval by the Revenue District
Officer may, out of his collection, advance an amount sufficient to defray
the costs of collection by means of the summary remedies provided
for in this Code, including the preservation or transportation in case of
personal property, and the advertisement and subsequent sale, both
in cases of personal and real property including improvements found
on the latter. In his monthly collection reports, such advances shall be
reflected and supported by receipts.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

465

Sec. 214. Redemption of Property Sold. — Within one (1) year
from the date of sale, the delinquent taxpayer, or any one for him,
shall have the right of paying to the Revenue District Officer the
amount of the public taxes, penalties, and interest thereon from the
date of delinquency to the date of sale, together with interest on said
purchase price at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) per annum from
the date of purchase to the date of redemption, and such payment
shall entitle the person paying to the delivery of the certificate issued
to the purchaser and a certificate from the said Revenue District
Officer that he has thus redeemed the property, and the Revenue
District Officer shall forthwith pay over to the purchaser the amount
by which such property has thus been redeemed, and said property
thereafter shall be free form the lien of such taxes and penalties.
The owner shall not, however, be deprived of the possession of the
said property and shall be entitled to the rents and other income
thereof until the expiration of the time allowed for its redemption.

Sec. 215. Forfeiture to Government for Want of Bidder. — In
case there is no bidder for real property exposed for sale as herein
above provided or if the highest bid is for an amount insufficient
to pay the taxes, penalties and costs, the Internal Revenue Officer
conducting the sale shall declare the property forfeited to the
Government in satisfaction of the claim in question and within two
(2) days thereafter, shall make a return of his proceedings and the
forfeiture which shall be spread upon the records of his office. It shall
be the duty of the Register of Deeds concerned, upon registration with
his office of any such declaration of forfeiture, to transfer the title of
the property forfeited to the Government without the necessity of an
order from a competent court.
Within one (1) year from the date of such forfeiture, the taxpayer,
or any one for him may redeem said property by paying to the
Commissioner or the latter's Revenue Collection Officer the full
amount of the taxes and penalties, together with interest thereon
and the costs of sale, but if the property be not thus redeemed, the
forfeiture shall become absolute.

Sec. 216. Resale of Real Estate Taken for Taxes. — The
Commissioner shall have charge of any real estate obtained by the
Government of the Philippines In payment or satisfaction of taxes,
penalties or costs arising under this Code or In compromise or
adjustment of any claim therefore, and said Commissioner may, upon
the giving of not less than twenty (20) days notice, sell and dispose
of the same of public auction or with prior approval of the Secretary
of Finance, dispose of the same at private sale. In either case, the
proceeds of the sale shall be deposited with the National Treasury,
and an accounting of the same shall rendered to the Chairman of the
Commission on Audit.
Sec. 217. Further Distraint or Levy. — The remedy by distraint of
personal property and levy on realty may be repeated if necessary
until the full amount due, including all expenses, is collected.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

466

Suspension of collection
Sec. 218. Injunction not Available to Restrain Collection of
Tax. — No court shall have the authority to grant an injunction to
restrain the collection of any national internal revenue tax, fee or
charge imposed by this Code.

R.A. 1125, Sec. 11, as amended by R.A. 9282. No appeal taken to
the CTA from the decision of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue or
the Commissioner of Customs or the Regional Trial Court, provincial,
city or municipal treasurer or the Secretary of Finance, the Secretary
of Trade and Industry and Secretary of Agriculture, as the case
may be shall suspend the payment, levy, distraint, and/or sale of
any property of the taxpayer for the satisfaction of his tax liability
as provided by existing law: Provided, however, That when in the
opinion of the Court the collection by the aforementioned government
agencies may jeopardize the interest of the Government and/or the
taxpayer, the Court at any stage of the proceeding may suspend the
said collection and require the taxpayer either to deposit the amount
claimed or to file a surety bond for not more than double the amount
with the Court.
In criminal and collection cases covered respectively by Section
7(b) and (c) of this Act, the Government may directly file the said
cases with the CTA covering amounts within its exclusive and original
jurisdiction.
General rule: No court can issue an injunction to restrain collection
of internal revenue taxes, fees, or charges imposed by the NIRC.

o

Exception: Only the CTA can issue an injunction and it is dnly
allowed when the following conditions concur:

1.

There is an appeal to the CTA, and

2.

In the opinion of the court, the collection by the government
agencies may jeopardize the interest of the Government and/
or the taxpayer, and

3.

Taxpayer either to deposit the amount claimed or to file a
surety bond for not more than the double the amount with
the Court.

Despite the wording of the CTA law (Section 11, R.A. 1125, as
• amended by R.A. 9282, Section 9), the CTA can issue injunctive
writs to restrain the collection of taxes and to even dispense
with the deposit of the amount claimed or the bond, whenever
the method employed by the CIR in the collection of the tax
jeopardizes the interests of the taxpayer for being patently in
violation of the law. (Spouses Emmanuel and Jinkee Pacquiao v.
Court of Tax Appeals, G.R. No. 213394, April 6, 2016)

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

467

O

Whenever the method employed by the CIR in the collection
of tax is not sanctioned by law, the bond requirement should
be dispensed with.

O

This prevents the absurd situation where the collection via
summary methods already violated the law yet the taxpayer
still needs to file a bond just to get an injunction.

If the amount of the surety bond is too high that it will practically
deny the taxpayer the meaningful opportunity to contest the
validity of the assessments and would likely impoverish the
taxpayer as to force it out of its business, then the amount of the
surety bond is void and must be lowered—even if it is still within
the "double the amount" limit set by law. (Tridharma Marketing
Corporation v. CTA, G.R. No. 215950, June 20, 2016, where the
SC remanded the case back to the CTA to determine the proper
amount of the bond>
Globesmart Services, Inc. received a final assessment notice with
formal letter of demand from the BIR for deficiency income tax,
value-added tax and withholding tax for the taxable year 2016
amounting to P48 million. Globesmart Services, Inc. filed a protest
against the assessment, but the Commissioner of Internal Revenue
denied the protest. Hence, Globesmart Services, Inc. filed a petition
for review in the CTA with an urgent motion to suspend the collection
of tax.

After hearing, the CTA Division issued a resolution granting the
motion to suspend but required Globesmart Services, Inc. to post a
surety bond equivalent to the deficiency assessment within 15 days
from notice of the resolution. Globesmart Services, Inc. moved for the
partial reconsideration of the resolution and for the reduction of the
bond to an amount it could obtain. The CTA Division issued another
resolution reducing the amount of the surety bond to P24 million.
The latter amount was still more than the net worth of Globesmart
Services, Inc. as reported in its audited financial statements.
a)

May the collection of taxes be suspended? Explain your answer.

b) Is the CTA Division justified In requiring Globesmart Services,
Inc. to post a surety bond as a condition for the suspension of the
deficiency tax collection? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

Yes, the collection of taxes may be suspended. Under the CTA
Law, the CTA can Issue an Injunction when there is an appeal
to the CTA, the collection will jeopardize the government and/
or the taxpayer, and the taxpayer either deposits the amount
claimed or files a surety bond of not more than double the
amount.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

468

b)

The CTA is not justified. Jurisprudence provides that the amount
of the surety bond should not be such that the taxpayer is
practically prevented from contesting the assessment. The
amount of the surety bond here is more than the net worth of
the taxpayer. This will impoverish the taxpayer and run it out of
business.

Tax Hens
Sec. 219. Nature and Extent of Tax Lien. — If any person,
corporation, partnership, joint-account (cuentas en participation),
association or insurance company liable to pay an internal revenue
tax, neglects or refuses to pay the same after demand, the amount
shall be a lien in favor of the Government of the Philippines from
the time when the assessment was made by the Commissioner
until paid, with interests, penalties, and costs that may accrue in
addition thereto upon all property and rights to property belonging
to the taxpayer: Provided, That this lien shall not be valid against
any mortgagee purchaser or judgment creditor until notice of such
lien shall be filed by the Commissioner in the office of the Register of
Deeds of the province or city where the property of the taxpayer is
situated or located.

A tax lien is another administrative remedy granted by law to the
BIR.

When a taxpayer neglects or refuses to pay his internal revenue
tax liability after demand, the amount demanded shall be a lien in
favor of the government from the time the assessment was made
by the CIR until paid with interest, penalties, and costs that may
accrue in addition thereto upon all property and rights to property
belonging to the taxpayer.
However, the lien shall not be valid against any mortgagee,
purchaser or judgment creditor until notice of such lien is
registered in the office of the RD.
Well-settled that the claim of the government predicated on a tax
lien is superior to the claim of a private litigant predicated on a
judgment. (CIR v. NLRC, G.R. No. 74965, November 9, 1994)

Compromise and abatement
•

The law also allows the tax liability of a taxpayer to be reduced
or even cancelled through compromise or abatement. Hence, the
two can be seen as a remedy of both the government and the
taxpayer.

j

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

O

469

Remember, the authority of the CIR to compromise and abate
tax liabilities cannot be delegated.
■

Except:

•

for assessments issued by the regional offices
involving basic deficiency taxes of P500,000 or less,
and
minor criminal violations.

Let's begin with compromise!
Compromise

Sec. 204. Authority of the Commissioner to Compromise, Abate
and Refund or Credit Taxes. — The Commissioner may —

(A) Compromise the Payment of any Internal Revenue Tax, when:
(1) A reasonable doubt as to the validity of the claim against the
taxpayer exists; or
(2) The financial position of the taxpayer demonstrates a clear
inability to pay the assessed tax. The compromise settlement of any
tax liability shall be subject to the following minimum amounts: For
cases of financial incapacity, a minimum compromise rate equivalent
to ten percent (10%) of the basic assessed tax; and

For other cases, a minimum compromise rate equivalent to forty
percent (40%) of the basic assessed tax.
Where the basic tax involved exceeds One million pesos (Pl,000,000)
or where the settlement offered is less than the prescribed minimum
rates, the compromise shall be subject to the approval of the
Evaluation Board which shall be composed of the Commissioner and
the four (4) Deputy Commissioners.

The grounds for compromise are:

1.

Doubtful validity of the claim against the taxpayer, or

2.

Financial incapacity of the taxpayer

The cases which may be compromised are:

1.

Delinquent accounts;

2.

Pending admin cases under admin protest after issuance of
final assessment notice to the taxpayer;

3.

Civil tax cases being disputed before the courts;

4.

Collection cases filed in courts;

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

470

Criminal violations

5.

O

EXCEPT if 1) already filed in court, or 2) involving criminal
tax fraud (R.R. 30-2002)

The following cases can NOT be compromised:

1.

Withholding tax cases, unless the applicant-taxpayer invokes
provisions of law that cast doubt on the taxpayer's obligation
to withhold;

2.

Criminal tax fraud cases confirmed as such by the CIR or his
duly authorized representative;

3.

Criminal violations already filed in court;

4.

Delinquent accounts
installment payments:

5.

Cases where final reports of reinvestigation or reconsideration
have been issued resulting to reduction in the original
assessment and the taxpayer is agreeable to such decision
by signing the required agreement form for the purpose;

6.

Cases which become final and executory after final judgment
of a court, where compromise is requested on the ground of
doubtful validity of the assessment;

7.

Estate tax cases where compromise is requested on the
ground of financial incapacity of the taxpayer. (R.R. 30-2002)

with

duly

approved

schedule

What are the examples for doubtful validity?

1.

2.

Delinquent account/disputed assessment resulted from a
jeopardy assessment

•

Jeopardy assessment is an assessment without the benefit
of complete or partial audit by an authorized revenue
officer, who has reason to believe that the assessment
and collection of a deficiency tax will be jeopardized
because of the taxpayer's failure to comply with audit
and investigation requirements.

•

These assessments are usually done just before the end
of the prescriptive period.

•

Thus, they are called "jeopardy" because the tax is in
jeopardy of not being collected at all and the officer is in
jeopardy of losing his job.

The assessment seems to be:
a.

Arbitrary,

b.

Based on presumptions, and

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

C.

3.

471

There is reason to believe that it is lacking in legal/factual
basis.

There is reason to believe that the assessment is lacking in
legal and factual basis and taxpayer failed:

a.

to file an admin protest because of alleged failure to
receive notice of assessment; or

b.

to file a request for reinvestigation/reconsideration within
30 days from receipt of final assessment notice; or
to elevate to the CTA an adverse decision of the
Commissioner, or his authorized representative, in some
cases, within 30 days from receipt thereof.

4.

The assessments were issued on or after January 1, 1998,
where the demand notice allegedly failed to comply with the
formalities prescribed under Section 228 of the NIRC;

5.

Assessments made based on the "Best Evidence Obtainable
Rule" and there is reason to believe that the same can be
disputed by sufficient and competent evidence;

6.

The assessment was:

a.

issued within the period extended by the taxpayer's
execution of Waiver of Statute of Limitations; and

b.

the waiver's authenticity is being questioned; and
there is strong reason to believe and evidence to prove
that it is not authentic. (R.R. 30-2002)

What are examples of financial incapacity?

1.

Corporation ceased or dissolved (but the tax liabilities for
the assets distributed to the stockholders as return of capital
cannot be compromised);

2.

Taxpayer has a surplus deficit resulting to capital impairment
by at least 50%

3.

a.

Provided taxpayer has no sufficient liquid asset to satisfy
liability, and

b.

Provided that amounts payable or due to stockholders
other than business-related transactions which are
properly includible in the regular "accounts payable" are
by fiction of law considered as part of capital and not
liability;

Net worth deficit (for corporations), and for an individual, if
he has no other leviable properties except his family home;

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

472

4.

Taxpayer is a compensation earner and he has no more
leviable assets except his family home;

5.

Taxpayer declared to be bankrupt by any court/tribunal/
authority/body/government agency.

Minimum Compromise Rates
Based on financial incapacity

10% of the basic assessed tax

Based on doubtful validity

40% of the basic assessed tax

Where the basic tax involved exceeds P1M or where the
settlement offered is less than the prescribed minimum rates,
the compromise shall be subject to the approval of the Evaluation
Board.
Abatement and cancellation of tax liability

Sec. 204 (cont.)
(B) Abate or Cancel a Tax Liability, when:

(1) The tax or any portion thereof appears to be unjustly or
excessively assessed; or
(2) The administration and collection costs involved do not justify the
collection of the amount due.
All criminal violations may be compromised except: (a) those already
filed in court, or (b) those involving fraud.

Abatement of the penalties and/or interest is allowed when:

1.

The taxes or any portion thereof appears to be unjustly or
excessively assessed, or

2.

The administration and collection costs do not justify the
collection of the amount due.

What are the instances where there appears to be uniust or
excessive assessment?

1.

Filing of the return/payment was made at the wrong venue;

2.

Taxpayer's mistake in payment of tax was due to erroneous
written advice of a revenue officer;

3.

Taxpayer's non-compliance is due to a difficult interpretation
of said law;

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

473

4.

Failure to pay on time because of substantial losses from
prolonged labor disputes, force majeure, legitimate business
reverses;

5.

Failure to pay because of circumstances beyond his control.
•

6.

In 4 and 5, the abatement will only cover the surcharge
and the compromise penalty, not the interest.

Late payment of tax under meritorious circumstances like:

•

Use of wrong tax form but correct amount of tax was
remitted;

•

Filing an amended return under meritorious circumstances
(here, only penalties are abated, not interest);

•

Surcharge erroneously imposed;

•

Late filing due to unresolved issue on classification/
valuation of real property (for capital gains);

•

Offsetting of taxes of the same kind (overpayment in one
quarter against underpayment in another);

•

Automatic offsetting of one kind of withholding against
the underpayment of another kind;

•

Late remittance of withholding tax on compensation of
expats pending the issuance of the SEC of the license to
the Philippine branch office or subsidiary (only surcharge
and penalty will be abated, not the interest);

•

Wrong use of the Tax Credit Certificate;

•

Analogous cases. (R.R. 13-2001, as amended by R.R.
4-2012, which removed one-day late filing as a ground
for abatement)

What are the instances where the collection costs are more than
the amount sought to be collected (/.e., not worth it)?

o

Basically, cases where the taxpayer appealed the assessment
or is contesting an assessment which had already been
reinvestigated and other meritorious circumstances.

o

What is important is that the abatement of the surcharge and
compromise will only be allowed upon written application by
the taxpayer that he is signifying his willingness to pay the
basic tax and interest or just the basic tax (depending on the
circumstances). (R.R. 13-2001, as amended)

i

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

474

Criminal violations which can be compromised
•

Criminal violations which do not involve tax fraud or which have
not been filed in court may be compromised.

•

A taxpayer's criminal liability may be settled extra-judicially. A
compromise of criminal liability is an extra-judicial settlement of
the taxpayer's criminal liability for his violation and is consensual
in character, hence, may not be imposed on the taxpayer without
his consent. (R.R. 12-1999)

•

In most instances, the taxpayer must pay a compromise penalty
to settle his criminal liability.
0

A compromise penalty differs from the compromise of a tax
liability as the former is paid to compromise a tax violation
(which may be subject of a criminal case), and the latter is
the amount paid to settle the actual tax liability.

Distinguish compromise from abatement of taxes. (2017 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: For compromise, the taxpayer is asking the
CIR to reduce his/her taxes because of financial incapacity or the
doubtful validity of the claim against the taxpayer. For abatement,
the taxpayer is asking the CIR to cancel the penalties due to unjust
or excessive assessment or the administration or collection costs do
not justify the collection of the taxes due.
Prescription of the government's power to collect

Sec. 222. Exceptions as to Period of Limitation of Assessment
and Collection of Taxes. —
(a) In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax
or of failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding
in court for the collection of such tax may be filed without assessment,
at any time within ten (10) years after the discovery of the falsity,
fraud or omission: Provided, That in a fraud assessment which has
become final and executory, the fact of fraud shall be judicially taken
cognizance of in the civil or criminal action for the collection thereof.
(b) If before the expiration of the time prescribed in Section 203 for
the assessment of the tax, both the Commissioner and the taxpayer
have agreed in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may
be assessed within the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon
may be extended by subsequent written agreement made before the
expiration of the period previously agreed upon.

(c) Any internal revenue tax which has been assessed within the
period of limitation as prescribed in paragraph (a) hereof may be
collected by distraint or levy or by a proceeding in court within five (5)
years following the assessment of the tax.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

475

(d) Any internal revenue tax, which has been assessed within the
period agreed upon as provided in paragraph (b) hereinabove, may
be collected by distraint or levy or by a proceeding in court within
the period agreed upon in writing before the expiration of the five
(5)-year period. The period so agreed upon may be extended by
subsequent written agreements made before the expiration of the
period previously agreed upon.

(e) Provided, however, That nothing in the immediately preceding and
paragraph (a) hereof shall be construed to authorize the examination
and investigation or inquiry into any tax return filed in accordance
with the provisions of any tax amnesty law or decree.
i

General rule: The prescriptive period to collect the taxes due is
five years from the date of assessment.
O

Exceptions:

1.

False or fraudulent return with intent to evade taxes:
within 10 years from discovery without need for prior
assessment. The government may file a proceeding in
court.

2.

Failure or omission to file a return: within 10 years from
discovery without need for assessment.

3.

Waiver in writing executed before the five-year period
expires: period agreed upon.

The five-year period to collect begins from the date the FAN has
been released, mailed, or sent to the taxpayer. If there is no
allegation when this was made, the five-year period starts from
the date the taxpayer receives the FAN. (Takenaka Corporation
Philippine Branch v. CIR, G.R. No. 221589, March 12, 2018, note
that the Supreme Court confuses the period to assess and the
period to collect in this case. SMH)
The prescriptive period to assess or collect deficiency tax is
governed by the NIRC (a special law) and not the Civil Code (a
general law). (Guagua Electric Light Plant Company, Inc. v. CIR,
G.R. No. L-23611, April 24, 1967)
O

The same can be said between the NIRC and the Rules of
Court. Hence, claims for taxes may be collected even after
the distribution of the decedent's estate. Claims for estate
taxes are exempted from the application of the statute of
non-claims. (Vera v. Fernandez, G.R. No. L-31364, March 30,
1979)

I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

476

For prescriptive period purposes, the tax is deemed collected if:

If collection is through summary remedies (distraint and
levy), when the government avails of a distraint and levy
procedure prescribed under the NIRC.

O

Distraint and levy proceedings are begun or commenced
by the issuance of the warrant and service thereof on
the taxpayer. (BPI v. CIR, G.R. No. 139736, October 17,
2005)

•

If collection is through judicial remedies (civil or criminal),
when the government files the complaint with the proper
court.

O

A judicial action for the collection of a tax may be initiated
by a) filing of a complaint with the proper regular trial
court, or b) where the taxpayer appeals an assessment
the CTA, by filing an answer to the taxpayer's petition for
review wherein payment of the tax is prayed for. (PNOC
v. CA, G.R. No. 109976, April 26, 2005, where it was the
informer who initially filed the petition for review with the
CTA)

•

The general rule is that there must be an assessment made
before collection is resorted to by the government. Without a
valid assessment, the five-year continues to run and also bars
the government from undertaking any summary administrative
remedies. (CIR v. Pilipinas Shell, G.R. No. 197945, July 9, 2018)
o

The exception is found in Section 222(A) of the NIRC wherein
judicial action to collect the tax liability is permitted even
without an assessment when the taxpayer files a false or
fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax or fails to file
a return. Collection must be done within 10 years after the
discovery.
•

However, once assessment is made against the taxpayer,
the government cannot avail of the 10-year period in
Section 222(A).
•

An assessment against the taxpayer takes the case
out of the provisions of Section 222(A) and places it
under Section 222(C), which gives the government
only five years from the date the assessment was
made to collect. (Republic v. Ret, G.R. No. L-13754,
March 31, 1962)

•

If an assessment is made, then the period to collect
is five years from assessment, not 10 years.

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

■

477

The period for collecting a tax through a judicial
proceeding, in case no return has been filed, is 10 years
from the discovery of the omission.

A letter by the CIR demanding the amount of a rubber-check
previously paid by a taxpayer should be deemed to be an
assessment if it declares and fixes the tax payable against the
party thereto and demands the settlement thereof. Hence, the
five-year period for collection of the tax due should commence
anew from the time said letter of demand was sent to the taxpayer.
(Republic v. Limaco & de Guzman Commercial Co., Inc., G.R. No.
L-13081, August 31, 1962)

Regular Return was Made

False, Fraudulent, or Failure to File
a Return

Assessment: 3 years

Assessment:
covery

Collection: 5 years from assessment

10 years from dis-

Collection: 5 years from assessment
If government does not make an
assessment, they can collect within
10 years from discovery.
They are, however, limited to purely
judicial remedies, (Section 222[A])

Suspension of running of statute of limitations

Sec. 223. Suspension of Running of Statute of Limitations. —
The running of the Statute of Limitations provided in Sections 203 and
222 on the making of assessment and the beginning of distraint or
levy a proceeding In court for collection, in respect of any deficiency,
shall be suspended for the period during which the Commissioner is
prohibited from making the assessment or beginning distraint or levy
or a proceeding in court and for sixty (60) days thereafter; when
the taxpayer requests for a reinvestigation which is granted by the
Commissioner; when the taxpayer cannot be located in the address
given by him In the return filed upon which a tax is being assessed or
collected: Provided, that, if the taxpayer informs the Commissioner
of any change in address, the running of the Statute of Limitations
will not be suspended; when the warrant of distraint or levy is duly
served upon the taxpayer, his authorized representative, or a member
of his household with sufficient discretion, and no property could be
located; and when the taxpayer is out of the Philippines.

•

i

The running of the prescriptive period for both the power to
assess and the power to collect can be suspended in the following
situations:

li

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

478

1.

2.

When the CIR is prohibited from making an assessment or
beginning distraint and lew or a proceeding in court and for
60 davs thereafter
•

The periods for assessment and collection are suspended.

•

The filing of a petition for review in the CTA from the
decision of the CIR on a protested assessment interrupts
the running of the prescriptive period for collection. The
pendency of the taxpayer's appeal in the CTA and in the
SC had the effect of temporarily staying the hands of
the CIR from collecting. (Republic v. Ker & Company,
Ltd., G.R. No. L-21609, September 29, 1966; Takenaka
v. CIR, G.R. 221589, March 12, 2018 seems to say that
this applies even if the CTA does not issue an injunction
against the collection^

The taxpaver reouests for reinvestioation which is granted by
the CIR

The collection is suspended (the assessment has
already been done at this point, so only the period to
collect is suspended. Note: when a taxpayer protests an
assessment, he has to choose between a reconsideration
or a reinvestigation.).

There is a difference between a request for reconsideration
and a request for reinvestioation. (BPI v. CIR, G.R. No.
174942, March 7, 2008)
o

Reconsideration refers to a plea for a re-evaluation
of an assessment on the basis of existing records
without need of additional evidence. This is basically
a mere re-evaluation of existing records. It does NOT
suspend the running of the prescriptive period. (CIR
v. Philippine Global Communication, Inc., G.R. No.
167146, October 31, 2006)

o

Reinvestigation refers to a plea for re-evaluation
on the basis of newlv-discovered or additional
evidence that a taxpayer intends to present in the
reinvestigation.

o

The distinction is essential because the suspension of
the period only occurs when the taxpayer requests
for a reinvestioation and is granted by the CIR.
■

Why doesn't a request for reconsideration
suspend the period? Because there is nothing
which prevents the BIR from collecting — they
have all the documents they need. Since no new

J9JC9B0M

GOVERNMENT'S REMEDIES

479

documents are to be presented in a request for
reconsideration, the next step for the BIR is to
issue a decision denying the taxpayer's protest
and to initiate proceedings for the collection of
the assessed tax, and thus, allow the taxpayer,
should it so choose, to contest the assessment
before the CTA.

A mere requestfor reinvestigation WITHOUT corresponding
action on the part of the CIR will not interrupt the running
of the period. The request must be granted by the CIR.
(Republic v. Acebedo, G.R. No. L-20477, March 29, 1968;
BPI v. CIR, G.R. No. 174942, March 7, 2008)
O

"Granted" means that the government acted upon
the request. (Republic v. Arcache, G.R. No. L-15547,
February 29, 1964)

■

The taxpayer is barred from invoking the defense
of prescription if the delay was due to his repeated
requests for reinvestigation and for extensions of
time to pay, which the government acted upon.
(Republic v. Arcache, G.R. No. L-15547, February
29, 1964)

O

The BIR must have acted on the request before the
period to collect ends. (CIR v. United Salvage and
Towage [Phils.], Inc., G.R. No. 197515, July 2, 2014,
where the CIR acted on the request for reinvestigation
only after the period to collect expired J

O

Since this suspends the period (and prejudicial to the
taxpayer), the burden of proof that the request was
actually granted shall be on the BIR. The grant may
be expressed in communications with the taxpayer or
implied from the actions of the CIR or his authorized
officers. (BPI v. CIR, G.R. No. 174942, March 7,
2008)
•

However, even when the requestforreconsideration
or reinvestigation is not accompanied by a valid
waiver or there is no request for reinvestigation
that had been granted by the BIR, the taxpayer
may still be held in estoppel and be prevented
from setting up the defense of prescription on
collection when, by his own repeated requests
or positive acts, the Government had been, for
good reasons, persuaded to postpone collection
to make the taxpayer feel that the demand is not
unreasonable or that no harassment or injustice

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

480

is meant by the Government, as laid down by the
Court in CIR v. Suyoc Consolidated Mining Co.
(G.R. No. L-11527, November 25, 1958). (BPI v.
CIR, G.R. No. 174942, March 7, 2008)

In computing whether the collection was done within the
period prescribed by law, do this:

•

3.

4.

O

The period starts to run again when the said request
is denied, i.e., the BIR acted upon the request but
did not find it meritorious afterwards. (CIR v. Capitol
Subdivision, Inc., G.R. No. L-18993, April 30, 1964)

There is no requirement that the CIR must first rule on
the taxpayer's request for reinvestigation before going
to court for the purpose of collecting the tax assessed.
(Republic v. Lim Tian Teng, G.R. No. L-21731, March 31,
1966)

•

Both the periods for assessment and
suspended

•

When records show that the BIR is aware of the taxpayer's
new address, the period is not suspended, even without
a formal written notice of the change of address. {CIR
v. BASF Coating + Inks Phils., Inc., G.R. No. 198677,
November 26, 2014, where the taxpayer's records with
the BIR clearly showed its new address. The BIR also still
insisted on sending the FAN to its old address, even after
the PAN was "returned to sender.")

collection

are

When the warrant of distraint and levy is duly served upon
the taxpayer or authorized representative and no property
could be located
Only the period for collection is suspended

When the taxpayer is out of the Philippines
•

6.

(Date of Collection) - (Date of Assessment) - (Period
of Reinvestigation) </= 5 years

When the taxpayer cannot be located in the address given
by him in the return filed, unless he informs the CIR of the
change of address

•
5.

O

Period for assessment and collection is suspended

Those under the CTA law

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER’S REMEDIES
With the whole machinery of the government aimed towards the
taxpayer and his money, the taxpayer is not left with a dull sword, a
flimsy shield, and a stubborn mule. The taxpayer is given two main
remedies:

1.

Protest or dispute the assessment; or

2.

Refund or recover of erroneously or illegally collected taxes.

The law also grants the taxpayer other certain remedies such as
applying for a compromise or an abatement (previously discussed),
releasing property from a public sale or redeeming it (previously
discussed), and availing of a tax amnesty.
A.

Protesting an Assessment

Sec. 228. Protesting of Assessment. — When the Commissioner
or his duly authorized representative finds that proper taxes should be
assessed, he shall first notify the taxpayer of his findings: Provided,
however, That a pre-assessment notice shall not be required in the
following cases:
(a) When the finding for any deficiency tax is the result of
mathematical error in the computation of the tax as appearing on
the face of the return; or
(b) When a discrepancy has been determined between the tax
withheld and the amount actually remitted by the withholding agent;
or

(c) When a taxpayer who opted to claim a refund or tax credit of
excess creditable withholding tax fora taxable period was determined
to have carried over and automatically applied the same amount
claimed against the estimated tax liabilities for the taxable quarter
or quarters of the succeeding taxable year; or
(d) When the excise tax due on excisable articles has not been paid;
or
(e) When the article locally purchased or imported by an exempt
person, such as, but not limited to, vehicles, capital equipment,
machineries and spare parts, has been sold, traded or transferred to
non-exempt persons.

481

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

482

The taxpayers shall be informed in writing of the law and the facts
on which the assessment is made; otherwise, the assessment shall
be void.

Within a period to be prescribed by implementing rules and
regulations, the taxpayer shall be required to respond to said notice.
If the taxpayer fails to respond, the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative shall issue an assessment based on his
findings.
Such assessment may be protested administratively by filing a
request for reconsideration or reinvestigation within thirty (30) days
from receipt of the assessment in such form and manner as may be
prescribed by implementing rules and regulations.
Within sixty (60) days from filing of the protest, all relevant
supporting documents shall have been submitted; otherwise, the
assessment shall become final.
If the protest is denied in whole or in part, or is not acted upon within
one hundred eighty (180) days from submission of documents, the
taxpayer adversely affected by the decision or inaction may appeal
to the Court of Tax Appeals within thirty (30) days from receipt of
the said decision, or from the lapse of one hundred eighty (180)-day
period; otherwise, the decision shall become final, executory and
demandable.

Protesting an assessment is the first taxpayer remedy.

R.R. 12-1999, as amended by R.R. 18-2013, gives the procedure
for protesting an assessment.
O

Remember that revenue officers must secure a LOA before
examining or assessing a taxpayer as part of due process.
Without a LOA, the examination or assessment is a nullity.
(Medicard Philippines, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 222743, April 5,
2017)

O

After the initial audit, the revenue officer shall send the
taxpayer a Notice of Discrepancy (ND). Within 30 days of
receipt of the ND, the revenue officer and the taxpayer shall
have a Discussion of Discrepancy to talk about how to settle
things. If things don't work out, the revenue officer should
endorse the case within 10 days from the conclusion of the
Discussion of Discrepancy to the assessment division for the
issuance of a deficiency tax assessment. (R.R. 22-2020)

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

483

Step one: Issuance of the preliminary assessment notice (PAN)

Sec. 3.1.1. Preliminary Assessment Notice (PAN).9 — If after
review and evaluation by the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative, as the case may be, it is determined that there exists
sufficient basis to assess the taxpayer for any deficiency tax or taxes,
the said Office shall issue to the taxpayer a Preliminary Assessment
Notice (PAN) for the proposed assessment. It shall show in detail
the facts and the law, rules and regulations, or jurisprudence on
which the proposed assessment is based (see illustration in ANNEX
"A" hereof).
If the taxpayer fails to respond within fifteen (15) days from date of
receipt of the PAN, he shall be considered in default, in which case,
a Formal Letter of Demand and Final Assessment Notice (FLD/FAN)
shall be issued calling for payment of the taxpayer's deficiency tax
liability, inclusive of the applicable penalties.
If the taxpayer, within fifteen (15) days from date of receipt of the
PAN, responds that he/it disagrees with the findings of deficiency tax
or taxes, an FLD/FAN shall be issued within fifteen (15) days from
filing/submission of the taxpayer's response, calling for payment
of the taxpayer's deficiency tax liability, inclusive of the applicable
penalties.

If there is sufficient basis for an assessment, the BIR will issue
a preliminary assessment notice stating the facts, laws, rules,
regulations, and jurisprudence on which the proposed assessment
is based.

o

•

Taxpayer has 15 days from receipt of the PAN to respond.
•

If he doesn't, default and a Formal Letter of Demand and
Final Assessment Notice (FLD/FAN) shall be issued.

•

If he does, a FLD/FAN will be issued within 15 days from
the filing/submission of the taxpayer's response.

The sending of a PAN to taxpayer to Inform him of the assessment
made Is but part of the "due process requirement in the issuance
of a deficiency tax assessment," the absence of which renders
nugatory any assessment made by the tax authorities. (CIR v.
Metro Star Superama, Inc., G.R. No. 185371, December 8, 2010)

O

j

Hence, if no PAN is given (and the case is not part of the
exceptions), then the FAN which follows therefrom is void.

9R.R. 12-1999, as amended by R.R. 18-2013.

I

a

i

c

i■

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

484

When a PAN is not needed

3.1.2 Exceptions to Prior Notice of the Assessment. — Pursuant
to Section 228 of the Tax Code, as amended, a PAN shall not be
required in any of the following cases:

(i) When the finding for any deficiency tax is the result of
mathematical error in the computation of the tax appearing on the
face of the tax return filed by the taxpayer; or
(ii) When a discrepancy has been determined between the tax
withheld and the amount actually remitted by the withholding agent;
or

(iii) When a taxpayer who opted to claim a refund or tax credit of
excess creditable withholding tax for a taxable period was determined
to have carried over and automatically applied the same amount
claimed against the estimated tax liabilities for the taxable quarter
or quarters of the succeeding taxable year; or
(iv) When the excise tax due on excisable articles has not been paid;
or
(v) When an article locally purchased or imported by an exempt
person, such as, but not limited to, vehicles, capital equipment,
machineries and spare parts, has been sold, traded or transferred to
non-exempt persons.

In the above-cited cases, a FLD/FAN shall be issued outright.

A PAN is not needed and a FAN can be issued outright in the
following cases:

o

Any deficiency tax is the result of mathematical error in the
computation of the tax evident on the face of the return

o

Discrepancy between the tax withheld and
actually remitted by the withholding agent

o

Taxpayer who opted to claim a refund or tax credit for excess
creditable withholding tax carried it over and automatically
applied the amount claimed against the estimated tax
liabilities for the taxable quarter of the succeeding taxable
year

o

Excise tax due on excisable articles has not been paid

o

When an article locally purchased or imported by an exempt
person has been sold, traded or transferred to non-exempt
person

the

amount

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

485

Step two: Issuance of the format letter of demand and final
assessment notice

3.1.3 Formal Letter of Demand and Final Assessment Notice
(FLD/FAN). — The Formal Letter of Demand and Final Assessment
Notice (FLD/FAN) shall be issued by the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative. The FLD/FAN calling for payment of the
taxpayer's deficiency tax or taxes shall state the facts, the law, rules
and regulations, or jurisprudence on which the assessment is based;
otherwise, the assessment shall be void (see illustration in ANNEX
"B" hereof).
Remember that the FLD/FAN must state the facts, law, rules and
regulations, or jurisprudence on which the assessment is based
in order to be valid. If not, it is void. (CIR v. Enron Subic Power
Corporation, G.R. No. 166387, January 19, 2009)
o

But see Samar-I Electric Cooperative v. CIR (G.R. No. 193100,
December 10, 2014), which stated that when the legal and
factual bases can be found in a series of correspondence
between the BIR and the taxpayer (and not in the formal
letter of demand and final assessment notice), there was
substantial compliance with the requirements of Section 228,
as the taxpayer was informed in writing.

O

And don't forget CIR v. Fitness by Design, Inc. (G.R. No.
215957, November 9, 2016) which also added that the basis
for allegations of fraud (needed to extend the prescriptive
period to 10 years, instead of three) must also be indicated
In the FAN to give the taxpayer a chance to refute them.

Step three: Protest the FLD/FAN
3.1.4 Disputed Assessment. — The taxpayer or its authorized
representative or tax agent may protest administratively against
the aforesaid FLD/FAN within thirty (30) days from date of receipt
thereof. The taxpayer protesting an assessment may file a written
request for reconsideration or reinvestigation defined as follows:

(I) Request for reconsideration — refers to a plea of re-evaluation
of an assessment on the basis of existing records without need of
additional evidence. It may involve both a question of fact or of law
or both.
(ii) Request for reinvestigation — refers to a plea of re-evaluation
of an assessment on the basis of newly discovered or additional
evidence that a taxpayer intends to present in the reinvestigation. It
may also involve a question of fact or of law or both.

486

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

I!
The taxpayer shall state in his protest (i) the nature of protest
whether reconsideration or reinvestigation, specifying newly
discovered or additional evidence he intends to present if it is a
request for reinvestigation, (ii) date of the assessment notice, and
(iii) the applicable law, rules and regulations, or jurisprudence on
which his protest is based, otherwise, his protest shall be considered
void and without force and effect.

'1

J9JC9B0M

If there are several issues involved in the FLD/FAN but the taxpayer
only disputes or protests against the validity of some of the issues
raised, the assessment attributable to the undisputed issue or issues
shall become final, executory and demandable; and the taxpayer
shall be required to pay the deficiency tax or taxes attributable
thereto, in which case, a collection letter shall be issued to the
taxpayer calling for payment of the said deficiency tax or taxes,
inclusive of the applicable surcharge and/or interest.

If there are several issues involved in the disputed assessment and
the taxpayer fails to state the facts, the applicable law, rules and
regulations, or jurisprudence in support of his protest against some
of the several issues on which the assessment is based, the same
shall be considered undisputed issue or issues, in which case, the
assessment attributable thereto shall become final, executory and
demandable; and the taxpayer shall be required to pay the deficiency
tax or taxes attributable thereto and a collection letter shall be
issued to the taxpayer calling for payment of the said deficiency tax,
inclusive of the applicable surcharge and/or interest.
For requests for reinvestigation, the taxpayer shall submit all relevant
supporting documents in support of his protest within sixty (60) days
from date of filing of his letter of protest, otherwise, the assessment
shall become final. The term "relevant supporting documents" refer
to those documents necessary to support the legal and factual bases
in disputing a tax assessment as determined by the taxpayer. The
sixty (60)-day period for the submission of all relevant supporting
documents shall not apply to requests for reconsideration.
Furthermore, the term "the assessment shall become final" shall
mean the taxpayer is barred from disputing the correctness of the
issued assessment by introduction of newly discovered or additional
evidence, and the FDDA shall consequently be denied.

If the taxpayer fails to file a valid protest against the FLD/FAN
within thirty (30) days from date of receipt thereof, the assessment
shall become final, executory and demandable. No request for
reconsideration or reinvestigation shall be granted on tax assessments
that have already become final, executory and demandable.

•

The taxpaust file a letter of protest within 30 davs from the date
of receipt of the FLD/FAN.

o

If the taxpayer fails to do so, then the assessment becomes
final, executory, and demandable.

J9JC9B0M

487

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

The protest comes .in the form of either a written request for
reconsideration or reinvestigation.
The protest must:
O

State the nature
reinvestigation);

O

Date of the FAN; and

O

Applicable rules, law, etc.
■

of the

protest

(if reconsideration

or

If the protest lacks any of these, then it shall be considered
void and without force and effect.

Note for requests for reinvestigation, the taxpayer shall submit all
relevant supporting documents 60 days from the date of the filing
of his letter of protest.
o

The 60-day period to submit relevant supporting documents
does NOT apply to requests for reconsideration.

O

"Relevant supporting documents" should be understood as
those documents necessary to support the legal basis in
disputing a tax assessment as determined by the taxpayer.

•

The BIR can only inform the taxpayer to submit additional
documents. The BIR cannot demand what type of
supporting documents should be submitted. Otherwise,
a taxpayer will be at the mercy of the BIR, which may
require the production of documents that a taxpayer
cannot submit. (CIR v. First Express Pawnshop Company,
Inc., G.R. No. 172045, June 16, 2009)
•

First Express submitted their documents along with
their protest. The Court said that the BIR cannot
demand what type of supporting documents should
be submitted.

•

The 60-day period is given for the benefit of the
taxpayer. He can take up the entire 60 days or not.
The taxpayer has a choice of not utilizing the period,
by immediately submitting the documents, effectively
starting the 180-day period of the BIR to act much
earlier.

•

The legal implication of this is when the taxpayer
appeals to the CTA because of the expiration of the
180-day period, the taxpayer must allege when
the supporting documents were submitted in order
to reckon the 180-day period. If not, the CTA may
dismiss the case because it was filed still within the
180-day period, and thus, prematurely filed.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

488

Step four: Recourse in case of inaction or denial
Once the protest is filed, two things can happen — either the
CIR or his representative denies it or sits on it and does nothing with
it.

Denial of the protest
SEC 3.1.4 (cont.) If the protest is denied, in whole or in part, by the
Commissioner's duly authorized representative, the taxpayer may
either: (i) appeal to the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) within thirty
(30) days from date of receipt of the said decision; or (ii) elevate
his protest through request for reconsideration to the Commissioner
within thirty (30) days from date of receipt of the said decision.

No request for reinvestigation shall be allowed in administrative appeal
and only issues raised in the decision of the Commissioner's duly
authorized representative shall be entertained by the Commissioner.
x

x

X

If the protest or administrative appeal, as the case may be, is denied,
in whole or in part, by the Commissioner, the taxpayer may appeal
to the CTA within thirty (30) days from date of receipt of the said
decision. Otherwise, the assessment shall become final, executory
and demandable. A motion for reconsideration of the Commissioner's
denial of the protest or administrative appeal, as the case may be,
shall not toll the thirty (30)-day period to appeal to the CTA.
If the protest or administrative appeal Is not acted upon by the
Commissioner within one hundred eighty (180) days counted from
the date of filing of the protest, the taxpayer may either: (i) appeal
to the CTA within thirty (30) days from after the expiration of the
one hundred eighty (180)-day period; or (II) await the final decision
of the Commissioner on the disputed assessment and appeal such
final decision to the CTA within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a
copy of such decision.

If the protest is denied in whole or in part
representative, the taxpayer has two options:

by

the CIR's

o

Appeal to the CTA division within 30 davs from date of receipt
of decision via a Petition for Review under Rule 42 (judicial
appeal); or

o

Request for reconsideration with the CIR within 30 days from
the date of receipt of the decision (administrative appeal).
■

If the protest or request for reconsideration is still denied
by the CIR, appeal to the CTA within 30 days from date of
receipt of said decision.

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

•

489

A motion for reconsideration (MR) of the CIR's denial
will NOT toll the 30-day period to appeal to the CTA.

If the protest or administrative appeal is not acted upon
by the CIR within 180 days counted from the date of the
filing of the protest, the taxpayer may either:

o

•

Appeal to the CTA within 30 days from the expiration
of the 180-day period, or

•

Wait for the final decision of the CIR and then appeal
said decision to the CTA within 30 days after receipt
of said decision.

The "appeal or wait" options are mutually exclusive.

Inaction

Sec. 3.1.4 (cont.)
XXX

If the protest Is not acted upon by the Commissioner's duly authorized
representative within one hundred eighty (180) days counted from
the date of filing of the protest in case of a request reconsideration; or
from date of submission by the taxpayer of the required documents
within sixty (60) days from the date of filing of the protest in case
of a request for reinvestigation, the taxpayer may either: (i) appeal
to the CTA within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the one
hundred eighty (180)-day period; or (il) await the final decision of
the Commissioner's duly authorized representative on the disputed
assessment.
x

X

X

If the CIR's representative does not act within 180 days counted
from:

o

The date of filing of the protest in case of a request for
reconsideration, or

o

The date of submission of the required relevant supporting
documents (within 60 days from the date of filing of the
protest for a request for reinvestigation)
•

The taxpayer may either:
•

Appeal to the CTA within 30 days from the expiration
of the 180-day period, or

•

Wait for the final decision of the CIR's representative.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

490

O

Again, this "appeal or wait" options in inaction
cases are mutually exclusive; resort to one bars
the application of the other. (RCBC v. CIR, G.R.
No. 168498, April 24, 2007)

O

Note that the option is granted to the taxpayer,
hence, the CIR cannot state that the appeal to
the CTA is late if the taxpayer chooses to wait for
the final decision, even if it is beyond the 180-day
period. (Lascona Land Co. Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No.
171251, March 5, 2012)

The taxpayer does not have the option to appeal to the
CIR in case the CIR's representative does not act on his
protest. The taxpayer must choose between the two
options. (PAGCOR v. BIR, G.R. No. 208731, January 27,
2016)

Issuance of a Final Decision on a Disputed Assessment (FDDA)
Sec. 3.1.5 Final Decision on a Disputed Assessment (FDDA).
— The decision of the Commissioner or his duly authorized
representative shall state the (i) facts, the applicable law, rules
and regulations, or jurisprudence on which such decision is based,
otherwise, the decision shall be void (see illustration in ANNEX "C"
hereof), and (ii) that the same is his final decision.

Assuming the CIR or his representative acts on the protest, the
FDDA must state:

•

o

The facts, the applicable law, rules and regulations or
jurisprudence on which the decision is based (if not, then it is
a void decision); and

o

That the decision is the final decision.

The FDDA must state the facts and the law in order to give the
taxpayer a chance for an intelligent appeal with the CTA.

o

If it doesn't, it is considered void.

o

A void FDDA does not invalidate the underlying assessment
(because an assessment and a FDDA are different). If the
FDDA is void, it is as if there was no decision by the CIR—
tantamount to a denial by inaction by the CIR, which may
still be appealed to the CTA. (CIR v. Liquigaz Philippines
Corporation, G.R. No. 215534, April 18, 2016)

J9JC9B0M

491

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

Quick rundown of the protest procedure

Filing of tax return
—► LOA and Audit Notice of Discrepancy

—► BIR finds deficiency and issues PAN (15 days to respond)
—► FLD/FAN (30 days to protest)
—► Taxpayer Files Protest Letter

—► Submit Supporting Documents if Request for Reinvestigation (60
days from time of protest letter)

BIR denial (FDDA)? Appeal to CTA or CIR (and then the CTA)
(within 30 days from decision)
BIR inaction for 180 days? Appeal to CTA (within 30 days from
lapse of 180 days) or wait for the decision of the BIR
•

BIR's compliance with the protest procedure should not be merely
perfunctory. If facts show that the BIR did not even consider the
taxpayer's explanations, then the assessment will be considered
void for violation due process. (CIR v. Avon Products, G.R. No.
201398, October 3, 2018)
O

In CIR v. Avon, the SC found that the PAN, the FAN, and the
collection letter were identical. While the BIR is not obliged to
accept the explanations of taxpayers, the BIR must, at least,
give a reason for rejecting these explanations. If it does not
do so, it is as if the taxpayer was not fully apprised of the
legal and factual basis of the assessments issued against it.

Special rule for assessments against and
government agencies and offices
•

disputes

between

When the BIR assesses a government agency or office and said
government agency protests, the next step is to appeal to the
Secretary of Justice, not the CTA. (CIR v. Secretary of Justice and
Metropolitan Cebu Water District [MCWD], G.R. No. 209289, July
9, 2018)
O

Under PD 242, all disputes, claims, and controversies solely
between or among the departments, bureaus, offices,
agencies, and instrumentalities of the national government
shall be administratively settled. This covers a tax dispute
between the CIR and another government entity, like PSALM
or a water district. (CIR v. MCWD; PSALM v. CIR, G.R. No.
198146, August8, 2017)

O

In all cases involving only questions of law, the SOJ shall
adjudicate and settle the issue. The decision of the SOJ

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

492

may be appealed to the Office of the President if the dispute
exceeds Pl,000,000.
O

PD 242 only applies when the controversy is solely
between or among the departments, bureaus, offices, and
instrumentalities of the government. Hence, when the
controversy also involves a private party (like an informer) PD
242 will not apply and the CTA will have jurisdiction. (PNOC v.
CA, G.R. No. 109976, April 26, 2005)

On March 10, 2010, Continental, Inc. received a preliminary
assessment notice (PAN) dated March 1, 2010 issued by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue (CIR) for deficiency income tax for
its taxable year 2008. It failed to protest the PAN. The CIR thereupon
issued a final assessment notice (FAN) with letter of demand on April
30, 2010. The FAN was received by the corporation on May 10, 2010,
following which or on May 25, 2010, it filed its protest against it.
The CIR denied the protest on the ground that the assessment had
already become final and executory, the corporation having failed to
protest the PAN.

Is the CIR correct? Explain. (2010 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No, the CIR is wrong! Failure to protest the PAN
will have no effect on the taxpayer, save that he will be considered
in default. It is the FAN which must be protested. In this case, as the
FAN was protested, then the assessment had not yet become final
and executory.

!

The BIR issued in 2010 a final assessment notice and demand letter
against X Corporation covering deficiency income tax for the year
2008 in the amount of P10 Million. X Corporation earlier requested
the advice of a lawyer on whether or not It should file a request for
reconsideration or a request for reinvestigation. The lawyer said It
does not matter whether the protest files against the assessment Is a
request for reconsideration or a request for reinvestigation, because
it has same consequences or implications.

a) What are the differences between a request for reconsideration
and a request for reinvestigation?
b) Do you agree with the advice of the lawyer? Explain your answer
(2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) Reconsideration refers to a plea for a re-evaluation of an
assessment on the basis of existing records without need of
additional evidence. This is basically a mere re-evaluation of existing
records. It does NOT suspend the running of the prescriptive period.
Reinvestigation refers to a plea for re-evaluation on the basis of

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

493

newly-discovered or additional evidence that a taxpayer intends to
present in the reinvestigation. The distinction is essential because
the suspension of the period only occurs when the taxpayer requests
for a reinvestigation and is granted by the CIR. Moreover, under
the new rules, the 60-day period to submit additional documents
will only apply for requests for reinvestigation, not requests for
reconsidera tion.
b) No, I do not agree with his advice for the plain reason that he is
wrong. As mentioned above, there are substantial differences between
a request for reconsideration and a request for reinvestigation.
Hence, I will first confirm with the client how he wants to approach
the situation and whether he has additional evidence or documents
to support his case; if he does, then we will go for a request for
reinvestigation; if he has none, then we will proceed with a request
for reconsideration.

On March 27, 2012, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) issued
a notice of assessment against Blue Water Industries Inc. (BWI), a
domestic corporation, informing the latter of its alleged deficiency
corporate income tax for the year 2009. On April 20, 2012, BWI
filed a letter protest before the BIR contesting said assessment and
demanding that the same be cancelled or set aside.
However, on May 19, 2013, that is, after more than a year from the
filing of the letter protest, the BIR informed BWI that the latter's
letter protest was denied on the ground that the assessment had
already become final, executory and demandable. The BIR reasoned
that its failure to decide the case within 180 days from filing of the
letter protest should have prompted BWI to seek recourse before the
Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) by filing a petition for review within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of the 180-day period as mandated by
the provisions of the last paragraph of Section 228 of the National
Internal Revenue Code (NIRC). Accordingly, BWI's failure to file a
petition for review before the CTA rendered the assessment final,
executory and demandable. Is the contention of the BIR correct?
Explain. (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No. The BIR is wrong. In case the BIR does not
act on a taxpayer's protest, the taxpayer has two options: appeal to
the CTA within 30 days from the end of the 180-day period or wait
for the final decision. In this case, the taxpayer can still wait for
the final decision. The assessment Is not yet final, executory, and
demandable.

Mr. Tiaga has been a law-abiding citizen diligently paying his income
taxes. On May 5, 2014, he was surprised to receive an assessment
notice from the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) informing him of
a deficiency tax assessment as a result of a mathematical error in
the computation of his income tax, as appearing on the face of his

J9JC9B0M

494

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

income tax return for the year 2011, which he filed on April 15, 2012.
Mr. Tiaga believes that there was no such error in the computation of
his income tax for the year 2011. Based on the assessment received
by Mr. Tiaga, may he already file a protest thereon? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Yes, Mr. Tiaga may already file a protest. A
PAN is not needed and a FAN can be issued outright in the cases of
mathematical errors in the computation of tax. The rules also state
that the taxpayer must protest the FAN, not the PAN. Here, it seems
the assessment issued to Mr. Tiaga is the FAN, given the basis of
mathematical error. Hence, he may already file a protest.

The BIR assessed the Babuyan Water District (BWD) with deficiency
income taxes amounting to P8.5 million, inclusive of interest and
surcharge. The BWD disputed the assessment, and argued that it was
a wholly-owned government entity performing essentia! government
functions. However, the BIR denied the protest.
The BWD filed a petition for arbitration in the Office of the Secretary
of Justice pursuant to Sections 66 to 71, Chapter 14, Book IV of
the Administrative Code of 1987 to assail the denial of its protest,
and to seek the proper interpretation of Section 32(8)(7)(b) of
the Tax Code that excluded from gross Income the income derived by
the Government or its political subdivisions. The Secretary of Justice
rendered a decision declaring the BWD exempt from the payment of
income tax.

The Commissioner of Internal Revenue appealed to the CTA on the
sole ground that the Secretary of Justice had no jurisdiction to review
the assessment of the BIR.

Is the appeal meritorious? Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The appeal of the CTA Is wrong. Under the law
and jurisprudence, all disputes, claims, and controversies solely
between or among the departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and
instrumentalities of the national government shall be administratively
settled by the Secretary of Justice. Here, the dispute is between two
government bodies: the BWD and the BIR. Hence, the Secretary of
Justice had jurisdiction to review the assessment of the BIR.

On October 5, 2016, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) sent KLM
Corp, a Final Assessment Notice (FAN), stating that after its audit
pursuant to a Letter of Authority duly issued therefor, KLM Corp,
had deficiency value-added and withholding taxes. Subsequently, a
warrant of distraint and/or levy was issued against KLM Corp. KLM
Corp, opposed the actions of the BIR on the ground that it was not
accorded due process because it did not even receive a Preliminary
Assessment Notice (PAN) after the BIR's investigation, which the
BIR admitted.:

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

a)

495

Distinguish a PAN from a FAN.

b) Are the deficiency tax assessment and warrant of distraint and/
or levy issued against KLM Corp, valid? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
a) A PAN is a preliminary assessment notice. It contains the law,
facts, and jurisprudence for the proposed assessment. A FAN is a
final assessment notice. It is the assessment itself, and must also
contain the law, facts, and jurisprudence as basis, as well as the
demand to pay within a period of time. The taxpayer protests the
FAN, not the PAN.
b) The deficiency tax assessment and warrant of distraint and/or
levy is invalid. Under the Tax Code, the PAN must be given and
received by the taxpayer, except for a few cases. Case law has also
stated that the PAN is a due process requirement. Here, no PAN was
given and therefore the taxpayer's due process rights were violated,
making the FAN and the warrant invalid.
r

After a Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) audit, T Corp., a domestic
corporation engaged in buying and selling of scrap metals, was found
to have deficiency income tax of P25,000,000.00, including Interests
and penalties, for the year 2012. For 2012, T Corp, hied its income
tax return (ITR) on April 15, 2013 because it used the calendar year
for its accounting. The BIR sent the Preliminary Assessment Notice
(PAN) on December 23, 2015, and eventually, the Final Assessment
Notice (FAN) on April 11, 2016, which were received by T Corp, on
the same dates that they were sent. Upon receipt of the FAN, T Corp,
hied Its protest letter on June 25, 2016.
Thereafter, and without action from the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue (CIR), T Corp, hied a petition for review before the Court
of Tax Appeals, alleging that the assessment has prescribed. For
Its part, the CIR moved to dismiss the case, pointing out that the
assessment had already become final because the protest was hied
beyond the allowable period.

a) Is T Corp.'s contention regarding the prescription of the
assessment meritorious? Explain.
b) Should the CIR's motion to dismiss be granted? Explain. (2019
Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
a)

T Corp's contention Is wrong. The Tax Code states that the
prescriptive period is three years from the hling of the return or
the date the law requires it to be hied, whichever is later. In this
case, the return was hied on 15 April 2013. The FAN was sent
and received on 11 April 2016, well within the 3-year period.
Hence, the assessment has not yet prescribed.

i

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

496

b)

B.

Yes, it should be granted. The Tax Code states that a taxpayer's
protest to the FAN must be filed within 30 days from receipt of
the FAN. In this case, the FAN was received on 11 April 2016
and the protest was filed on 25 June 2016, way beyond the 30day period. Hence, the assessment had already become final.
Therefore, the motion to dismiss must be granted.

Claiming a Refund

Refund
Sec. 72. Suit to Recover Tax Based on False or Fraudulent
Returns. — When an assessment is made in case of any list,
statement or return, which in the opinion of the Commissioner
was false or fraudulent or contained any understatement or
undervaluation, no tax collected under such assessment shall be
recovered by any suit, unless it is proved that the said list, statement
or return was not false nor fraudulent and did not contain any
understatement or undervaluation; but this provision shall not apply
to statements or returns made or to be made in good faith regarding
annual depreciation of oil or gas wells and mines.

Sec. 204. Authority of the Commissioner to Compromise,
Abate and Refund or Credit Taxes. — The Commissioner may —

(C) Credit or refund taxes erroneously or illegally received or
penalties imposed without authority, refund the value of internal
revenue stamps when they are returned in good condition by the
purchaser, and, in his discretion, redeem or change unused stamps
that have been rendered unfit for use and refund their value upon
proof of destruction. No credit or refund of taxes or penalties shall be
allowed unless the taxpayer files in writing with the Commissioner a
claim for credit or refund within two (2) years after the payment of
the tax or penalty: Provided, however, That a return filed showing
an overpayment shall be considered as a written claim for credit or
refund.

A Tax Credit Certificate validly issued under the provisions of this
Code may be applied against any internal revenue tax, excluding
withholding taxes, for which the taxpayer is directly liable. Any
request for conversion into refund of unutilized tax credits may
be allowed, subject to the provisions of Section 230 of this Code:
Provided, That the original copy of the Tax Credit Certificate showing
a creditable balance is surrendered to the appropriate revenue officer
for verification and cancellation: Provided, further, That in no case
shall a tax refund be given resulting from availment of incentives
granted pursuant to special laws for which no actual payment was
made.
The Commissioner shall submit to the Chairmen of the Committee on
Ways and Means of both the Senate and House of Representatives,

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

497

every six (6) months, a report on the exercise of his powers under this
Section, stating therein the following facts and information, among
others: names and addresses of taxpayers whose cases have been
the subject of abatement or compromise; amount involved; amount
compromised or abated; and reasons for the exercise of power:
Provided, That the said report shall be presented to the Oversight
Committee in Congress that shall be constituted to determine that
said powers are reasonably exercised and that the government is not
unduly deprived of revenues.

Sec. 229. Recovery of Tax Erroneously or Illegally Collected.
— No suit or proceeding shall be maintained in any court for the
recovery of any national internal revenue tax hereafter alleged to
have been erroneously or illegally assessed or collected, or of any
penalty claimed to have been collected without authority, of any
sum alleged to have been excessively or in any manner wrongfully
collected without authority, or of any sum alleged to have been
excessively or in any manner wrongfully collected, until a claim for
refund or credit has been duly filed with the Commissioner; but such
suit or proceeding may be maintained, whether or not such tax,
penalty, or sum has been paid under protest or duress.
In any case, no such suit or proceeding shall be filed after the
expiration of two (2) years from the date of payment of the tax or
penalty regardless of any supervening cause that may arise after
payment: Provided, however, That the Commissioner may, even
without a written claim therefor, refund or credit any tax, where on
the face of the return upon which payment was made, such payment
appears clearly to have been erroneously paid.

I

Sec. 230. Forfeiture of Cash Refund and of Tax Credit. —

(A) Forfeiture of Refund. — A refund check or warrant issued in
accordance with the pertinent provisions of this Code, which shall
remain unclaimed or uncashed within five (5) years from the date
the said warrant or check was mailed or delivered, shall be forfeited
in favor of the Government and the amount thereof shall revert to
the general fund.
(B) Forfeiture of Tax Credit. — A tax credit certificate issued in
accordance with the pertinent provisions of this Code, which shall
remain unutilized after five (5) years from the date of issue, shall,
unless revalidated, be considered invalid, and shall not be allowed as
payment for internal revenue tax liabilities of the taxpayer, and the
amount covered by the certificate shall revert to the general fund.
(C) Transitory Provision. — For purposes of the preceding
Subsection, a tax credit certificate issued by the Commissioner or
his duly authorized representative prior to January 1, 1998, which
remains unutilized or has a creditable balance as of said date, shall
be presented for revalidation with the Commissioner or his duly
authorized representative on or before June 30, 1998.

1

J9JC9B0M

1

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

498

The following are the instances when a claim for refund may be
availed of:
1.

Erroneously or illegally assessed or collected internal revenue
taxes,

2.

Penalties imposed without authority, or

3.

Any sum alleged to have been excessive or in any manner
wrongfully collected

There is a distinction between a tax refund and a tax credit.
O

In a tax refund, there is actual reimbursement.

o

In a tax credit, a tax certificate or tax credit memo is issued
to the taxpayer, and this can be applied against any sum
that may be due and collectible from the taxpayer, except
withholding taxes.

*

Tax credit certificates can no longer be transferred or
assigned to any other person. (R.R. 14-2011)

The requirements for a tax credit or refund are:

1.

Written claim for credit or refund filed with the CIR (a return
filed showing overpayment shall be considered as a written
claim), whether or not the tax has been paid under protest,
and

2.

Filed within two years after the actual payment of the tax or
penalty, regardless of the existence of any supervening cause
after payment.

o

Hence, a taxpayer who realizes a transaction is taxexempt through a BIR Ruling should not reckon the
two-year period from the issuance of the BIR Ruling.
BIR Rulings merely confirm what is in the Tax Code.
The period begins from actual payment of tax, not from
the discovery of excessive payment of the tax. (CIR v.
Meralco, G.R. No. 181459, June 9, 2014)

o

The two-year period is mandatory and will be strictly
followed. It is the two-year period that applies to refunds,
not the six-year period for sotutio indebiti under the Civil
Code. (CIR v. San Miguel Corporation, G.R. No. 180740,
November 11, 2019)

Basically, when filing for a refund/credit, you need the following
(common elements in all refund cases):
o

Filed within the two-vear period with the CIR

o

Substantive basis in law

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

O

499

Documents to support or substantiate your claim
Why such stringent requirements?

■

•

Because a claim for a refund/credit partakes of the
nature of an exemption and is strictly construed
against the claimant. He needs to establish the legal
basis for the refund and substantiate it.

•

This was also reiterated in Philex Mining Corporation
v. CIR (G.R. No. 120324, April 21, 1999), where the
refund awarded to the taxpayer was based on the
specific tax deemed paid, and not on the increased
rates actually paid. The Court stated that the refund
privileges must be strictly construed.

•

However, if the requirements are met, the BIR should
refund without any unreasonable delay what it has
erroneously collected. (CIR v. Tokyo Shipping Co.
Ltd., G.R. No. L-68252, May 26, 1995)

The claim must be filed with the CIR, even if a different
government agency has the responsibility of collecting the taxes.
(Agusan Wood Industries v. DENR, G.R. No. 234531, July 10,
2019, where the taxpayer filed a refund claim for forest charges
with the DENR, which the SC held was wrong as the forest charges
were taxes J
The government is not liable to pay interest on the taxes it
refunds to the taxpayer, given that there is no provision in law
requiring such. (Collector of Internal Revenue v. Sweeney, G.R.
No. L-12178, August 21, 1959)

Remember, a withholding agent can file a claim for refund.
O

As an agent of the taxpayer, his authority to file the necessary
Income tax return and to remit the tax withheld to the
government impliedly includes the authority to file a claim for
refund and to bring an action for recovery of such claim. (CIR
v. Smart Communications, Inc., G.R. No. 179045, August 25,
2010)
■

O

However, if ever the withholding agent does get the
refund, the withholding agent has the obligation to remit
the same to the principal taxpayer. As a mere agent of
the taxpayer, he has the duty to return what he has
recovered; otherwise, he would be unjustly enriching
himself.

Of course, the taxpayer (or the person whose income was
subjected to withholding) may also file a claim for refund,
but it should be directed to the BIR, not the taxpayer's

ill

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

500

withholding agent. (Honda Cars Philippines, Inc. v. Honda
Cars Technical Specialists and Supervisors Union, G.R. No.
204142, November 19, 2014, where a union filed a case
against its employer)

•

The taxpayer does not have a cause of action for
erroneously collected tax against the withholding agent.

Two venues of refund:
Admin (BIR)

Judicial (CTA)
On the written claim to the BIR’.
The written claim for credit or refund filed with the CIR is a
mandatory requirement.

•

O

It is a condition precedent. If the taxpayer fails to comply
with the same, any action on his part in recovering that tax
will necessarily fail. If a judicial action is brought for recovery,
it will be dismissed. (Vda. de Aguinaldo v. CIR, G.R. No.
L-19927, February 26, 1965)

o

Hence, an action brought to court to demand reconveyance
of property sold upon forfeiture for nonpayment of a tax
assessment will be dismissed, as It actually attacks the
underlying assessment and demands the refund for allegedly
erroneously collected taxes. Recourse to administrative
remedies (protesting an assessment or claiming a refund)
should have been resorted to first. (Alcantara v. Republic,
G.R. No. 192536, March 15, 2017)

O

But can the CIR refund or claim any tax without a written
claim?

Yes. But only when on the face of the return upon which
payment was made, such payment appears clearly to
have been erroneously paid. {Codal)
On refunding overpaid creditable withholding taxes'.

•

Requisites:

o

Filing the same within the two-year period;

o

Establishing the fact of withholding with copies of the CWT
certificates; and

o

Showing that the income received was declared as part of
gross income. (CIR v. Far East Bank, G.R. No. 173854, March
15, 2010)

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

501

On the two-year prescriptive period

•

The general rule is that the two-year prescriptive period runs
from the payment of the tax. This, however, has been explained
by the Supreme Court in the following cases:
O

For overpaid quarterly corporate income tax, the two-year
prescriptive period to claim refunds commences to run only
from the time the refund is ascertained, which can only be
determined after a final adjustment return is accomplished.
In other words, for corporations, the two-year period begins
when they file the final adjustment return. (CIR v. Philippine
American Life Insurance Co., G.R. No. 105208, May 29, 1995)
■

The two-year period should be computed from the time
of actual filing of the adjusted return or annual income
tax return, not the last day allowed by law to file. So if
you file earlier than the last day for filing, the period is
counted from the date of actual filing. (CIR v. CA and BPI,
G.R. No. 117254, January 21, 1999)

■

For example, the last day to file is on April 15 and you file
your income tax return on April 4, the two-year period
will start on April 4. The Government is given this benefit.

O

For overpaid withholding taxes, the period is counted from
the end of the taxable year. (Gibbs v. CIR, G.R. No. L-17406,
November 29, 1965 — Gibbs claimed he overpaid the taxes
he withheld for some foreigner)

O

But for claiming a refund for creditable withholding taxes,
the period is counted from the filing of the taxpayer's final
adjustment tax return. (ACCRAIN v. CA, G.R. No. 96322,
December 20, 1991 — ACCRAIN claimed that they didn't have
taxes due to credit the taxes withheld by their withholding
agents)

O

Where the tax is paid in installments (for natural persons
only), the period for refund begins from date for payment of
the last Installment.

O

Can the buyer in a transaction exempt from indirect taxes
claim the refund?
■

No, because the statutory taxpayer is the seller. The
buyer merely shoulders the burden. (Unless the law
clearly grants the party to which the economic burden is
shifted an exemption from both direct and indirect taxes,
as what happened in Philippine Airlines, Inc. v. CIR, G.R.
No. 198759, July 1, 2013)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

502

The two-year period cannot be extended by the BIR by a mere
revenue memorandum. (Philippine Bank of Communications v.
CIR, G.R. No. 112024, January 28, 1999)
The other general rule is that the two-year prescriptive period is
mandatory, meaning after the lapse of the two-year period, there
can no longer be proceedings for refund. This, however, also has
its exceptions:
O

When the taxpayer and the government agree to wait for the
outcome of a case which is on all fours with the instant case

O

When the payment of tax was not due because of error or
wrongful collection, but because of a patriotic duty to help the
cause of the nation {CIR v. PNB, G.R. No. 161997, October
25, 1995, wherein the PNB made an advanced payment of its
taxes, which was recognized as such by the BIR themselves)

O

When the taxpayer was made to believe that the refund was
going to be allowed by the government

With respect to the CTA, the two-year period is not jurisdictional
and may be suspended for reasons of equity and other special
circumstances.
On bringing the claim to the CTA (take note of the different rule
when it comes to refunds of input taxes because of CIR v. Aichi
Forging, G.R. No. 184283, October 6, 2010)

•

The taxpayer need not wait for the action of the CIR on the claim
for refund before taking his claim to the CTA.

•

Both the claim for refund and the appeal to the CTA must be done
within the two-year period.
O

Hence, if the period is about to expire, and the CIR has not
acted upon the claim, the taxpayer may file and appeal with
the CTA, without waiting for the CIR.

O

The suit or proceeding must be started in the CTA before the
end of the two-year period without awaiting the decision of
the CIR. (Gibbs v. Collector of Internal Revenue, G.R. No.
L-13453, February 29, 1960)
■

The taxpayer's failure to comply with the requirement
regarding the institution of the action or proceeding in
court within two years after the payment of the taxes
bars him from recovery of the same, irrespective of
whether a claim for the refund of such taxes filed with
the CIR is still pending action on the latter. (Collector of
Internal Revenue v. Sweeney, G.R. No. L-12178, August
21, 1959)

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

503

For example, on April 15, 2010, you filed an ITR. On April
10, 2012, you realized you overpaid your taxes. You have
five days before the prescriptive period lapses. What do
you do?
a.

Claim for a refund with the BIR on April 10, 2012

b.

File an appeal with the CTA on April 15, 2012

Cry
d.

Both A & B

The answer is D. The prudent thing to do is exhaust all
administrative remedies before going to Court. But since
your last day is on April 15, then you have no other choice
but to file an appeal with the CTA.
The claim must be filed with the court which has proper jurisdiction
over the refund. That court is the CTA. And, the claim must not be
in a mere supplemental petition in another case pending before
the CTA, as its admission is merely discretionary. A petition for
review must be filed instead. (Far East Bank v. CIR, G.R. No.
138919, May 2, 2006)
Note that when it comes to refunding unutilized input taxes
(VAT), only the administrative claim must be filed within the twoyear period. (Refer to discussions on Mindanao Geothermal II
Partnership v. CIR in the VAT section)

a) Explain the procedure for claiming refunds or tax credits of input
Value Added Tax (VAT) for zero-rated or effectively zero-rated sales
under Sec. 112 of the National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC) from
the filing of an application with the CIR up to the CTA.

b) Explain the procedure for claiming refunds of tax erroneously or
Illegally collected under Sec. 229 of the NIRC from the filing of the
claim for refunds with the CIR up to the CTA. (2016 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
a) To claim refunds or tax credits for zero-rated sales, the taxpayer
must first file an administrative claim with the CIR within two years
from the end of the taxable quarter when the relevant sales were
made. The CIR has 90 days to rule on the claim. The taxpayer then
has 30 days, from the decision of the CIR or from the expiration of
the 90-day period if the CIR does not act, to file a judicial claim with
the CTA, even if this is beyond the two-year period. This 90+30-day
rule is mandatory and Jurisdictional. (Adjusted to reflect TRAIN)

b) To claim refunds for erroneously or illegally collected taxes, the
taxpayer must file both the administrative claim and the judicial claim
within two years from the payment of the tax. The administrative
claim is mandatory and the CTA will dismiss the case without it.

t

J9JC9B0M

504

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

On May 10, 2011, the final withholding tax for certain income
payments to W Corp, was withheld and remitted to the Bureau of
Internal Revenue (BIR), and the corresponding return therefor was
concomitantly filed on the same date. Upon discovering that the
amount withheld was excessive, M/ Corp, filed with the BIR a claim
for refund for erroneously withheld and collected final withholding
income tax on May 3, 2013. A week after, and without waiting for
any decision from the Commissioner of Interna! Revenue (CIR), W
Corp, filed a petition for review before the Court of Tax Appeals
(CTA) to make sure that the petition was filed within the two (2)year period for claiming refunds.

In resisting the claim, the BIR contended that the claim must
be dismissed by the CT A on the ground of non-exhaustion of
administrative remedies because it did not give the CIR the
opportunity to act on the claim of refund.

Is the BIR's contention meritorious? Explain. (2019 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The BIR's contention is wrong. To claim refunds
for erroneously or illegally collected taxes, the taxpayer must file
both the administrative claim and the judicial claim within two years
from the payment of the tax. In this case, the two-year period was
nearly up, so the taxpayer had no choice but to file the judicial claim
without waiting for the action of the CIR.

XYZ Corp, is listed as a top 20,000 Philippine corporation by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue. It secured a loan from ABC Bank with a
6°/o per annum interest. AU interest payments made by XYZ Corp, to
ABC Bank is subject to a 2% creditable withholding tax. At the same
time, XYZ Corp, has a trust deposit with ABC Bank in the amount of
P100,000,000.00, which earns 2°/o interest per annum, but Is subject
to a 20°/o final withholding tax on the interest income received by
XYZ Corp.
When is the deadline for filing a judicial claim for refund for any
excess or erroneous taxes paid in the case of: 1. the 20% final
withholding tax; and 2. the 2% creditable withholding tax? (2019
Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: For refunds for any excess or erroneous taxes
paid for final withholding tax, the deadline for filing a judicial claim
is two years from the date of the payment of tax. For creditable
withholding tax, the deadline for filing a judicial claim is two years
from the filing of the taxpayer's final adjustment return.

On choosing between a refund and a credit for corporations

Sec. 76. Final Adjustment Return. — Every corporation liable to
tax under Section 27 shall file a final adjustment return covering the
total taxable income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year. If the

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

505

sum of the quarterly tax payments made during the said taxable
year is not equal to the total tax due on the entire taxable income of
that year, the corporation shall either:

(A) Pay the balance of tax still due; or
(B) Carry-over the excess credit; or

(C) Be credited or refunded with the excess amount paid, as the
case may be.
In case the corporation is entitled to a tax credit or refund of the
excess estimated quarterly income taxes paid, the excess amount
shown on its final adjustment return may be carried over and
credited against the estimated quarterly income tax liabilities for the
taxable quarters of the succeeding taxable years. Once the option to
carry-over and apply the excess quarterly income tax against income
tax due for the taxable quarters of the succeeding taxable years
has been made, such option shall be considered irrevocable for that
taxable period and no application for cash refund or issuance of a tax
credit certificate shall be allowed therefor.

The section offers three options to a taxable corporation whose
total quarterly income tax payments in a given taxable year
exceeds its total income due:
O

Filing for a tax refund, or

o

Availing of a tax credit, or

o

Carry over the excess credit against the estimated income
tax liabilities of the succeeding quarters.

If you choose the carry-over option, it is considered irrevocable
for that taxable period, and no application for a tax refund or
issuance of a tax credit certificate shall then be allowed. (Philam
Asset Management, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No. 156637, December 14,
2005)
o

Irrevocable...
Once the taxpayer opts to carry-over the excess income
tax against the taxes due for the succeeding taxable
years, such option is irrevocable for the whole amount
of the excess income tax, thus, prohibiting the taxpayer
from applying for a refund for that same excess income
tax in the next succeeding taxable years.
The unutilized excess tax credits will remain in the
taxpayer's account and will be carried over and applied
against the taxpayer's income tax liabilities in the
succeeding taxable years until fully utilized. (Asiaworld

J9JC9B0M

506

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Properties Philippines Corporation
171766, July 29, 2010)

•

v.

CIR,

G.R.

No.

In other words, if you choose to carry-over unutilized
taxes in 2010, you have to keep carrying these taxes
over until they are fully exhausted.

The taxpayer must choose by marking the corresponding option
box provided in the final adjusted return (FAR). While a taxpayer
is required to mark its choice in the form provided by the BIR, this
requirement is only for the purpose of facilitating tax collection.
o

However, failure to signify one's intention in the FAR does not
mean outright barring of a valid request for a refund, should
one still choose this option later on.

■

o

•

In PhUAm Management v. CIR, PhilAm did not make the
appropriate marking in the BIR form, but the Supreme
Court said that despite the failure to do so, the filing of
its written claim effectively serves as an expression of its
choice to request a tax refund, instead of a tax credit.
To assert that any future claim for a tax refund will be
instantly hindered by a failure to signify one's intention
in the FAR is to render nugatory the clear provision that
allows for a two-year prescriptive period. Moreover,
PhilAm did not perform any act indicating that it chose a
tax credit.

In the same case, however, the Court, ruling on a different
taxable period, stated that the subsequent acts of PhilAm
revealed that it had effectively chosen the carry-over option
— despite not marking the carry-over option box. The ’act'
which indicated such was that they filled out the portion "prior
year's excess credits" in the FAR. Filling this portion was not
mandatory — if they indeed chose a refund, they should have
just left this blank.

The irrevocability rule only applies to the carry-over option. It
does not apply to taxpayers who choose to refund or a tax credit.
(University Physicians Services, Inc.-Management, Inc. v. CIR,
G.R. No. 205955, March 7, 2018)

o

The law does not prevent a taxpayer who originally opted for
a refund or tax credit certificate from shifting to the carryover of the excess creditable taxes to the taxable quarters
of the succeeding taxable years. However, in case the
taxpayer decides to shift its option to carry-over, it may no
longer revert to its original choice due to the irrevocability
rule. (University Physicians Services, Inc.-Management, Inc.
v. CIR, try reconciling this with Rhombus Energy v. CIR, G.R.
No. 206362, August 1, 2018)

>

J9JC9B0M

TAXPAYER'S REMEDIES

507

Mirador, Inc., a domestic corporation, filed its Annual Income Tax
Return for its taxable year 2008 on April 15, 2009. In the Return, it
reflected an income tax overpayment of Pl, 000,000 and indicated
its choice to carry-over the overpayment as an automatic tax credit
against its income tax liabilities in subsequent years.

On April 15, 2010, it filed its Annual Income Tax Return for its taxable
year 2009 reflecting a taxable loss and an income tax overpayment
for the current year 2009 in the amount of P500,000 and its income
tax overpayment for the prior year 2008 of Pl,000,000.
In its 2009 Return, the corporation indicated its option to claim for
refund the total income tax overpayment of Pl,500,000.

Choose which of the following statements is correct.

a. Mirador, Inc. may claim as refund the total income tax
overpayment of Pl,500,000 reflected in its income tax return for its
taxable year 2009;

b. It may claim as refund the amount of P500,000 representing its
income tax overpayment for its taxable year 2009; or

No amount may be claimed as refund. Explain the basis of your
c.
answer. (2010 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: I choose B. It may claim the P500,000 because it
did not indicate that it will carry-over the overpayment. It will not be
allowed to claim the Pl, 000,000 because if a corporation chooses to
carry-over the overpayment, then the choice is irrevocable.

On April 16, 2012, the corporation filed its annual corporate Income
tax return for 2011, showing an overpayment of income tax of Pl
Million which Is to be carried over to the succeeding year(s). On
May 15, 2012, the corporation sought advice from you and said that
It contemplates to file an amended return for 2011, which shows
that Instead of carry over of the excess income tax payment, the
same shall be considered as a claim for tax refund and the small
box shown as "refund" in the return will be filled up. Within a year,
the corporation will file the formal request for refund for the excess
payment.
a) Will you recommend to the corporation such a course of action
and justify that the amended return Is the latest official act of the
corporation as to how it may treat such overpayment of tax or should
you consider the option granted to taxpayers as Irrevocable, once
previously exercised by it? Explain your answer.
b) Should the petition for review filed with the CTA on the basis of
the amended tax return be denied by the BIR and the CTA, could the
corporations still carry over such excess payment of income tax in
the succeeding years, considering that there is no prescriptive period
provided for in the income tax law with respect to carry over of
excess income tax payments? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

i
•

J9JC9B0M

508

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Suggested answer: a) I will advise the corporation to file its
amended tax return. Jurisprudence states that the failure to signify
one's intent to carry-over or refund the excess taxes is not a bar to
claim for refund, as the marking on the final adjustment return is
merely for administrative purposes. In this case, the corporation had
yet to carry over the excess taxes as the return is to be amended
only within a month from the filing of the original return. Hence, no
concrete action has been made by the corporation to signify that it
indeed carried over the excess income tax. In fact, the filing of the
written claim will signify that it has chosen refund as an option to
claim its unutilized and excess taxes.
b) Assuming the petition for review is denied, the excess income
tax shall be carried over perpetually until said income tax is fully
exhausted. The Tax Code and jurisprudence have stated that once
the excess and unutilized income tax is carried over, it will be
irrevocable and the excess unutilized taxes will be carried over until
the entire amount is fully utilized.

Vanderful, Inc.'s income tax return for taxable year 2015 showed
an overpayment due to excess creditable withholding taxes in the
amount of P750,000.00. The company opted to carry over the
excess income tax credits as tax credit against its quarterly income
tax liabilities for the next succeeding years. For taxable year 2016,
the company's income tax return showed an overpayment due to
excess creditable withholding taxes in the amount of Pl,100,000.00,
which included the carry-over from year 2015 in the amount of
P750,000.00 because its operations resulted in a net loss; hence,
there was no application for any tax liability. This time, the company
opted and marked the box "To be refunded' In respect of the total
amount of Pl,100,000.00.

Vanderful, Inc. now files in the BIR a claim for refund of unutilized
overpayments of Pl,100,00.00. Is the claim meritorious? (2017 Bar
Exam)
Suggested answer: The claim Is not meritorious. The Tax Code and
jurisprudence have stated that once the excess and unutilized Income
tax is carried over, it will be irrevocable and the excess unutilized
taxes will be carried over until the entire amount is fully utilized. In
this case, Vanderful wonderfully opted to carry over. It can no longer
go back on this decision.

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)
A.

Jurisdiction of the CTA

R.A. 9282, Sec. 7. Jurisdiction. — The CTA shall exercise:

Exclusive appellate jurisdiction to review by appeal, as herein
a.
provided:
1. Decisions of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue in cases
involving disputed assessments, refunds of internal revenue
taxes, fees or other charges, penalties in relation thereto, or other
matters arising under the National Internal Revenue or other laws
administered by the Bureau of Internal Revenue;

2. Inaction by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue in cases
involving disputed assessments, refunds of internal revenue taxes,
fees or other charges, penalties in relations thereto, or other matters
arising under the National Internal Revenue Code or other laws
administered by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, where the National
Internal Revenue Code provides a specific period of action, in which
case the inaction shall be deemed a denial;
3.
Decisions, orders or resolutions of the Regional Trial Courts in
local tax cases originally decided or resolved by them in the exercise
of their original or appellate jurisdiction;

4.
Decisions of the Commissioner of Customs in cases involving
liability for customs duties, fees or other money charges, seizure,
detention or release of property affected, fines, forfeitures or other
penalties in relation thereto, or other matters arising under the
Customs Law or other laws administered by the Bureau of Customs;
Decisions of the Central Board of Assessment Appeals in
5.
the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction over cases involving the
assessment and taxation of real property originally decided by the
provincial or city board of assessment appeals;

Decisions of the Secretary of Finance on customs cases elevated
6.
to him automatically for review from decisions of the Commissioner
of Customs which are adverse to the Government under Section
2315 of the Tariff and Customs Code;

509

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

510

7.
Decisions of the Secretary of Trade and Industry, in the case of
nonagricultural product, commodity or article, and the Secretary of
Agriculture in the case of agricultural product, commodity or article,
involving dumping and countervailing duties under Sections 301 and
302, respectively, of the Tariff and Customs Code, and safeguard
measures under Republic Act No. 8800, where either party may
appeal the decision to impose or not to impose said duties.
b. Jurisdiction over cases involving criminal offenses as herein
provided:

1.
Exclusive original jurisdiction over all criminal offenses arising
from violations of the National Internal Revenue Code or Tariff and
Customs Code and other laws administered by the Bureau of Internal
Revenue or the Bureau of Customs: Provided, however, That offenses
or felonies mentioned in this paragraph where the principal amount
o[sic] taxes and fees, exclusive of charges and penalties, claimed
is less than One million pesos (Pl,000,000) or where there is no
specified amount claimed shall be tried by the regular Courts and the
jurisdiction of the CTA shall be appellate. Any provision of law or the
Rules of Court to the contrary notwithstanding, the criminal action
and the corresponding civil action for the recovery of civil liability for
taxes and penalties shall at all times be simultaneously instituted
with, and jointly determined in the same proceeding by the CTA, the
filing of the criminal action being deemed to necessarily carry with it
the filing of the civil action, and no right to reserve the filling of such
civil action separately from the criminal action will be recognized.

2.

Exclusive appellate jurisdiction in criminal offenses:

a.
Over appeals from the judgments, resolutions or orders of the
Regional Trial Courts in tax cases originally decided by them, in their
respected territorial jurisdiction.
Over petitions for review of the judgments, resolutions or
b.
orders of the Regional Trial Courts in the exercise of their appellate
jurisdiction over tax cases originally decided by the Metropolitan Trial
Courts, Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts in
their respective jurisdiction.

c.

Jurisdiction over tax collection cases as herein provided:

1. Exclusive original jurisdiction In tax collection cases involving final
and executory assessments for taxes, fees, charges and penalties:
Provided, however, That collection cases where the principal amount
of taxes and fees, exclusive of charges and penalties, claimed is less
than One million pesos (Pl,000,000) shall be tried by the proper
Municipal Trial Court, Metropolitan Trial Court and Regional Trial
Court.
2.

Exclusive appellate jurisdiction in tax collection cases:

a.
Over appeals from the judgments, resolutions or orders of the
Regional Trial Courts in tax collection cases originally decided by
them, in their respective territorial jurisdiction.

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

511

Over petitions for review of the judgments, resolutions or
b.
orders of the Regional Trial Courts in the Exercise of their appellate
jurisdiction over tax collection cases originally decided by the
Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit
Trial Courts, in their respective jurisdiction.

The Court of Tax Appeals has exclusive appellate jurisdiction to
review by appeal:

1.

Decisions of CIR, involving disputed assessments, refunds or
other matters arising under NIRC or other laws administered
by the BIR;

2.

Inaction by the CIR, involving disputed assessments,
refunds or other matters arising under NIRC or other laws
administered by the BIR, when the NIRC provides a specific
period of action, in which case the inaction shall be deemed a
denial;

3.

Decisions, orders or resolutions of RTCs on local tax cases
originally decided or resolved by them;

4.

Decisions of the Commissioner of Customs (COC) involving
matters arising under the Customs Law or other laws
administered by the Bureau of Customs (BOC);

5.

Decisions of the Central Board of Assessment Appeals (CBAA)
involving the assessment and taxation of real property
originally decided by the provincial or city board of assessment
appeals;

6.

Decisions of the Secretary of Finance on customs case
elevated to him automatically for review from decisions of
the COC which are adverse to the Government; and
DecisionsoftheSecretaryofTradeandIndustry(nonagricultural
products, commodities or articles), and the Secretary of
Agriculture (for agricultural products, commodities, or
articles), involving dumping and countervailing duties under
Section 301 or 302 of the Tariff and Customs Code, and
safeguard measures under R.A. 8800, where either party may
appeal the decision to impose or not to impose said duties.

7.

Jurisdiction over cases involving criminal offenses:

1.

Exclusive original jurisdiction — all criminal offenses arising
from violations of NIRC or Tariff and Customs Code and other
laws administered by the BIR or BOC, where the principal
amount of tax claimed is worth Pl,000,000 or more

•

If less than Pl,000,000 or no specified amount claimed,
it exercises exclusive appellate jurisdiction

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

512

2.

Fxrlijqivp appellate jurisdiction over:

•

Appeals from the RTC in tax cases originally decided by
them

•

Petitions for review from RTC in the exercise of their
appellate jurisdiction over tax cases originally decided by
the MTCs

Jurisdiction over tax collection cases

1.

Exclusive original jurisdiction in tax collection cases involving
final and executory assessments fortaxes, fees, (exclusive of
charges and penalties), where amount claimed is Pl,000,000
or more

•

2.

•

Exclusive appellate jurisdiction in tax collection cases

•

Appeals from the RTC in tax cases originally decided by
them

•

Petitions for review from RTC in the exercise of their
appellate jurisdiction over tax cases originally decided by
the MTCs

The jurisdiction of the CTA is to review by appeal decisions of the
CIR on disputed assessments (the FDDA). When a taxpayer does
not protest an assessment (/.e., the FLD/FAN), and appeals the
assessment itself to the CTA, his appeal Is premature. (CIR v.
Villa, G.R. No. L-23988, January 2, 1968)

o

•

If less than P1M or no specified amount claimed, it
exercises exclusive appellate jurisdiction

However, when the taxpayer protested the PAN, but (not the
FLD/FAN) which categorically stated that it was the CIR's
final decision and that appeal must be made to the CTA, the
CIR is estopped from raising the argument that the appeal
is premature. (Allied Banking Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No.
175097, February 5, 2010)

A final demand letter for payment of delinquent taxes may be
considered a decision on a disputed or protested assessment.
Thus, the taxpayer can file an appeal with the CTA. (CIR v. Isabela
Cultural Corporation, G.R. No. 135210, July 11, 2001)
O

A demand letter of the CIR — which states a warning that in
the event the taxpayer fails to pay, collection will be enforced
— constitutes the order appealable to the CTA. (Surigao
Electric Co. v. CIR, G.R. No. L-25289, June 28, 1974; a
collection letter of a similar nature was also considered the
order appealable to the CTA in CIR v. Avon, G.R. No. 201398,
October 3, 2018)

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)
■

The BIR should always indicate to the taxpayer in clear
and unequivocal language what constitutes final action on
a disputed assessment. The object is to avoid repeated
requests for reconsideration by the taxpayer, thereby
delaying the finality of the assessment, and consequently,
the collection of the taxes due. (Surigao Electric Co. v.
CIR, G.R. No. L-25289, June 28, 1974)

•

This would also prevent the taxpayer from groping in the
dark, speculating as to which communication or action of
the BIR may be the decision appealable to the CTA.

•

o

513

Note that R.R. 18-2013 now mandates the BIR to
indicate in the final decision on a disputed assessment
that it indeed is the final decision of the BIR.

Since the power to make an assessment may be delegated
to subordinate officers, the act of issuance of the demand
letter by a subordinate officer is an order that is appealable
to the CTA. (Oceanic Wireless Network, Inc. v. CIR, G.R. No.
148380, December 9, 2005, wherein the taxpayer failed to
appeal to the CTA within 30 days of receipt of the demand
letter made by the Chief of the Accounts Receivable and
Billing Division of the BIR)

Remember that the taxpayer must file with the CTA within 30 days
from the receipt of the FDDA denying his/her protest. However,
the CTA can relax this requirement for strong compelling reasons.

o

An example of a strong compelling reason is when the
taxpayer receives both an amended assessment and the
FDDA on the same day, and the taxpayer protests both
because of the language of the amended assessment, instead
of immediately appealing the FDDA to the CTA. (Misnet, Inc.
v. CIR, G.R. No. 210604, June 3, 2019, wherein the SC stated
that the taxpayer was exhausting administrative remedies
given the confusing instructions of the BIR)

R.R.s, RMOs, and RMCs are rulings or opinions of the CIR which
are under the exclusive jurisdiction of the CTA, not the RTC. (CIR
v. Leal, G.R. No. 113459, November 18, 2002)
o

Hence, questioning the constitutionality of an R.R. and RMC
is within the jurisdiction of the CTA. (Asia International
Auctioneers, Inc. v. Parayno, G.R. No. 163445, December
18, 2007)

o

Seemingly conflicting cases (CIR v. CTA and Petron, G.R.
No. 207843, July 15, 2015) have constantly confused and
confounded everyone on whether the CTA has jurisdiction
over rulings or opinions—just like Lafayette with the British

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

514

henchmen (#hamilton). In Banco de Oro v. Republic (G.R.
No. 198756, August 16, 2016), the Supreme Court explicitly
ruled that the CTA may take cognizance of cases directly
challenging the constitutionality or validity of a tax law,
regulation, or administrative issuance (such as revenue
orders, revenue memorandum circulars, and rulings).

■

The CTA likewise has jurisdiction over CIR issuances
which have been reviewed by the Secretary of Finance,
such as a BIR Ruling. (BDO v. Republic)

The issue of whether the right of the CIR to collect has prescribed,
collection being one of the duties of the BIR, is considered covered
by the term "other matters" under the jurisdiction of the CTA.
O

The fact that assessment has become final for failure to protest
only means that the validity or correctness of the assessment
may no longer be questioned on appeal. However, this issue is
entirely distinct from the issue of whether the right to collect
has in fact prescribed. (CIR v. Hambrecht, G.R. No. 169225,
November 17, 2010)

The jurisdiction of the CTA has been expanded to include not only
decisions or rulings but inaction as well of the CIR. (RCBC v. CIR,
G.R. No. 168498, April 24, 2007; Lascona Land Co., Inc. v. CIR,
G.R. No. 171251, March 5, 2012)
o

In case the CIR fails to act on the disputed assessment within
the 180-day period from date of submission of documents, a
taxpayer can either:

1.

File a petition for review with the CTA within 30 days after
the expiration of the 180-day period, or

2.

Await the final decision of the Commissioner on the
disputed assessments and appeal such final decision to
the CTA within 30 days after receipt of a copy of such
decision.

Remember: these options are mutually exclusive, and resort
to one bars the application of the other.
The appellate jurisdiction of the CTA is not limited to cases which
involve decisions of the CIR on matters relating to assessments
or refunds. It also covers other cases that arise out of the NIRC
or related laws administered by the BIR. Hence, the CTA has
the jurisdiction to determine if the warrant of distraint and levy
issued by the BIR is valid and to rule if the Waiver of Statute of
Limitations was validly effected. (Philippine Journalists, Inc. v.
CIR, G.R. No. 162852, December 16, 2004)

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

515

An action to collect on a bond used to secure the payment of
taxes is not a tax collection case, but rather a simple case for
enforcement of a contractual liability; hence, it is not under the
jurisdiction of the CTA. (Philippine British Assurance Company,
Inc. v. Republic, G.R. No. 185588, February 2, 2010)

Filing a motion for reconsideration of a decision of the CIR denying
a protest does not toll or suspend the period to appeal to the CTA.
The 30-day period to appeal to the CTA is still reckoned from the
date the taxpayer is notified of the denial of the CIR. (Fishwealth
Canning Corporation v. CIR, G.R. No. 179343, January 21, 2010)
o

This has been incorporated in R.R. 18-2013.

-

Compare this to asking for a reinvestigation and it being
granted by the CIR.

•

In that case, what is being tolled is the time for
the CIR to collect, not the period to appeal to the
CTA. Moreover, the request for reinvestigation is the
protest itself, and not on the final decision of the CIR.
But can the period to appeal to the CTA be extended?

•

Yes. In City of Manila v. Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines,
Inc. (G.R. No. 181845, August 4, 2009), the Court
stated that in appeals to the CTA, the Rules of Court
are applicable. Since in the Rules of Court, Rule 42
allows extensions to file petitions for review to be filed
with Court of Appeals, the same should be applicable
in petitions for review with the CTA.

•

Hence, the 30-day original period for filing a Petition
for Review with the CTA may be extended for a period
of 15 days. No further extension shall be allowed
thereafter, except only for the most compelling
reasons, in which case the extended period shall not
exceed 15 days.

Can the CTA issue writs of certiorari over interlocutory orders of
the RTC?

O

Yes, it can, as it exercises appellate jurisdiction over the RTC
on local tax cases. (City of Manila v. Grecia-Cuerdo, G.R. No.
175723, February 4, 2014)

It is the CTA, not the CA, that has jurisdiction over appeals on tax
collection cases originally decided by the RTC.
O

Hence, when the BIR wrongly appeals to the CA, the CA
cannot refer the records of the case to the CTA for proper
disposition. The mode of appeal was wrong to begin with,
making the RTC judgment final and executory. (Mitsubishi

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

516

Motors Philippines Corporation v. Bureau of Customs, G.R.
No. 209830, June 17, 2015)
In local tax collection cases, the amount of the claim determines
where the case should be filed.
O

When the claim does not exceed P300,000 (or P400,000 in
Metro Manila), the case should be filed in the MTC, not the
RTC. The RTC exercises appellate jurisdiction in those cases.
(China Banking Corporation v. City Treasurer of Manila, G.R.
No. 204117, July 1, 2015)

Does the Court of Appeals have the power to review compromise
agreements forged by the Commissioner of Interna! Revenue and a
taxpayer? Explain. (2010 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: No, the Court of Appeals has no jurisdiction to
review the compromise agreement. It is the Court of Tax Appeals
which has exclusive jurisdiction over decisions of the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue on other matters arising from the NIRC.

In the examination conducted by the revenue officials against the
corporate taxpayer in 2010, the BIR issued a final assessment notice
and demand letter which states: "It is requested that the above
deficiency tax be paid immediately upon receipt hereof, Inclusive
of penalties incident to delinquency. This is our final decision based
on investigation. If you disagree, you may appeal this final decision
within thirty (30) days from receipt hereof, otherwise said deficiency
tax assessment shall become final, executory and demandable. ” The
assessment was immediately appealed by the taxpayer to the Court
of Tax Appeals, without filing its protest against the assessment and
without a denial thereof by the BIR. If you were the judge, would
your deny the petition for review filed by the taxpayer and consider
the case as prematurely filed? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

i

Suggested answer: If I were the judge, I will not deny the petition for
review. In this case, the taxpayer was made to believe by the BIR that
no other investigation or any matter would proceed from any further
protest or appeal. The BIR in this case should have Indicated clearly
and unequivocally to the taxpayer whether the action constitutes
a final determination on a disputed assessment, and the taxpayer
should not be punished by simply relying on the BIR's actions. The
case is eerily similar to Allied Banking Corporation v. CIR, where the
Supreme Court held that the taxpayer should not be prejudiced by
the actions of the BIR.

The City of Liwliwa assessed local business taxes against Talin
Company. Claiming that there is double taxation, Talin Company filed
a Complaint for Refund or Recovery of Illegally and/or Erroneouslycollected Local Business Tax; Prohibition with Prayer to Issue

I

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

517

Temporary Restraining Order and Writ of Preliminary Injunction with
the Regional Trial Court (RTC). The RTC denied the application for a
Writ of Preliminary Injunction. Since its motion for reconsideration
was denied, Talin Company filed a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals (CA). The government lawyer representing
the City of Liwliwa prayed for the dismissal of the petition on the
ground that the same should have been filed with the Court of Tax
Appeals (CTA). Talin Company, through its lawyer, Atty. Frank,
countered that the CTA cannot entertain a petition for certiorari since
it is not one of its powers and authorities under existing laws and
rules. Decide. (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested Answer: The government lawyer is correct. The CTA—not
the Court of Appeals—exercises appellate jurisdiction over the RTC
on local taxes such as this one. Hence, it can entertain a petition for
certiorari from an interlocutory order of the RTC.

|
I
i

GGG, Inc. offered to sell through competitive bidding its shares
in HHH Corp., equivalent to 40°/o of the total outstanding capital
stock of the latter. JJJ, Inc. acquired the said shares in HHH Corp,
as the highest bidder. Before it could secure a certificate authorizing
registration/tax clearance for the transfer of the shares of stock to
JJJ, Inc., GGG, Inc. had to request a ruling from the BIR confirming
that its sale of the said shares was at fair market value and was thus
not subject to donor's tax. In BIR Ruling No. 012-14, the CIR held
that the selling price for the shares of stock of HHH Corp, was lower
than their book value, so the difference between the selling price
and the book value of said shares was a taxable donation. GGG, Inc.
requested the Secretary of Finance to review BIR Ruling No. 012-14,
but the Secretary affirmed said ruling. GGG, Inc. filed with the Court
of Appeals a Petition for Review under Rule 43 of the Revised Rules
of Court. The Court of Appeals, however, dismissed the Petition for
lack of jurisdiction declaring that it is the CTA which has jurisdiction
over the issues raised. Before which Court should GGG, Inc. seek
recourse from the adverse ruling of the Secretary of Finance in the
exercise of the latter's power of review? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The CTA is the proper court to seek recourse from
the adverse ruling of the Secretary of Finance. The Supreme Court
has previously ruled that the CTA has jurisdiction over administrative
issuances of the CIR, subject to prior review by the Secretary of
Finance.

State at least five (5) cases under the exclusive appellate jurisdiction
of the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA). (2016 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:
The following are within the exclusive appellate jurisdiction of the
CTA:
•

Decisions of the CIR involving disputed assessments;

J9JC9B0M

518

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Inaction by the CIR involving disputed assessments;
Decisions of RTCs on local tax cases;
Decisions of the Commissioner of Customs involving matters
arising from the Customs Code;
Decisions of the CBAA involving the assessment and taxation of
real property originally decided by the LBAAs.
B.

Procedure in Civil and Criminal Cases

R.A. 9282, SEC. 11. Who May Appeal; Mode of Appeal; Effect
of Appeal. — Any party adversely affected by a decision, ruling or
inaction of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, the Commissioner
of Customs, the Secretary of Finance, the Secretary of Trade and
Industry or the Secretary of Agriculture or the Central Board of
Assessment Appeals or the Regional Trial Courts may file an appeal
with the CTA within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such decision
or ruling or after the expiration of the period fixed by law for action
as referred to in Section 7(a)(2) herein.
Appeal shall be made by filing a petition for review under a procedure
analogous to that provided for under Rule 42 of the 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure with the CTA within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
decision or ruling or in the case of inaction as herein provided, from
the expiration of the period fixed by law to act thereon. A Division of
the CTA shall hear the appeal: Provided, however, That with respect
to decisions or rulings of the Central Board of Assessment Appeals
and the Regional Trial Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
appeal shall be made by filing a petition for review under a procedure
analogous to that provided for under Rule 43 of the 1997 Rules of
Civil Procedure with the CTA, which shall hear the case en banc.
All other cases involving rulings, orders or decisions filed with the
CTA as provided for in Section 7 shall be raffled to its Divisions. A
party adversely affected by a ruling, order or decision of a Division
of the CTA may file a motion for reconsideration of new trial before
the same Division of the CTA within fifteen (15) days from notice
thereof: Provided, however, That in criminal cases, the general rule
applicable in regular Courts on matters of prosecution and appeal
shall likewise apply.

No appeal taken to the CTA from the decision of the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue or the Commissioner of Customs or the Regional
Trial Court, provincial, city or municipal treasurer or the Secretary
of Finance, the Secretary of Trade and Industry and Secretary of
Agriculture, as the case may be shall suspend the payment, levy,
distraint, and/or sale of any property of the taxpayer for the
satisfaction of his tax liability as provided by existing law: Provided,
however, That when in the opinion of the Court the collection by the
aforementioned government agencies may jeopardize the interest

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

519

of the Government and/or the taxpayer, the Court at any stage of the
proceeding may suspend the said collection and require the taxpayer
either to deposit the amount claimed or to file a surety bond for not
more than double the amount with the Court.

In criminal and collection cases covered respectively by Section
7(b) and (c) of this Act, the Government may directly file the said
cases with the CTA covering amounts within its exclusive and original
jurisdiction.

CTA RULES

RULE 8 PROCEDURE IN CIVIL CASES

Rule 8, Sec. 1. Review of cases in the Court en banc. — In
cases falling under the exclusive appellate jurisdiction of the Court
en banc, the petition for review of a decision or resolution of the
Court in Division must be preceded by the filing of a timely motion
for reconsideration or new trial with the Division.
Sec. 3. Who may appeal; period to file petition. — (a) A
party adversely affected by a decision, ruling or the inaction of
the Commissioner of Internal Revenue on disputed assessments
or claims for refund of internal revenue taxes, or by a decision or
ruling of the Commissioner of Customs, the Secretary of Finance,
the Secretary of Trade and Industry, the Secretary of Agriculture, or
a Regional Trial Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction may
appeal to the Court by petition for review filed within thirty days after
receipt of a copy of such decision or ruling, or expiration of the period
fixed by law for the Commissioner of Internal Revenue to act on
the disputed assessments. In case of inaction of the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue on claims for refund of internal revenue taxes
erroneously or illegally collected, the taxpayer must file a petition for
review within the two-year period prescribed by law from payment
or collection of the taxes, (n)
(b) A party adversely affected by a decision or resolution of a Division
of the Court on a motion for reconsideration or new trial may appeal
to the Court by filing before it a petition for review within fifteen days
from receipt of a copy of the questioned decision or resolution. Upon
proper motion and the payment of the full amount of the docket and
other lawful fees and deposit for costs before the expiration of the
reglementary period herein fixed, the Court may grant an additional
period not exceeding fifteen days from the expiration of the original
period within which to file the petition for review. (Rules of Court,
Rule 42, Sec. la)

(c) A party adversely affected by a decision or ruling of the Central
Board of Assessment Appeals and the Regional Trial Court in the
exercise of their appellate jurisdiction may appeal to the Court by
filing before it a petition for review within thirty days from receipt of
a copy of the questioned decision or ruling, (n)

J9JC9B0M

520

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Sec. 4. Where to appeal; mode of appeal. — (a) An appeal from
a decision or ruling or the inaction of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue on disputed assessments or claim for refund of internal
revenue taxes erroneously or illegally collected, the decision or
ruling of the Commissioner of Customs, the Secretary of Finance,
the Secretary of Trade & Industry, the Secretary of Agriculture, and
the Regional Trial Court in the exercise of their original jurisdiction,
shall be taken to the Court by filing before it a petition for review as
provided in Rule 42 of the Rules of Court. The Court in Division shall
act on the appeal, (n)

(b) An appeal from a decision or resolution of the Court in Division
on a motion for reconsideration or new trial shall be taken to the
Court by petition for review as provided in Rule 43 of the Rules of
Court. The Court en banc shall act on the appeal, (n)
(c) An appeal from a decision or ruling of the Central Board of
Assessment Appeals or the Regional Trial Court in the exercise of
their appellate jurisdiction shall be taken to the Court by filing before
it a petition for review as provided in Rule 43 of the Rules of Court.
The Court en banc shall act on the appeal, (n)

RULE 9 PROCEDURE IN CRIMINAL CASES
RULE 9, Section 1. Review of cases in the Court. — The review
of criminal cases in the Court en banc or in Division shall be governed
by the applicable provisions of Rule 124 of the Rules of Court, (n)
Sec. 2. Institution of criminal actions. — All criminal actions
before the Court In Division in the exercise of its original jurisdiction
shall be instituted by the filing of an information in the name of the
People of the Philippines. In criminal actions involving violations of
the National Internal Revenue Code and other laws enforced by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue
must approve their filing. In criminal actions involving violations of
the tariff and Customs Code and other laws enforced by the Bureau
of Customs, the Commissioner of Customs must approve their filing.
(Rules of Court, Rule 110, Sec. 2a; n)
The institution of the criminal action shall interrupt the running of
the period of prescription. (Rules of Court, Rule 110, Sec. 1, par. 2a)

Sec. 9. Appeal; period to appeal. — (a) An appeal to the Court
in criminal cases decided by a Regional Trial Court in the exercise
of its original jurisdiction shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal
pursuant to Sections 3(a) and 6, Rule 122 of the Rules of Court
within fifteen days from receipt of a copy of the decision or final order
with the court which rendered the final judgment or order appealed
from and by serving a copy upon the adverse party. The Court in
Division shall act on the appeal.

(b) An appeal to the Court en banc in criminal cases decided by
the Court in Division shall be taken by filing a petition for review as
provided in Rule 43 of the Rules of Court within fifteen days from

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

521

receipt of a copy of the decision or resolution appealed from. The
Court may, for good cause, extend the time for filing of the petition
for review for an additional period not exceeding fifteen days.
(c) An appeal to the Court in criminal cases decided by the Regional
Trial Courts in the exercise of their appellate jurisdiction shall be
taken by filing a petition for review as provided in Rule 43 of the Rules
of Court within fifteen days from receipt of a copy of the decision or
final order appealed from. The Court en banc shall act on the appeal.
(n)

Steps in appealing a decision to the CTA and beyond

1.

Appeal within 30 davs from receipt of decision or period of
inaction of the CIR, COC, Secretary of Finance, Secretary of Trade
and Industry or Secretary of Agriculture, or the CBAA or the RTC.
How?

General rule: Appeal to the CTA DIVISION by a petition for review
under Rule 42 within 30 days
O

Exception: In case of decisions of the CBAA or RTC in the
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, appeal to EN BANC by a
petition for review under Rule 43
•

In other words, the CTA Division has jurisdiction over all
the matters that are brought to the CTA; except in cases
which come from the CBAA and the RTC (in the exercise
of its appellate jurisdiction), these go straight to the CTA
en banc

In criminal cases, appeal from the decision of the RTC decided
in the exercise of its original jurisdiction is via a notice of appeal
filed within 15 days from receipt of decision
O

2.

If the RTC acted in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction,
appeal to the En Banc by a petition for review under Rule 43
within 15 days from receipt of decision.

In case the decision of the Division was adverse:
File a motion for reconsideration/motion for new trial (MR/MNT)
with the same division within 15 days from receipt of the decision
o

The MR or the MNT is a condition precedent before bringing
the case to the CTA En Banc. Before the CTA En Banc can take
cognizance of the petition for review, the litigant must show
that it sought prior reconsideration or moved for a new trial
with the division. (Commissioner of Customs v. Marina Sales,
Inc., G.R. No. 183868, November 22, 2010)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

522

3.

In case the resolution of the Division on the MR is still adverse:

File a petition for review with the CTA en banc under Rule 43
within 15 days from receipt of the decision
Same rule for criminal cases.

4.

O

However, the denial of a motion to quash is an interlocutory
order which is not the proper subject of an appeal or petition
for review to the CTA en banc. (Judy Anne Santos v. People,
G.R. No. 173176, August 26, 2008)

O

The proper remedy for interlocutory orders issued by the CTA
division is Rule 65 straight to the Supreme Court. (CIR v. CTA
and CBK Power Company Limited, G.R. No. 203054, July 29,
2015)

In case the decision of the CTA en banc is still adverse
File a review on certiorari with the SC under Rule 45 within 15
days from receipt of the decision
If you want to appeal from a decision of the local assessment
board, go first to the CBAA. The decision of the CBAA will be
appealable to the CTA en banc under Rule 43. (See #1 exception)

On May 15, 2013, CCC, Inc. received the Final Decision on Disputed
Assessment issued by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue (CIR)
dismissing the protest of CCC, Inc. and affirming the assessment
against said corporation. On June 10, 2013, CCC, Inc. filed a
Petition for Review with the Court of Tax Appeals (CTA) in division.
On July 31, 2015, CCC, Inc. received a copy of the Decision dated
July 22, 2015 of the CTA division dismissing its Petition. CCC, Inc.
immediately filed a Petition for Review with the CTA en banc on
August 6, 2015. Is the immediate appeal by CCC, Inc. to the CTA en
banc of the adverse Decision of the CTA division the proper remedy?
(2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: No, this is improper. CCC, Inc. should have filed
a motion for reconsideration with the CTA division first. CTA Rufes
state that a MR is a prerequisite before elevating the case to the CTA
en banc.
Power of the CTA to take evidence
Rule 12, Sec. 2. Power of the Court to receive evidence. — The
Court may receive evidence in the following cases:

(a) In all cases falling within the original jurisdiction of the Court in
Division pursuant to Section 3, Rule 4 of these Rules; and

I

i

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

523

(b) In appeals in both civil and criminal cases where the Court
grants a new trial pursuant to Section 2, Rule 53 and Section 12,
Rule 124 of the Rules of Court, (n)

Sec. 3. Taking of evidence by a justice. — The Court may, motu
proprio or upon proper motion, direct that a case, or any issue
therein, be assigned to one of its members for the taking of evidence,
when the determination of a question of fact arises at any stage of
the proceedings, or when the taking of an account is necessary, or
when the determination of an issue of fact requires the examination
of a long account. The hearing before such justice shall proceed in
all respects as though the same had been made before the Court.

Upon the completion of such hearing, the justice concerned shall
promptly submit to the Court a written report thereon, stating therein
his findings and conclusions. Thereafter, the Court shall render its
decision on the case, adopting, modifying, or rejecting the report in
whole or in part, or, the Court may, in its discretion, recommit it to
the justice with instructions, or receive further evidence, (n)

Sec. 4. Taking of evidence by Court official. — In default or ex
parte hearings, or in any case where the parties agree in writing, the
Court may delegate the reception of evidence to the Clerk of Court,
the Division Clerks of Court, their assistants who are members of the
Philippine bar, or any Court attorney. The reception of documentary
evidence by a Court official shall be for the sole purpose of marking,
comparison with the original, and Identification by witnesses of such
documentary evidence. The Court official shall have no power to rule
on objections to any question or to the admission of exhibits, which
objections shall be resolved by the Court upon submission of his
report and the transcripts within ten days from termination of the
hearing. (Rules of Court, Rule 30, Sec. 9a)

The CTA may consider all pieces of evidence formally offered,
whether or not they were submitted in the administrative level.
(PAL V. CIR, G.R. No. 206309, January 17, 2018)

Institution of criminal actions and inclusion of civil action
Rule 9, Sec. 2. Institution of criminal actions. — All criminal
actions before the Court in Division in the exercise of its original
jurisdiction shall be instituted by the filing of an information in the
name of the People of the Philippines. In criminal actions involving
violations of the National Internal Revenue Code and other laws
enforced by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue must approve their filing. In criminal actions
involving violations of the Tariff and Customs Code and other laws
enforced by the Bureau of Customs, the Commissioner of Customs
must approve their filing. (Rules of Court, Rule 110, Sec. 2a; n)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

524

The institution of the criminal action shall interrupt the running of
the period of prescription. (Rules of Court, Rule 11O, Sec. 1, par. 2a)

Sec. 3. Prosecution of criminal actions. — All criminal actions
shall be conducted and prosecuted under the direction and control
of the public prosecutor. In criminal actions involving violation of the
National Internal Revenue Code or other laws enforced by the Bureau
of Internal Revenue, and violations of the Tariff and Customs Code or
other laws enforced by the Bureau of Customs, the prosecution may
be conducted by their respective duly deputized legal officers. (Rules
of Court, Rule 110, Sec. 5, par. 6a)
Sec. 11. Inclusion of civil action in criminal action. — In
cases within the jurisdiction of the Court, the criminal action and
the corresponding civil action for the recovery of civil liability for
taxes and penalties shall be deemed jointly instituted in the same
proceeding. The filing of the criminal action shall necessarily carry
with it the filing of the civil action. No right to reserve the filing of
such civil action separately from the criminal action shall be allowed
or recognized. (Rules of Court, Rule 111, Sec. l[a], par. la)

A petition for review questioning a FDDA is not deemed instituted
with a criminal case for tax evasion. Hence, the taxpayer must
still pay the filing fees for the petition for review, even if the tax
evasion case covers the same taxable year as the FDDA. (Gaw v.
CIR, G.R. 222837, July 23, 2018)

o

What is deemed instituted with the criminal action is only
the government's recovery of the taxes and penalties relative
to the criminal case. The remedy of the taxpayer to appeal
the disputed assessment is not deemed instituted with the
criminal case. (Gaw. v. CIR)

O

While a tax evasion case is pending, the BIR is not precluded
from issuing an assessment or FDDA against a taxpayer.
The taxpayer must go through the assessment process to
question the assessment to prevent it from becoming final,
executory, and demandable. (Gaw v. CIR)

After filing an Information for violation of Section 254 of the National
Internal Revenue Code (Attempt to Evade or Defeat Tax) with the
CTA, the Public Prosecutor manifested that the People is reserving
the right to file the corresponding civil action for the recovery of the
civil liability for taxes. As counsel for the accused, comment on the
People's manifestation. (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The public prosecutor is wrong. CTA Rules state
that the filing of the criminal action shall necessarily carry with it the
filing of the civil action and no right to reserve the filing of the civil
action separately shall be allowed.

J9JC9B0M

COURT OF TAX APPEALS
(R.A. 1125, as amended and Revised Rules of Court
of the CTA, A.M. No. 05-11-07-CTA, as amended)

Role of OSG as counsel
Sec. IO. Solicitor General as counsel for the People and
government officials sued in their official capacity. — The
Solicitor General shall represent the People of the Philippines and
government officials sued in their official capacity in all cases
brought to the Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction. He
may deputized the legal officers of the Bureau of Internal Revenue
in cases brought under the National Internal Revenue Code or
other laws enforced by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, or the legal
officers of the Bureau of Customs in cases brought under the Tariff
and Customs Code of the Philippines or other laws enforced by
the Bureau of Customs, to appear in behalf of the officials of said
agencies sued in their official capacity: Provided, however, such duly
deputized legal officers shall remain at all times under the direct
control and supervision of the Solicitor General, (n)

525

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION
So, you've made it this far. But with local government taxation,
the big bailer changes. It's not the national government taxpayers
have to deal with; here, there's a new sheriff in town—the local
government unit (LGU). So take note of that! No more BIR or CIR
here. You're in LGU land now.
A.

Principles. Definitions, and Limitations

R.A. 7160, Sec. 128. Scope. — The provisions herein shall govern
the exercise by provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays of
their taxing and other revenue-raising powers.
Sec. 129. Power to Create Sources of Revenue. — Each local
government unit shall exercise its power to create its own sources
of revenue and to levy taxes, fees, and charges subject to the
provisions herein, consistent with the basic policy of local autonomy.
Such taxes, fees, and charges shall accrue exclusively to the local
government units.

Each LGU shall exercise its power:
o

to create its own sources of revenue, and

o

to levy taxes, fees, and charges,
•

•

subject to the Local Government Code (LGC) provisions
and consistent with the basic policy of local autonomy.

These shall accrue exclusively to the LGUs.
o
Hence, when a provision of law redirects amusement tax
collection from the city to the hands of movie producers, that
provision is void and unconstitutional. (Film Development
Council of the Philippines v. Coion Heritage Realty Corporation,
G.R. No. 203754, June 16, 2015)

Fundamental Principles
Sec. 130. Fundamental Principles. — The following fundamental
principles shall govern the exercise of the taxing and other revenueraising powers of local government units:

(a) Taxation shall be uniform in each local government unit;
526

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

527

(b) Taxes, fees, charges and other impositions shall:
be equitable and based as far as practicable on the
(1)
taxpayer's ability to pay;

(2)

be levied and collected only for public purposes;

(3)

not be unjust, excessive, oppressive, or confiscatory;

not be contrary to law, public policy, national economic
(4)
policy, or in restraint of trade;

(c) The collection of local taxes, fees, charges and other impositions
shall in no case be let to any private person;
(d) The revenue collected pursuant to the provisions of this Code
shall inure solely to the benefit of, and be subject to disposition
by, the local government unit levying the tax, fee, charge or other
imposition unless otherwise specifically provided herein; and
(e) Each local government unit shall, as far as practicable, evolve a
progressive system of taxation.

The following are the fundamental principles that shall govern the
exercise of the taxing and revenue-raising powers of the LGUs.

1.

Uniformity in each LGU;

2.

The taxes, fees, charges and other impositions shall:
a.

be equitable and based on the taxpayer's ability to pay

b.

be levied and collected only for public purposes
not be unjust, excessive, oppressive, or confiscatory

d.

not be contrary to law, public policy, national economic
policy, or in restraint of trade

3.

Collection shall not be let to any private person;

4.

The revenue collected shall inure solely to the benefit of
the LGU levying the tax, etc., unless otherwise specifically
provided in the LGC; and

5.

Each LGU shall evolve a progressive system of taxation.

Definition of Terms
Sec. 131. Definition of Terms. — When used in this Title, the
term:

(a) "Agricultural Product" includes the yield of the soil, such as corn,
rice, wheat, rye, hay, coconuts, sugarcane, tobacco, root crops,
vegetables, fruits, flowers, and their by-products; ordinary salt; all

J9JC9B0M

528

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

kinds of fish; poultry; and livestock and animal products, whether in
their original form or not. The phrase "whether in their original form
or not" refers to the transformation of said products by the farmer,
fisherman, producer or owner through the application of processes
to preserve or otherwise to prepare said products for the market
such as freezing, drying, salting, smoking, or stripping for purposes
of preserving or otherwise preparing said products for the market;

(b) "Amusement" is a pleasurable diversion and entertainment. It is
synonymous to relaxation, avocation, pastime, or fun;
(c) "Amusement Places" include theaters, cinemas, concert halls,
circuses and other places of amusement where one seeks admission
to entertain oneself by seeing or viewing the show or performances;

(d) "Business" means trade or commercial activity regularly engaged
in as a means of livelihood or with a view to profit;

(e) "Banks and other financial institutions" include non-bank
financial intermediaries, lending investors, finance and investment
companies, pawnshops, money shops, insurance companies,
stock markets, stock brokers and dealers in securities and foreign
exchange, as defined under applicable laws, or rules and regulations
thereunder;

(f) "Capital Investment" is the capital which a person employs in any
undertaking, or which he contributes to the capital of a partnership,
corporation, or any other juridical entity or association in a particular
taxing jurisdiction;
(g) "Charges" refer to pecuniary liability, as rents or fees against
persons or property;
(h) "Contractor" Includes persons, natural or juridical, not subject
to professional tax under Section 139 of this Code, whose activity
consists essentially of the sale of all kinds of services for a fee,
regardless of whether or not the performance of the service calls
for the exercise or use of the physicalI or mental faculties of such
contractor or his employees.
As used in this Section, the term "contractor" shall include general
engineering, general building and specialty contractors as defined
under applicable laws; filling, demolition and salvage works
contractors; proprietors or operators of mine drilling apparatus;
proprietors or operators of dockyards; persons engaged in the
installation of water system, and gas or electric light, heat, or power;
proprietors or operators of smelting plants; engraving, plating,
and plastic lamination establishments; proprietors or operators of
establishments for repairing, repainting, upholstering, washing or
greasing of vehicles, heavy equipment, vulcanizing, recapping and
battery charging; proprietors or operators of furniture shops and
establishments for planing or surfacing and recutting of lumber,
and sawmills under contract to saw or cut logs belonging to others;
proprietors or operators of dry-cleaning or dyeing establishments,

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

529

steam laundries, and laundries using washing machines; proprietors
or owners of shops for the repair of any kind of mechanical and
electrical devices, instruments, apparatus, or furniture and shoe
repairing by machine or any mechanical contrivance; proprietors or
operators of establishments or lots for parking purposes; proprietors
or operators of tailor shops, dress shops, milliners and hatters,
beauty parlors, barbershops, massage clinics, sauna, Turkish
and Swedish baths, slenderizing and building saloons and similar
establishments; photographic studios; funeral parlors; proprietors
or operators of hotels, motels, and lodging houses; proprietors or
operators of arrastre and stevedoring, warehousing, or forwarding
establishments; master plumbers, smiths, and house or sign painters;
printers, bookbinders, lithographers; publishers except those
engaged in the publication or printing of any newspaper, magazine,
review or bulletin which appears at regular intervals with fixed prices
for subscription and sale and which is not devoted principally to the
publication of advertisements; business agents, private detective
or watchman agencies, commercial and immigration brokers, and
cinematographic film owners, lessors and distributors.
(i) "Corporation" includes partnerships, no matter how created
or organized, joint-stock companies, joint accounts (cuentas en
participation), associations or insurance companies but does not
include general professional partnerships and a joint venture or
consortium formed for the purpose of undertaking construction
projects or engaging in petroleum, coal, geothermal, and other
energy operations pursuant to an operating or consortium agreement
under a service contract with the government. General professional
partnerships are partnerships formed by persons for the sole purpose
of exercising their common profession, no part of the income of
which is derived from engaging in any trade or business. The term
"resident foreign" when applied to a corporation means a foreign
corporation not otherwise organized under the laws of the Philippines
but engaged in trade or business within the Philippines;

(j) "Countryside and Barangay Business Enterprise" refers to any
business entity, association, or cooperative registered under the
provisions of Republic Act Numbered Sixty-eight hundred ten (R.A.
No. 6810), otherwise known as "Magna Carta For Countryside And
Barangay Business Enterprises (Kalakalan 20)";
(k) "Dealer" meansone whose business is to buy and sell merchandise,
goods, and chattels as a merchant. He stands immediately between
the producer or manufacturer and the consumer and depends for his
profit not upon the labor he bestows upon his commodities but upon
the skill and foresight with which he watches the market;
(l) "Fee" means a charge fixed by law or ordinance for the regulation
or inspection of a business or activity;

(m) "Franchise" is a right or privilege, affected with public Interest
which is conferred upon private persons or corporations, under such
terms and conditions as the government and its political subdivisions
may impose in the interest of public welfare, security, and safety;

J9JC9B0M

530

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(n) "Gross Sales or Receipts" include the total amount of money or its
equivalent representing the contract price, compensation or service
fee, including the amount charged or materials supplied with the
services and deposits or advance payments actually or constructively
received during the taxable quarter for the services performed or to
be performed for another person excluding discounts if determinable
at the time of sales, sales return, excise tax, and value-added tax
(VAT);
(o) "Manufacturer"includes every person who, by physical or chemical
process, alters the exterior texture or form or inner substance of any
raw material or manufactured or partially manufactured product in
such manner as to prepare it for special use or uses to which it
could not have been put in its original condition, or who by any such
process alters the quality of any such raw material or manufactured
or partially manufactured products so as to reduce it to marketable
shape or prepare it for any of the use of industry, or who by any
such process combines any such raw material or manufactured or
partially manufactured products with other materials or products of
the same or of different kinds and in such manner that the finished
products of such process or manufacture can be put to a special
use or uses to which such raw material or manufactured or partially
manufactured products in their original condition could not have been
put, and who in addition alters such raw material or manufactured or
partially manufactured products, or combines the same to produce
such finished products for the purpose of their sale or distribution to
others and not for his own use or consumption;
(p) "Marginal Farmer or Fisherman" refers to an individual engaged
in subsistence farming or fishing which shall be limited to the sale,
barter or exchange of agricultural or marine products produced by
himself and his immediate family;

(q) "Motor Vehicle" means any vehicle propelled by any power
other than muscular power using the public roads, but excluding
road rollers, trolley cars, street-sweepers, sprinklers, lawn mowers,
bulldozers, graders, fork-lifts, amphibian trucks, and cranes if not
used on public roads, vehicles which run only on rails or tracks, and
tractors, trailers, and traction engines of all kinds used exclusively
for agricultural purposes;
(r) "Municipal Waters" includes not only streams, lakes, and tidal
waters within the municipality, not being the subject of private
ownership and not comprised within the national parks, public
forest, timber lands, forest reserves or fishery reserves, but also
marine waters included between two lines drawn perpendicularly to
the general coastline from points where the boundary lines of the
municipality or city touch the sea at low tide and a third line parallel
with the general coastline and fifteen (15) kilometers from it. Where
two (2) municipalities are so situated on the opposite shores that
there is less than fifteen (15) kilometers of marine waters between
them, the third line shall be equally distant from opposite shores of
the respective municipalities;

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

531

(s) "Operator" includes the owner, manager, administrator, or any
other person who operates or is responsible for the operation of a
business establishment or undertaking;

(t) "Peddler" means any person who, either for himself or on
commission, travels from place to place and sells his goods or offers
to sell and deliver the same. Whether a peddler is a wholesale peddler
or a retail peddler of a particular commodity shall be determined
from the definition of wholesale dealer or retail dealer as provided in
this Title;
(u) "Persons" means every natural or juridical being, susceptible of
rights and obligations or of being the subject of legal relations;
(v) "Residents" refer to natural persons who have their habitual
residence in the province, city, or municipality where they exercise
their civil rights and fulfill their civil obligations, and to juridical
persons for which the law or any other provision creating or
recognizing them fixes their residence in a particular province, city,
or municipality. In the absence of such law, juridical persons are
residents of the province, city, or municipality where they have their
legal residence or principal place of business or where they conduct
their principal business or occupation;

(w) "Retail" means a sale where the purchaser buys the commodity
for his own consumption, irrespective of the quantity of the
commodity sold;
(x) "Vessel" Includes every type of boat, craft, or other artificial
contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of
transportation on water;
(y) "Wharfage" means a fee assessed against the cargo of a vessel
engaged in foreign or domestic trade based on quantity, weight, or
measure received and/or discharged by vessel; and
(z) "Wholesale" means a sale where the purchaser buys or imports
the commodities for resale to persons other than the end user
regardless of the quantity of the transaction.

Local Taxing Authority
Sec. 132. Local Taxing Authority. — The power to impose a
tax, fee, or charge or to generate revenue under this Code shall be
exercised by the sanggunian of the local government unit concerned
through an appropriate ordinance.

•

The power to tax in the local government is vested in and
exercised by the sanoounian .

•

Every tax imposed must be levied pursuant to a valid ordinance.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

532

The ultimate reference for local taxation is the local ordinance.
O

These ordinances usually add to the minimum requirements
of the LGC.

O

LGUs may exercise the power to levy taxes, fees, or charges on
any bases or subject NOT otherwise specifically enumerated
in the LGC or the taxed under the NIRC, or other applicable
laws. (See Section 186 below')

Limitations on the LGU's power to tax

In determining the limitations of local governments to tax, two
sections are applicable:

•

Sec. 186. Power To Levy Other Taxes, Fees or Charges.
— Local government units may exercise the power to levy taxes,
fees or charges on any base or subject not otherwise specifically
enumerated herein or taxed under the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or other applicable laws:
Provided, That the taxes, fees, or charges shall not be unjust,
excessive, oppressive, confiscatory or contrary to declared national
policy: Provided, further, That the ordinance levying such taxes,
fees or charges shall not be enacted without any prior public hearing
conducted for the purpose.

Section 186 gives a general view of the limitations

•

O

Those already subject to tax under the
applicable laws cannot be taxed again

O

Local taxes shall not be unjust, excessive, confiscatory or
contrary to national policy

O

No ordinance can be enacted without any prior public hearing
conducted for the purpose

NIRC or other

The exclusionary rule states that a province may not levy excise
taxes on articles already taxed by the NIRC. (Province of Bulacan
v. CA, G.R. No. 126232, November 27, 1998)
O

Hence, a province may not ordinarily impose taxes on stones,
sand, gravel, etc., from private lands, as the same are already
taxed under the NIRC.

O

The same with professional basketball games. PBA is liable
to pay amusement taxes to the national government and not
to the local governments. Amusement tax on professional
basketball games remains a national tax under the NIRC.
Section 140 of the LGC subjects certain places of amusement

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

533

to amusement tax imposable by the province, but it does not
include professional basketball games. (Philippine Basketball
Association v. CA, G.R. No. 119122, August 8, 2000)

KM Corporation, doing business in the City of Kalookan, has been
a distributor and retailer of clothing and household materials.
It has been paying the City of Kalookan local taxes based on
Sections 15 (Tax on Wholesalers, Distributors or Dealers) and
17 (Tax on Retailers) of the Revenue Code of Kalookan City (Code).
Subsequently, the Sangguniang Panlungsod enacted an ordinance
amending the Code by inserting Section 21 which imposes a tax on
"Businesses Subject to Excise, Value-Added and Percentage Taxes
under the National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC)," at the rate of
50°/o of l°/o per annum on the gross sales and receipts on persons
"who sell goods and services in the course of trade or business."
KM Corporation paid the taxes due under Section 21 under protest,
claiming that (a) local government units could not impose a tax on
businesses already taxed under the NIRC and (b) this would amount
to double taxation, since its business was already taxed under
Sections 15 and 17 of the Code.
a) May local government units Impose a tax on businesses already
subjected to tax under the NIRC?
b)

Does

this amount to

double

taxation? (2018

Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) Generally, no. Under the LGC, LGUs may not exercise the power
to levy taxes on any base or subject taxed under the provisions of
the NIRC.

b) Yes, this amounts to double taxation. Jurisprudence has stated
that when a city has already Imposed a business tax pursuant to one
or two sections of its revenue ordinance, it may no longer subject the
same taxpayer to a business tax under another catch-all provision.
This Is double taxation as It taxes the same subject matter of the
same taxpayer twice.

Sec. 133. Common Limitations on the Taxing Powers of Local
Government Units. — Unless otherwise provided herein, the
exercise of the taxing powers of provinces, cities, municipalities, and
barangays shall not extend to the levy of the following:

(a) Income tax, except when levied on banks and other financial
institutions;

(b) Documentary stamp tax;
(c) Taxes on estates, inheritance, gifts, legacies and other
acquisitions mortis causa, except as otherwise provided herein;

(d) Customs duties, registration fees of vessel and wharfage on
wharves, tonnage dues, and all other kinds of customs fees, charges

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

534

and dues except wharfage on wharves constructed and maintained
by the local government unit concerned;

(e) Taxes, fees and charges and other impositions upon goods
carried into or out of, or passing through, the territorial jurisdictions
of local government units in the guise of charges for wharfage, tolls
for bridges or otherwise, or other taxes, fees or charges in any form
whatsoever upon such goods or merchandise;
(f) Taxes, fees or charges on agricultural and aquatic products when
sold by marginal farmers or fishermen;

(g) Taxes on business enterprises certified to by the Board of
Investments as pioneer or non-pioneer for a period of six (6) and
four (4) years, respectively from the date of registration;
(h) Excise taxes on articles enumerated under the National Internal
Revenue Code, as amended, and taxes, fees or charges on petroleum
products;
(I) Percentage or value-added tax (VAT) on sales, barters or
exchanges or similar transactions on goods or services except as
otherwise provided herein;

(j) Taxes on the gross receipts of transportation contractors and
persons engaged in the transportation of passengers or freight by
hire and common carriers by air, land or water, except as provided in
this Code;
(k) Taxes on premiums paid by way of reinsurance or retrocession;

(l) Taxes, fees or charges for the registration of motor vehicles and
for the issuance of all kinds of licenses or permits for the driving
thereof, except tricycles;
(m) Taxes, fees, or other charges on Philippine products actually
exported, except as otherwise provided herein;

(n) Taxes, fees, or charges, on Countryside and Barangay Business
Enterprises and cooperatives duly registered under R.A. No. 6810
and Republic Act Numbered Sixty-nine hundred thirty-eight (R.A. No.
6938) otherwise known as the "Cooperatives Code of the Philippines"
respectively; and
(o) Taxes, fees or charges of any kind on the National Government,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and local government units.
Section 133 enumerates specific instances where an LGU cannot
impose a tax. They are:
1.

Income tax,

•

2.

Except when
institutions

levied

Documentary stamp tax

on

banks

and

other

financial

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

3.

Taxes on estates, inheritance, legacies or other acquisitions
mortis causa,

•

4.

Except as otherwise provided

Customs duties, registration of vessel and wharfage on
wharves, tonnage dues, and all other kinds of customs fees,
charges and dues
•

5.

535

Except wharfage on wharves constructed and maintained
by the LGU

Taxes, fees and charges and other impositions upon goods
carried into or out of, or passing through, the territorial
jurisdictions of local government units in the guise of charges
for wharfage, tolls for bridges or otherwise, or other taxes,
fees or charges in any form whatsoever upon such goods or
merchandise
•

An ordinance imposing fees on goods and the vehicles
passing through a municipality for police surveillance is
invalid. It violates this limitation. It is also a restraint of
trade. (Palma Development Corporation v. Municipality of
Malangas, G.R. No. 152492, October 16, 2003)
o

It is irrelevant if the fees imposed are actually for
police surveillance, because any other form of
imposition on goods passing through the territorial
jurisdiction of the municipality is clearly prohibited.

6. Taxes, fees or charges on agricultural products or aquatic
products when sold by marginal farmers or fishermen
7.

Taxes on business enterprises certified to by the Board of
Investments (BOI) as pioneer or non-pioneer for a period
of six (6) and four (4) years, respectively from the date of
registration
•

The starting point is the date of registration, not date of
commercial operation. (Batangas Power Corporation v.
Ba tangas City, G.R. No. 152675, April 28, 2004)

o

8.

The reckoning date of commercial operation refers to
income taxes imposed by the national government on
BOI-registered firms.

Section 133(h) covers two distinct limitations:

•

Excise taxes on articles enumerated under the NIRC, and

•

Taxes, fees or charges on petroleum products.

o

For "excise taxes on articles enumerated under
the NIRC," the Court defined "excise tax" as that

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

536

levied on a specific article rather than one upon
the performance, carrying on, or the exercise of an
activity. (Petron Corporation v. Tiangco, G.R. No.
158881, April 16, 2008, wherein the municipality
of Navotas passed an ordinance imposing business
taxes on Petron.)
In other words, when the LGC talks about "excise
taxes," they refer to those enumerated in the
NIRC which are subject to either ad valorem tax
or specific tax.

•

For this limitation to be applicable, there should
be a mirror image between the good sought to be
taxed by the LGU and the good either under ad
valorem tax or specific tax.

When it comes to "taxes, fees, or charges on
petroleum products," the distinction between a tax
on a business (business tax) and a tax on the article
(excise tax) is immaterial. (Petron Corporation v.
Tiangco, G.R. No. 158881, April 16, 2008)

O

9.

■

•

The phrase "taxes, fees or charges on petroleum
products" does not qualify the kind of taxes, fees
or charges that could withstand the absolute
prohibition imposed by the provision.

■

Since the law does not distinguish, LGUs are
prohibited from imposing not only excise taxes
on petroleum products, but all taxes, fees and
charges.

Percentage tax or VAT on sales, barters or exchanges or
similar transactions on goods or services

•

Except as otherwise provided
o

Section 140 is an example of an exception.
•

Provinces are not barred from levying amusement
taxes even if amusement taxes are a form of
percentage taxes.10 (Pelizloy Realty Corporation
v. Benguet, G.R. No. 183137, April 10, 2013)

■

However, the province can only levy amusement
taxes to those activities enumerated in Section
140.

10Percentage taxes are those measured by percentage of the gross selling
price.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

537

10. Taxes on the gross receipts of transportation contractors
and persons engaged in the transportation of passengers or
freight by hire and common carriers by air, land or water

•

Except as provided in the LGC
O

The definition of "common carriers" in the Civil Code
makes no distinction as to the means of transporting,
as long as it is by land, water or air. Nor does it
provide that the transportation of the passengers or
goods be by motor vehicle. (First Philippine Industrial
Corp. v. CA, G.R. No. 125948, December 29, 1998)
Thus, a grantee of a pipeline concession is a common
carrier, and is thus exempt from business tax imposed
by an LGU.

The legislation intended to exclude from the taxing
power of the LGU the imposition of business tax
against common carriers to prevent a duplication
of the "common carrier's tax" already found in the
NIRC.

•

Hence, a local ordinance which imposes local
business tax on the gross receipts of persons
who transport passengers or freight for hire and
common carriers was held invalid. (City of Manila
v. Colet, G.R. No. 120051, December 10, 2014)

11. Taxes on premiums paid by way of reinsurance or retrocession
i

J9JC9B0M

12. Taxes, fees or charges for the registration of motor vehicles
and for the issuance of all kinds of licenses or permits for the
driving thereof,
•

Except tricycles

13. Taxes, fees, or other charges on Philippine products actually
exported,
•

Except as otherwise provided herein

14. Taxes, fees, or charges, on Countryside and Barangay
Business Enterprises and Cooperatives duly registered under
R.A. 6810 and the Cooperatives Code of the Philippines
15. Taxes, fees or charges of any kind on:

•

the National Government,

•

its agencies and instrumentalities, and

•

local government units.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

538

O

Is this absolute? No. In Section 234(A), there is the
exception to the exemption clause which taxes the
national government when the beneficial use of its
real properties is given to a taxable entity. (More on
this when we reach real property tax [R.PT])

XYZ Shipping Corporation is a branch of an international shipping
line with voyages between Manila and the West Coast of the U.S.
The company's vessels load and unload cargoes at the Port of Manila,
albeit it does not have a branch or sales office in Manila. AH the bills
of lading and invoices are issued by the branch office in Makati which
is also the company's principal office.
The City of Manila enacted an ordinance levying a 2% tax on gross
receipts of shipping lines using the Port of Manila.

Can the City Government of Manila legally impose said levy on the
corporation? Explain. (2010 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: It cannot. The LGC prohibits the imposition
of local taxes on common carriers. XYZ Shipping Corporation is a
common carrier as it is a corporation engaged in the business of
transporting goods by water for a fee, offering its services to the
public.

ABC Corporation Is registered as a holding company and has an office
in the City of Makati. It has no actual business operations. It invested
in another company and its earnings are limited to dividends from
this investment. Interests on its bank deposits, and foreign exchange
gains from its foreign currency account. The City of Makati assessed
ABC Corporation as a contractor or one that sells services for a fee.
Is the City of Makati correct? (2013 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The City of Makati is wrong. It cannot impose
local business tax on income, except when levied on banks and other
financial institutions. In the case at hand, ABC Corporation is not a
bank or a financial institution. It clearly Is not. Hence, it cannot be
assessed local business tax for the income which it received from
banks, deposits, and foreign exchange gains.

How to Determine Local Business Tax

•

In answering this question, use the following:

1.

What is the business activity involved and the rate assigned
to it? (Check Sections 135-141, 143)

2.

What are the gross receipts of the business?

3.

Multiply the gross receipts by the rates.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

539

B. Taxing Powers of LGUs

•

General rule: Only cities and municipalities can impose business
taxes.
What about provinces?
O

Provinces can only levy taxes, fees, and charges enumerated
in the LGC, as can be seen below.

What about barangays?
O

See Section 152.

Provinces

CHAPTER 2 — SPECIFIC PROVISIONS ON
THE TAXING AND OTHER REVENUE-RAISING
POWERS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS
Article One — Provinces

Sec. 134. Scope of Taxing Powers. — Except as otherwise
provided in this Code, the province may levy only the taxes, fees,
and charges as provided in this Article.
Sec. 135. Tax on Transfer of Real Property Ownership. — (a)
The province may impose a tax on the sale, donation, barter, or on
any other mode of transferring ownership or title of real property at
the rate of not more than fifty percent (50%) of one percent (1%) of
the total consideration involved in the acquisition of the property or
of the fair market value in case the monetary consideration involved
In the transfer is not substantial, whichever is higher. The sale,
transfer or other disposition of real property pursuant to R.A. No.
6657 shall be exempt from this tax.
(b) For this purpose, the Register of Deeds of the province concerned
shall, before registering any deed, require the presentation of
the evidence of payment of this tax. The provincial assessor shall
likewise make the same requirement before cancelling an old tax
declaration and Issuing a new one in place thereof. Notaries public
shall furnish the provincial treasurer with a copy of any deed
transferring ownership or title to any real property within thirty (30)
days from the date of notarization. It shall be the duty of the seller,
donor, transferor, executor or administrator to pay the tax herein
imposed within sixty (60) days from the date of the execution of the
deed or from the date of the decedent's death.

Sec. 136. Tax on Business of Printing and Publication. — The
province may impose a tax on the business of persons engaged in
the printing and/or publication of books, cards, posters, leaflets,
handbills, certificates, receipts, pamphlets, and others of similar
nature, at a rate not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of one percent

J9JC9B0M

540

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(1%) of the gross annual receipts for the preceding calendar year.
In the case of a newly started business, the tax shall not exceed
one-twentieth (1/20) of one percent (1%) of the capital investment.
In the succeeding calendar year, regardless of when the business
started to operate, the tax shall be based on the gross receipts for
the preceding calendar year, or any fraction thereof, as provided
herein. The receipts from the printing and/or publishing of books or
other reading materials prescribed by the Department of Education,
Culture and Sports, as school texts or references shall be exempt
from the tax herein imposed.

Sec. 137. Franchise Tax. — Notwithstanding any exemption
granted by any law or other special law, the province may impose a
tax on businesses enjoying a franchise, at a rate not exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of one percent (1%) of the gross annual receipts
for the preceding calendar year based on the incoming receipt, or
realized, within its territorial jurisdiction. In the case of a newly
started business, the tax shall not exceed one-twentieth (1/20) of one
percent (1%) of the capital investment. In the succeeding calendar
year, regardless of when the business started to operate, the tax
shall be based on the gross receipts for the preceding calendar year,
or any fraction thereof, as provided herein.

Sec. 138. Tax on Sand, Gravel and Other Quarry Resources. —
The province may levy and collect not more than ten percent (10%)
of fair market value in the locality per cubic meter of ordinary stones,
sand, gravel, earth, and other quarry resources, as defined under
the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, extracted from
public lands or from the beds of seas, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks,
and other public waters within its territorial jurisdiction. The permit
to extract sand, gravel and other quarry resources shall be issued
exclusively by the provincial governor, pursuant to the ordinance of
the sangguniang panlalawigan. The proceeds of the tax on sand,
gravel and other quarry resources shall be distributed as follows:

(1) Province — Thirty percent (30%);
(2) Component city or municipality where the sand, gravel, and
other quarry resources are extracted — Thirty percent (30%); and
(3) Barangay where the sand, gravel, and other quarry resources
are extracted — Forty percent (40%).

®ec" 139- Professional Tax. — (a) The province may levy an annual
professional tax on each person engaged in the exercise or practice
of his profession requiring government examination at such amount
and reasonable classification as the sangguniang panlalawigan may
determine but shall in no case exceed Three hundred pesos (P300).

(b) Every person legally authorized to practice his profession
shall pay the professional tax to the province where he practices
his profession or where he maintains his principal office in case he
practices his profession in several places: Provided, however, That
such person who has paid the corresponding professional tax shall

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

541

be entitled to practice his profession in any part of the Philippines
without being subjected to any other national or local tax, license, or
fee for the practice of such profession.

(c) Any individual or corporation employing a person subject to
professional tax shall require payment by that person of the tax on
his profession before employment and annually thereafter.

l i

(d) The professional tax shall be payable annually, on or before
the thirty-first (31st) day of January. Any person first beginning to
practice a profession after the month of January must, however, pay
the full tax before engaging therein. A line of profession does not
become exempt even if conducted with some other profession for
which the tax has been paid. Professionals exclusively employed in
the government shall be exempt from the payment of this tax.
(e) Any person subject to the professional tax shall write in deeds,
receipts, prescriptions, reports, books of account, plans and designs,
surveys and maps, as the case may be, the number of the official
receipt issued to him.
Sec. 140. Amusement Tax. — (a) The province may levy an
amusement tax to be collected from the proprietors, lessees, or
operators of theaters, cinemas, concert halls, circuses, boxing
stadia, and other places of amusement at a rate of not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the gross receipts from admission fees.

(b) In the case of theaters or cinemas, the tax shall first be deducted
and withheld by their proprietors, lessees, or operators and paid
to the provincial treasurer before the gross receipts are divided
between said proprietors, lessees, or operators and the distributors
of the cinematographic films.

(c) The holding of operas, concerts, dramas, recitals, painting
and art exhibitions, flower shows, musical programs, literary and
oratorical presentations, except pop, rock, or similar concerts shall
be exempt from the payment of the tax herein Imposed.

(d) The sangguniang panlalawigan may prescribe the time, manner,
terms and conditions for the payment of tax. In case of fraud or
failure to pay the tax, the sangguniang panlalawigan may impose
such surcharges, interests and penalties as it may deem appropriate.
(e) The proceeds from the amusement tax shall be shared equally
by the province and the municipality where such amusement places
are located.
Sec. 141. Annual Fixed Tax For Every Delivery Truck or Van
of Manufacturers or Producers, Wholesalers of, Dealers,
or Retailers in, Certain Products. — (a) The province may
levy an annual fixed tax for every truck, van or any vehicle used
by manufacturers, producers, wholesalers, dealers or retailers in
the delivery or distribution of distilled spirits, fermented liquors,
soft drinks, cigars and cigarettes, and other products as may be

-

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

542

determined by the sangguniang panlalawigan, to sales outlets, or
consumers, whether directly or indirectly, within the province in an
amount not exceeding Five hundred pesos (P500).

(b) The manufacturers, producers, wholesalers, dealers, and
retailers referred to in the immediately foregoing paragraph shall be
exempt from the tax on peddlers prescribed elsewhere in this Code.

If provinces cannot impose business taxes, what can they impose?

1.

Tax on Transfer of Real Property Ownership (Section 135)

2.

Taxes on Business of Printing and Publication (Section 136)

3.

Franchise Tax (Section 137)

Notwithstanding any exemption given by law

•

Tax on Sand, Gravel and Other Quarry Resources (Section
138)

4.

Provincial governments can levy excise taxes on quarry
resources from public lands independently from the
national government. (Lepanto Consolidated Mining
Company v. Ambanloc, G.R. No. 180639, June 29, 2010)

•

5.

Professional Tax (Section 139)

•

6.

For professions, even if you pay taxes in Batanes, you
can still practice your profession in Manila or anywhere
else in the Philippines.

Amusement Tax (Section 140)

•

Theaters, cinemas, concert halls, circuses, and boxing
stadia are bound by a common typifying characteristic
in that they are all venues primarily for the staging of
spectacles or the holding of public shows, exhibitions,
performances, and other events meant to be viewed by
an audience. Accordingly, 'other places of amusement'
must be interpreted in this light.
o

Hence, resorts, swimming pools, bath houses, hot
springs, and tourist spots are not "other places of
amusement" which a province can tax. (Pelizloy
Realty Corporation v. Benguet, G.R. No. 183137,
April 10, 2013)

O

Golf courses are also not considered places of
amusement because people don't go to golf courses
to watch a performance. They go there to play golf.
(Alta Vista Golf and Country Club v. Cebu, G.R. No.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

543

180235, January 20, 2016—but what about people
who go there to watch golfers?,)
•

7.

PBA games are likewise not subject to amusement taxes
as these are taxed under the NIRC. (Philippine Basketball
Association v. CA, G.R. No. 119122, August 8, 2000)

Fixed Tax For Every Delivery Truck or Van of Manufacturers
or Producers, Wholesalers of, Dealers, or Retailers in, Certain
Products (Section 141)

Municipalities and cities
Article Two — Municipalities

Sec. 142. Scope of Taxing Powers. — Except as otherwise
provided in this Code, municipalities may levy taxes, fees, and
charges not otherwise levied by provinces.

Article Three — Cities
Sec. 151. Scope of Taxing Powers. — Except as otherwise provided
in this Code, the city, may levy the taxes, fees, and charges which the
province or municipality may impose: Provided, however, That the
taxes, fees and charges levied and collected by highly urbanized and
independent component cities shall accrue to them and distributed in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. The rates of taxes that
the city may levy may exceed the maximum rates allowed for the
province or municipality by not more than fifty percent (50%) except
the rates of professional and amusement taxes.
Municipalities may levy taxes, fees, and charges not otherwise
allocated to provinces.

o

Except as otherwise provided.
•

In other words, stuff that the provinces are given the
power to tax, the municipalities cannot, unless otherwise
provided by the LGC.

■

•

Hence, a municipality may not impose franchise
taxes as this power has been allocated to
provinces. (Pasig v. Manila Electric Company,
G.R. No. 181710, March 7, 2018, where the SC
also held that the conversion of Pasig to a city did
not cure the defect of the municipal ordinance,)

Cities may levy taxes, fees, and charges which the
province or municipality may impose.
■

The rates may exceed the maximum rates
allowed for the province or municipality by not

J9JC9B0M

544

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

more than 50% except the rates of professional
and amusement rates.
In other words, what the province or municipality may
impose, so can the city.

But provinces and municipalities cannot tax the same
thing.
The City of Maharlika passed an ordinance imposing a tax on any sate
or transfer of real property located within the city at a rate of fifty
percent (50%) of one percent (1%) of the total consideration of the
transaction. Jose sold a parcel of land in the city, which he inherited
from his deceased parents, and refused to pay the aforesaid tax. He
instead filed a case asking that the ordinance be declared null and
void since the tax it imposed can only be collected by the national
government, as in fact he has paid the Bureau of Interna! Revenue
(BIR) the required capital gains tax. If you were the City Legal Officer
of Maharlika, what defenses would you raise to sustain the validity of
the ordinance? (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: If I were the Maharlika Legal Officer, I would
say that the LGC gives cities the power to levy the same kind of
taxes which provinces may impose. And since provinces may impose
transfer taxes on real property, then the city can as well. I would
also say that this wasn't a tax on income, but a tax on the transfer
of the property. I would also raise the defense that Jose's immediate
recourse to the courts is unwarranted, given he should've first
questioned the ordinance with the Secretary of Justice.

SECTION 143. Tax on Business — The municipality may Impose
taxes on the following business:
(a) On manufacturers, assemblers, repackers, processors, brewers,
distillers, rectifiers, and compounders of liquors, distilled spirits, and
wines or manufacturers of any article of commerce of whatever kind
of nature, in accordance with the following schedule:

With gross sales or receipts for the preceding
calendar year in the amount of
Less than 10,000.00
P 10,000.00 or more but less than 15,000.00

15,000.00 or more but less than 20,000.00

20,000.00 or more but less than 30,000.00
30,000.00 or more but less than 40,000.00

40,000.00 or more but less than 50,000.00
50,000.00 or more but less than 75,000.00

Amount of
Tax Per Annum

165.00
220.00
302.00
440.00
660.00
825.00
1,320.00

J9JC9B0M

545

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

1,650.00
2,200.00
2,750.00
3,850.00
5,500.00
8,000.00
10,000.00
13,750.00
16,500.00
19,800.00
23,100.00
24,375.00

75,000.00 or more but less than 100,000.00
100,000.00 or more but less than 150,000.00
150,000.00 or more but less than 200,000.00
200,000.00 or more but less than 300,000.00
300,000.00 or more but less than 500,000.00

500,000.00 or more but less than750,000.00
750,000.00 or more but less than 1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00 or more but less than 2,000,000.00
2,000,000.00 or more but less than 3,000,000.00
3,000,000.00 or more but less than 4,000,000.00

4,000,000.00 or more but less than 5,000,000.00
5,000,000.00 or more but less than 6,500,000.00

6,500,000.00 or more at a rate not exceeding thirty-seven and
a half percent (37 1/2%) of one percent (1%)

(b) On wholesalers, distributors, or dealers in any article of
commerce of whatever kind or nature in accordance with the
following schedule:
With gross sales or receipts for the Preceding
calendar year in the amount of

Amount of Tax
Per Annum

Less than Pl,000.00
P 1,000.00 or more but less than 2,000.00

2,000.00 or more but less than 3,000.00
3,000.00 or more but less than 4,000.00

4,000.00 or more but less than 5,000.00

5,000.00 or more but less than 6,000.00
6,000.00 or more but less than 7,000.00
7,000.00 or more but less than 8,000.00
8,000.00 or more but less than 10,000.00

10,000.00 or more but less than 15,000.00
15,000.00 or more but less than 20,000.00
20,000.00 or more but less than 30,000.00

30,000.00 or more but less than 40,000.00
40,000.00 or more but less than 50,000.00

50,000.00 or more but less than 75,000.00
75,000.00 or more but less than 100,000.00
100,000.00 or more but less than 150,000.00
150,000.00 or more but less than 200,000.00

200,000.00 or more but less than 300,000.00
300,000.00 or more but less than 500,000.00

18.00
33.00
50.00
72.00
100.00
121.00
143.00
165.00
187.00
220.00
275.00
330.00
440.00
660.00
990.00
1,320.00
1,870.00
2,420.00
3,300.00
4,400.00

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

546

500,000.00 or more but less than 750,000.00
750,000.00 or more but less than 1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00 or more but less than 2,000,000.00

6,600.00
8,800.00
10,000.00

2,000,000.00 or more at a rate not exceeding fifty percent (50%)
of one percent (1%)

(c) On exporters, and on manufacturers, millers, producers, wholesalers, distributors, dealers or retailers of essential commodities
enumerated hereunder at a rate not exceeding one-half (1/2) of the
rates prescribed under subsections (a), (b) and (d) of this Section:
(1)

Rice and corn;

Wheat or cassava flour, meat, dairy products, locally
(2)
manufactured, processed or preserved food, sugar, salt and
other agricultural, marine, and fresh water products, whether in
their original state or not;
Cooking oil and cooking gas;
(3)
Laundry soap, detergents, and medicine;
(4)
(5) Agricultural implements, equipment and- - post harvest
• - «-•
facilities, fertilizers, pesticides, insecticides, herbicides and other
farm inputs;-

(6)

Poultry feeds and other animal feeds;

(7)

School supplies; and

(8)

Cement

(d) On retailers,

Rate of Tax
Per Annum

With gross sales or receipts for the
Preceding calendar year of:

P 400,000.00 or less

2%

More than P 400,000.00

1%

Provided, however, That Barangays shall have the exclusive
power to levy taxes, as provided under Section 152 hereof, on gross
sales or receipts of the preceding calendar year of Fifty thousand
pesos (P50,000.00) or less in the case of municipalities.
(e) On contractors and other independent contractors, in accordance
with the following schedule:

With gross receipts for the preceding Calendar
year in the amount of:

Amount of Tax
Per Annum

Less than P 5,000.00
P 5,000.00 or more but less than 10,000.00
10,000.00 or more but less than 15,000.00

27.50
61.60
104.50

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

15,000.00 or more but less than 20,000.00
20,000.00 or more but less than 30,000.00
30,000.00 or more but less than 40,000.00
40,000.00 or more but less than 50,000.00
50,000.00 or more but less than 75,000.00
75,000.00 or more but less than 100,000.00
100,000.00 or more but less than 150,000.00
150,000.00 or more but less than 200,000.00
200,000.00 or more but less than 250,000.00
250,000.00 or more but less than 300,000.00
300,000.00 or more but less than 400,000.00
400,000.00 or more but less than 500,000.00
500,000.00 or more but less than 750,000.00
750,000.00 or more but less than 1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00 or more but less than 2,000,000.00

547

165.00
275.00
385.00
550.00
880.00
1,320.00
1,980.00
2,640.00
3,630.00
4,620.00
6,160.00
8,250.00
9,250.00
10,250.00
11,500.00

2,000,000.00 or more at a rate not exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of one percent (1%)
(f) On banks and other financial institutions, at a rate not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of one percent (1) on the gross receipts of the
preceding calendar year derived from interest, commissions and
discounts from lending activities, income from financial leasing,
dividends, rentals on property and profit from ex change or sale of
property, insurance premium.

(g) On peddlers engaged in the sale of any merchandise or article or
commerce, at a rate not exceeding Fifty pesos (P50.00) per peddler
annually.

(h) On any business, not otherwise specified in the preceding
paragraphs, which the Sanggunlan concerned may deem proper to
tax: Provided, That on any business subject to the excise, valueadded or percentage tax under the National Internal Revenue Code,
as amended, the rate of tax shall not exceed two percent (2%) of
gross sales or receipts of the preceding calendar year.

The Sanggunlan concerned may prescribe a schedule of graduated
tax rates but in no case to exceed the rates prescribed herein.
Sec. 131. (d) "Business" means trade or commercial activity
regularly engaged in as a means of livelihood or with a view to profit;
Sec. 131. (n) "Gross Sales or Receipts" include the total amount of
money or its equivalent representing the contract price, compensation
or service fee, including the amount charged or materials supplied
with the services and deposits or advance payments actually or
constructively received during the taxable quarter for the services
performed or to be performed for another person excluding discounts
if determinable at the time of sales, sales return, excise tax, and
value-added tax (VAT)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

548

Section 143 gives an enumeration of specific business activities
and their responding tax rates.
o

The tax rates given by the LGC are the maximum rates that a
sanggunian can impose by an ordinance.

O

Section 143(h) gives the sanggunian the authority to tax
whatever it pleases, as long as it does not go against the
limitations set about in the other provisions of the LGC.
■

Hence, the ultimate reference on whether there is a local
tax or not is an ordinance passed by the sanggunian.

Local business taxes are based on gross receipts.
o

Gross receipts include money or its equivalent actually or
constructively received in consideration of services rendered
or articles, sold, exchanged or leased, whether actual or
constructive.

Constructive receipt occurs when the money consideration or its
equivalent is placed at the control of the person who rendered the
service without restrictions by the payor.
o

It is important to know the difference between gross receipts
and gross income, especially when the taxpayer uses the
accrual method of accounting, which considers when the
right to receive income accrues, and not the actual receipt of
the income. Revenue includes those amounts which have not
actually been received yet.

O

Hence, when a city assessed a petitioner's local business tax
based on gross revenues as reported in its audited financial
statements, the city is wrong. (Ericsson Telecommunications, Inc. v. City of Pasig, G.R. No. 176667, November 22,
2007)

Condominium corporations are generally exempt from local
business taxation under the Local Government Code, irrespective
of any local ordinance that seeks to declare otherwise. They are
prohibited from doing activities for profit under the Condominium
Code, hence they are not "businesses" under the Local Government
Code. (Yamane v. BA Lepanto Condominium Corporation, G.R.
No. 154993, October 25, 2005)
Holding companies are not banks, financial institutions, or nonbank financial intermediaries. Hence, a city may not tax the
dividends received by a holding company under its revenue
ordinance. (Davao v. Randy Allied Ventures, Inc., G.R. No.
241697, July 29, 2019, note, however, that the SC stated that

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

549

holding companies may be taxed accordingly if it engages in
other profit-making activities aside from the management of its
subsidiary's shares,)
When a municipality or city has already imposed a business tax
pursuant to Section 143(A-G) of the LGC, said municipality may
no longer subject the same taxpayer to a business tax under
Section 143(H). This would be direct duplicate double taxation.
(City of Manila v. Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines, Inc., G.R. No.
181845, August 4, 2009)
O

Can the LGUs choose between A-G or H as the basis of the tax
ordinance?

No. You can only use Section 143(H) when the activity
is "not otherwise specified in the preceding paragraphs."
Hence, if the business activity is already under those
specified in A-G, the LGU has to abide by the maximum
tax rates established therein.

BATAS Law is a general professional partnership operating in the
City of Valenzuela. It regularly pays value-added tax on its services.
All its lawyers have individually paid the required professional tax
for the year 2017. However, as a condition for the renewal of its
business permit for the year 2017, the City Treasurer of Valenzuela
assessed BATAS Law for the payment of percentage business tax on
its gross receipts for the year 2016 in accordance with the Revenue
Tax Code of Valenzuela.
Is BATAS Law liable to pay the assessed percentage business tax?
Explain your answer. (2017 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: BATAS Law is not liable to pay the assessed
percentage business tax. The payment of business taxes for the
business permit is akin to regulating professions, which the LGUs
may not do. Regulation of professions is within the exclusive
domain of their respective agencies or offices, not the LGU. Hence,
professionals are exempt from paying business permit fees for their
offices, as long as they have paid their professional tax and do not
engage in selling or trading any articles of commerce. Professionals
must still secure a business permit (at no cost), but are not required
to pay the business tax for the business permit. (Department of
Finance Local Finance Circular No. 001-2019)

Sec. 144. Rates of Tax within the Metropolitan Manila Area.
— The municipalities within the Metropolitan Manila Area may levy
taxes at rates which shall not exceed by fifty percent (50%) the
maximum rates prescribed in the preceding Section.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

550

Special rule for municipalities within Metro Manila:
O

They can tax more than the usual, as long as not more than
50% of the maximum rates of the preceding section.

Fees and charges for regulation & licensing

Sec. 146. Payment of Business Taxes. —

(a) The taxes imposed under Section 143 shall be payable for every
separate or distinct establishment or place where business subject
to the tax is conducted and one line of business does not become
exempt by being conducted with some other business for which such
tax has been paid. The tax on a business must be paid by the person
conducting the same.

(b) In cases where a person conducts or operates two (2) or more
of the businesses mentioned in Section 143 of this Code which are
subject to the same rate of tax, the tax shall be computed on the
combined total gross sales or receipts of the said two (2) or more
related businesses.
(c) In cases where a person conducts or operates two (2) or more
businesses mentioned in Section 143 of this Code which are subject
to different rates of tax, the gross sales or receipts of each business
shall be separately reported for the purpose of computing the tax
due from each business.

Sec. 147. Fees and Charges. — The municipality may impose and
collect such reasonable fees and charges on business and occupation
and, except as reserved to the province in Section 139 of this Code,
on the practice of any profession or calling, commensurate with the
cost of regulation, inspection and licensing before any person may
engage in such business or occupation, or practice such profession
or calling.
Sec. 148. Fees for Sealing and Licensing of Weights and
Measures. — (a) The municipality may levy fees for the sealing and
licensing of weights and measures at such reasonable rates as shall
be prescribed by the sangguniang bayan.

(b) The sangguniang bayan shall prescribe the necessary regulations
for the use of such weights and measures, subject to such guidelines
as shall be prescribed by the Department of Science and Technology.
The sanggunian concerned shall, by appropriate ordinance, penalize
fraudulent practices and unlawful possession or use of instruments of
weights and measures and prescribe the criminal penalty therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. Provided, however, That
the sanggunian concerned may authorize the municipal treasurer to
settle an offense not involving the commission of fraud before a case
therefor is filed in court, upon payment of a compromise penalty of
not less than Two hundred pesos (P200).

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

551

Sec. 149. Fishery Rentals, Fees and Charges —

(a) Municipalities shall have the exclusive authority to grant fishery
privileges in the municipal waters and impose rentals, fees or charges
therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

(b) The sangguniang bayan may:

(1) Grant fishery privileges to erect fish corrals, oyster, mussels or
other aquatic beds or bangus fry areas, within a definite zone of the
municipal waters, as determined by it: Provided, however, That duly
registered organizations and cooperatives of marginal fishermen
shall have the preferential right to such fishery privileges: Provided,
further, That the sangguniang bayan may require a public bidding in
conformity with and pursuant to an ordinance for the grant of such
privileges: Provided, finally, That in the absence of such organizations
and cooperatives or their failure to exercise their preferential right,
other parties may participate in the public bidding in conformity with
the above cited procedure.

(2) Grant the privilege to gather, take or catch bangus fry, prawn fry
or kawag-kawag or fry of other species and fish from the municipal
waters by nets, traps or other fishing gears to marginal fishermen
free of any rental, fee, charge or any other imposition whatsoever.
(3) Issue licenses for the operation of fishing vessels of three (3) tons
or less for which purpose the sangguniang bayan shall promulgate
rules and regulations regarding the issuances of such licenses to
qualified applicants under existing laws.
Provided, however, That the sanggunian concerned shall, by
appropriate ordinance, penalize the use of explosives, noxious or
poisonous substances, electricity, muro-ami, and other deleterious
methods of fishing and prescribe a criminal penalty therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this Code: Provided, finally, That
the sanggunian concerned shall have the authority to prosecute any
violation of the provisions of applicable fishery laws.

•

Municipalities and cities may impose and collect such reasonable
fees and charges on business and occupation, except the
professional tax which is reserved to the province (note Section
139, which reserves to the province the right to tax professions
which need government examinations).

•

Examples of other fees and charges that can be charged by the

municipality/city:
O

Fees for sealing and licensing of weights and measures,

0

Fishery rentals, fees, and charges in municipal waters.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

552

Barangays

Article Four — Barangays

Sec. 152. Scope of Taxing Powers. — The barangays may levy
taxes, fees, and charges, as provided in this Article, which shall
exclusively accrue to them:

(a) Taxes — On stores or retailers with fixed business establishments
with gross sales or receipts of the preceding calendar year of Fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000) or less, in the case of cities and Thirty
thousand pesos (P30,000) or less, in the case of municipalities, at a
rate not exceeding one percent (1%) on such gross sales or receipts.

(b) Service Fees or Charges — barangays may collect reasonable
fees or charges for services rendered in connection with the regulation
or the use of barangay-owned properties or service facilities such as
palay, copra, or tobacco dryers.
(c) Barangay Clearance — No city or municipality may issue any
license or permit for any business or activity unless a clearance is
first obtained from the barangay where such business or activity is
located or conducted. For such clearance, the sangguniang barangay
may impose a reasonable fee. The application for clearance shall be
acted upon within seven (7) working days from the filing thereof. In
the event that the clearance is not issued within the said period, the
city or municipality may issue the said license or permit.

(d) Other Fees and Charges — The barangay may levy reasonable
fees and charges;
(1) On commercial
cockpits;

breeding of fighting

cocks,

cockfights and

(2) On places of recreation which charge admission fees; and
(3) On billboards, signboards, neon signs, and outdoor advertisements.

Common revenue-raising powers

Article Five

Common Revenue-Raising Powers

Sec. 153. Service Fees and Charges. — Local government units
may impose and collect such reasonable fees and charges for
services rendered.

Sec. 154. Public Utility Charges. — Local government units may
fix the rates for the operation of public utilities owned, operated and
maintained by them within their jurisdiction.

Sec. 155. Toll Fees or Charges. — The sanggunian concerned
may prescribe the terms and conditions and fix the rates for the

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

553

imposition of toll fees or charges for the use of any public road,
pier or wharf, waterway, bridge, ferry or telecommunication system
funded and constructed by the local government unit concerned:
Provided, That no such toll fees or charges shall be collected from
officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and
members of the Philippine National Police on mission, post office
personnel delivering mail, physically-handicapped, and disabled
citizens who are sixty-five (65) years or older. When public safety
and welfare so requires, the sanggunian concerned may discontinue
the collection of the tolls, and thereafter the said facility shall be free
and open for public use.

LGUs may impose and collect fees and charges for services
rendered.
It can fix:
O

Reasonable fees and charges for services rendered

O

Public utility charges
-

O

For the operation of public utilities owned, operated, and
maintained by them within their jurisdiction.

Toll fees or charges
•

For the use of any public road, pier, or wharf, waterway,
bridge, ferry or telecommunication system FUNDED and
CONSTRUCTED by the LGU concerned
•

BUT no such toll fees or charges shall be collected
from:
O

Officers and enlisted men of the Armed Forces
of the Philippines and members of the Philippine
National Police on mission,

O

Post office personnel delivering mail,

o

Physically-handicapped
and

o

Citizens who are sixty-five (65) years or older.

and

disabled

citizens,

Community tax
Article Six — Community Tax

Sec. 156. Community Tax. — Cities or municipalities may levy a
community tax in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Sec. 157. Individuals Liable to Community Tax. — Every
inhabitant of the Philippines eighteen (18) years of age or over who

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

554

has been regularly employed on a wage or salary basis for at least
thirty (30) consecutive working days during any calendar year, or
who is engaged in business or occupation, or who owns real property
with an aggregate assessed value of One thousand pesos (Pl,000)
or more, or who is required by law to file an income tax return shall
pay an annual community tax of Five pesos (P5.00) and an annual
additional tax of One peso (Pl.00) for every One thousand pesos
(Pl,000) of income regardless of whether from business, exercise
of profession or from property which in no case shall exceed Five
thousand pesos (P5,000).
In the case of husband and wife, the additional tax herein imposed
shall be based upon the total property owned by them and the total
gross receipts or earnings derived by them.

Sec. 158. Juridical Persons Liable to Community Tax. — Every
corporation no matter how created or organized, whether domestic
or resident foreign, engaged in or doing business in the Philippines
shall pay an annual community tax of Five hundred pesos (P500)
and an annual additional tax, which, in no case, shall exceed Ten
thousand pesos (P10,000) in accordance with the following schedule:

(1) For every Five thousand pesos (P5,000) worth of real property
in the Philippines owned by it during the preceding year based on
the valuation used for the payment of the real property tax under
existing laws, found in the assessment rolls of the city or municipality
where the real property is situated — Two pesos (P2.00); and
(2) For every Five thousand pesos (P5,000) of gross receipts or
earnings derived by it from its business in the Philippines during the
preceding year — Two pesos (P2.00).

The dividends received by a corporation from another corporation
however shall, for the purpose of the additional tax, be considered as
part of the gross receipts or earnings of said corporation.
Sec. 159. Exemption. — The following are exempt from the
community tax:

(1) Diplomatic and consular representatives; and
(2) Transient visitors when their stay In the Philippines does not
exceed three (3) months.
Who can impose community tax?
Only cities or municipalities.

o

Who are liable to pay community tax?

o

Individuals who are:

■

18 years and above, and who is
•

regularly employed for at least 30 consecutive
working days during any calendar year or

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

o

555

•

engaged in a business or occupation or

•

owns real property worth more than P1000 (assessed
value), or

•

required to file an income tax return

Corporations

Who are exempt from community development tax?
o

O

Absolutely:

•

Diplomats, and

«

Consular representatives

Exempt for the rest of the current taxable year:
•

Transient visitors who stay not more than three months

•

Persons who come to reside in the Philippines on or after
July 1

■

Persons who become 18 years of age on or after July 1

•

Corporations established and organized on or after July 1

Sec. 160. Place of Payment. — The community tax shall be paid
in the place of residence of the individual, or in the place where the
principal office of the juridical entity is located.
Sec. 161. Time for Payment; Penalties for Delinquency. — (a)
The community tax shall accrue on the first (1st) day of January of
each year which shall be paid not later than the last day of February
of each year. If a person reaches the age of eighteen (18) years
or otherwise loses the benefit of exemption on or before the last
day of June, he shall be liable for the community tax on the day he
reaches such age or upon the day the exemption ends. However, if a
person reaches the age of eighteen (18) years or loses the benefit of
exemption on or before the last day of June, he shall be liable for the
community tax on the day he reaches such age or upon the day the
exemption ends. However, if a person reaches the age of eighteen
(18) years or loses the benefit of exemption on or before the last day
of March, he shall have twenty (20) days to pay the community tax
without becoming delinquent.

Persons who come to reside in the Philippine or reach the age of
eighteen (18) years on or after the first (1st) day of July of any year,
or who cease to belong to an exempt class on or after the same date,
shall not be subject to the community tax for that year.

(b) Corporation established and organized on or before the last
day of June shall be liable for the community tax for that year. But
corporations established and organized on or before the last day of

J9JC9B0M

556

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

March shall have twenty (20) days within which to pay the community
tax without becoming delinquent. Corporations established and
organized on or after the first day of July shall not be subject to the
community tax for that year.

If the tax is not paid within the time prescribed above, there shall
be added to the unpaid amount an interest of twenty-four percent
(24%) per annum from the due date until it is paid.
Sec. 162. Community Tax Certificate. — A community tax
certificate shall be issued to every person or corporation upon
payment of the community tax. A community tax certificate may also
be issued to any person or corporation not subject to the community
tax upon payment of One peso (Pl.00).

Sec. 163. Presentation of Community Tax Certificate On
Certain Occasions. — (a) When an individual subject to the
community tax acknowledges any document before a notary public,
takes the oath of office upon election or appointment to any position
in the government service; receives any license, certificate, or
permit from any public authority; pays any tax or fee; receives any
money from any public fund; transacts other official business; or
receives any salary or wage from any person or corporation, it shall
be the duty of any person, officer, or corporation with whom such
transaction is made or business done or from whom any salary or
wage is received to require such individual to exhibit the community
tax certificate. The presentation of community tax certificate shall
not be required in connection with the registration of a voter.

(b) When, through its authorized officers, any corporation subject to
the community tax receives any license, certificate, or permit from
any public authority, pays any tax or fee, receives money from public
funds, or transacts other official business, it shall be the duty of the
public official with whom such transaction is made or business done,
to require such corporation to exhibit the community tax certificate.
(c) The community tax certificate required in the two preceding
paragraphs shall be the one issued for the current year, except for
the period from January until the fifteenth (15th) of April each year,
in which case, the certificate issued for the preceding year shall
suffice.
Sec. 164. Printing of Community Tax Certificates and
Distribution of Proceeds. — (a) The Bureau of Internal Revenue
shall cause the printing of community tax certificates and distribute
the same to the cities and municipalities through the city and
municipal treasurers in accordance with prescribed regulations. The
proceeds of the tax shall accrue to the general funds of the cities,
municipalities and barangays except a portion thereof which shall
accrue to the general fund of the national government to cover the
actual cost of printing and distribution of the forms and other related
expenses. The city or municipal treasurer concerned shall remit to
the national treasurer the said share of the national government in
the proceeds of the tax within ten (10) days after the end of each
quarter.

1
J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

557

(b) The city or municipal treasurer shall deputize the barangay
treasurer to collect the community tax in their respective jurisdictions:
Provided, however, That said barangay treasurer shall be bonded in
accordance with existing laws.

(c) The proceeds of the community tax actually and directly collected
by the city or municipal treasurer shall accrue entirely to the general
fund of the city or municipality concerned. However, proceeds of the
community tax collected through the barangay treasurers shall be
apportioned as follows:
(1) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue to the general fund of
the city or municipality concerned; and
(2) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue to the barangay where
the tax is collected.
Should be paid in the residence of the individual or in the place
where the office of the juridical entity is located.

Time to pay: before February 1 of each year

C.

Situs of Local Taxes
Sec. 150. Situs of the Tax. —

(a) For purposes of collection of the taxes under Section 143
of this Code, manufacturers, assemblers, repackers, brewers,
distillers, rectifiers and compounders of liquor, distilled spirits and
wines, millers, producers, exporters, wholesalers, distributors,
dealers, contractors, banks and other financial Institutions, and
other businesses, maintaining or operating branch or sales outlet
elsewhere shall record the sale In the branch or sales outlet making
the sale or transaction, and the tax thereon shall accrue and shall be
paid to the municipality where such branch or sales outlet is located.
In cases where there is no such branch or sales outlet in the city or
municipality where the sale or transaction is made, the sale shall be
duly recorded in the principal office and the taxes due shall accrue
and shall be paid to such city or municipality.

(b) The following sales allocation shall apply to manufacturers,
assemblers, contractors, producers, and exporters with factories,
project offices, plants, and plantations in the pursuit of their business:
(1) Thirty percent (30%) of all sales recorded in the
principal office shall be taxable by the city or municipality where
the principal office is located; and

Seventy percent (70%) of all sales recorded In the
(2)
principal office shall be taxable by the city or city or municipality
where the factory, project office, plant or plantation is located;
and

J9JC9B0M

558

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(c) In case of a plantation located at a place other than the place
where the factory is located, said seventy percent (70%) mentioned
in subparagraph (b) of subsection (2) above shall be divided as
follows:
(1) Sixty percent (60%) to the city or municipality where
the factory is located; and
(2) Forty percent (40%) to the city or municipality where
the plantation is located.

(d) In cases where a manufacturer, assembler, producer, exporter or
contractor has two (2) or more factories, project offices, plants, or
plantations located in different localities, the seventy percent (70%)
sales allocation mentioned in subparagraph (b) of subsection (2)
above shall be prorated among the localities where the factories,
project offices, plants, and plantations are located in proportion to
their respective volumes of production during the period for which
the tax is due.
(e) The foregoing sales allocation shall be applied irrespective of
whether or not sales are made in the locality where the factory,
project office, plant, or plan is located.
Sec. 143. (D) IR.R. — Sales made by route trucks, vans,
or vehicles — (1) For route sales made in a locality where a
manufacturer, producer, wholesaler, retailer or dealer has a branch
or sales office or warehouse, the sale are recorded in the branch,
sales office or warehouse and the tax due thereon is paid to the LGU
where such branch, sales office or warehouse is located. (2) For route
sales made in a locality where a manufacturer, producer, wholesaler,
retailer or dealer has no branch, sales office or warehouse the sales
are recorded in the branch, sales office or warehouse from where
the route trucks withdraw their products for sale, and the tax due
on such sales is paid to the LGU where such branch, sales office
or warehouse is located. (3) Based on subparagraphs (1) and (2)
above, LGUs where route trucks deliver merchandise cannot impose
any tax on said trucks except the annual fixed tax authorized to be
imposed by the province in Article 231 of this Rule on every delivery
truck or van or any motor vehicle used by manufacturers, producers,
wholesalers, dealers, or retailers, in the delivery or distribution of
distilled spirits, fermented liquors, soft drinks, cigars and cigarettes,
and other products as may be determined by the sangguniang
panlalawigan, and by the city, pursuant to Article 223 of this Rule.
•

For purposes of complying with local tax liabilities (/.e., which
LGU to pay), the taxpayer may rely on the location stated in the
certificate of title. (Cainta v. City of Pasig and Uniwide Sales, G.R.
No. 176703, June 28, 2017, where the taxpayer was caught in
the middle of a boundary dispute between Cainta and Pasig)

o

The boundary dispute is not a prejudicial question in local
business tax cases, and the tax collection case can proceed

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

559

during the pendency of the boundary dispute. (Cainta v. City
of Pasig)
However, a boundary dispute is a prejudicial question in
real property tax cases. (Sta. Lucia v. Pasig, G.R. No.
166838, June 15, 2011)

■

O

The contending LGUs cannot collect and reimburse taxes
from each other as a matter of expediency. The payment
and reimbursement must be coursed through the taxpayer.
(Cainta v. City of Pasig)

For purposes of collecting local business taxes, we have to know
to which city or municipality the said taxes accrue to. So, let's
check the rules on allocation:

1.

2.

3.

4.

When sale was made in a certain municipality or city

a.

If there is a branch for sales office or warehoused where
the sale was made, the sale shall be recorded in the said
branch (or sales office or warehouse), and the tax shall
accrue and be paid to the municipality (or city) where the
branch is located.

b.

If there is no branch for sales office or warehoused where
the sale was made, the sale shall be recorded in the
principal office and taxes shall accrue and be paid to the
municipality (or city) where the principal office is located.

If there is no branch for sales office or warehoused, and the
company has a factory, plants, plantations, project office

a.

30% of sales — taxable where principal office is located

b.

70% of sales — taxable where factory, plant, plantation,
project office is located

Sales allocation in case factories and plantations located in
different places
a.

30% of sales — taxable where principal office is located

b.

70% distributed as follows:

o

60% taxable where factory is located

o

40% taxable where plantation is located

In case there are two or more factories and plantations
located in different localities

a.

Prorate the 70% according to the volume of production

J9JC9B0M

560

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

5.

In case of route sales

a.

Made in a locality where a manufacturer, producer,
wholesaler, retailer or dealer has a branch or sales office
or warehouse, the sale are recorded in the branch, sales
office or warehouse and the tax due thereon is paid to
the LGU where such branch, sales office or warehouse is
located.

b.

Made in a locality where a manufacturer, producer,
wholesaler, retailer or dealer has no branch, sales office
or warehouse the sales are recorded in the branch, sales
office or warehouse from where the route trucks withdraw
their products for sale.

•

Remember, as long as there is a branch, the sale will be recorded
there. The rules for allocation apply only if there is no branch.

•

The sales allocations shall be applied irrespective of whether or
not sales are made in the locality where the factory, project office,
plant, or plantation is located.

*

C?n va'ld^ tax the sales of matches to customers outside
o t e city as long as the orders were booked and paid for in the
company's branch office in the city. (Philippine Match Co., Ltd. v.
City of Cebu, G.R. No. L-30745, January 18, 1978)

*

Principal office: head or main office, it is the address registered in
the documents submitted to the SEC/DTI.
Branch/sales office: fixed place in a locality which conducts
operations of the business as an extension of the principal office,

o

Does NOT include display offices used as display areas where
no stocks or items are stored for sale, although orders for the
products may be received thereat.

Warehouse: place where the goods are stored
o

accePts orders and/or issues sales invoices independent
ranch with sales office, it shall be considered a sales
office.
tr^Ct of a9ricultural land where trees or seedlings
planted, uniformly spaced or seeded by broadcast methods.

nr~ agricultural land utilized by a business
agricultural stuff° COnduct research and experiments Involving

°

are ’°Cated Sha" NOT be

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

561

In case of manufacturers or producers which engage the services
of an independent contractor to produce or manufacture some of
their products, these rules on situs of taxation shall apply except
that the factory or plant and warehouse of the contractor utilized
for the production and storage of the manufacturers' products
shall be considered as the factory or plant and warehouse of
the manufacturer. {Definitions based on Art. 243, Implementing
Rules and Regulations [IRR] of R.A. 7160')
Ferremaro, Inc., a manufacturer of handcrafted shoes, maintains its
principal office in Cubao, Quezon City. It has branches/sales offices
in Cebu and Davao. Its factory is located in Marikina City where most
of its workers live. Its principal office in Quezon City is also a sales
office.

Sales of finished products for calendar year 2009 in the amount of
PIO million were made at the following locations:

i)

Cebu branch

25%

H)
Hi)

Davao branch

15%

Quezon City branch

60%

Total

100%

Where should the applicable local taxes on the shoes be paid?
Explain. (2010 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The local taxes must be paid In Cebu, Davao,
and Quezon City. The LGC states that the local taxes shall record
the sales in LGUs where the branch offices or sales offices made the
sales. Here, the sales were made in the branch offices in Cebu and
Davao and the sales office in Quezon City.

Kathang Isip, Inc. (Kii) Is a domestic corporation engaged in the
business of manufacturing, importing, exporting, and distributing
toys both locally and abroad. Its principal office is located in
Kalookan City, Philippines. It has 50 branches in different cities and
municipalities in the country. When Kii applied for renewal of its
mayor's permit and licenses in its principal office In January this
year, Kalookan City demanded payment of the local business tax
on the basis of the gross sales reported by the corporation in its
audited financial statements for the preceding year. Kii protested,
contending that Kalookan City may tax only the sales consummated
by Its principal office but not the sales consummated by its branch
offices located outside Kalookan City.

When Kalookan City denied the protest, Kii engaged the services of
Atty. Kristeta Kabuyao to file the necessary judicial proceedings to
appeal the decision of Kalookan City. Atty. Kabuyao is a legal expert,
but resides in Kalibo, Aklan where her husband operates a resort.

!

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

562

She, however, practices in Metro Manila, including Kalookan City. The
counsel representing the city, in the case filed in Kalookan City by
KII, questioned the use of Atty. Kabuyao's Professional Tax Receipt
(PTR) issued in Aklan for a case filed in Kalookan City.
a) Is KII's contention that Kalookan City can only collect local
business taxes based on sales consummated in the principal office
meritorious?

b) Is the Kalookan City counsel correct in saying that Atty.
Kabuyao's PTR issued in Aklan cannot be used in Kalookan? (2018
Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

D.

a)

KKI is correct. Under the LGC, sales by branches shall accrue to
the LGU where the branch is located. Hence, Kalookan may not
tax the sales of KKI's branches outside Kalookan City.

b)

The Kalookan City counsel is wrong. The LGC states that the
payment of professional tax in one LGU allows the professional
to practice anywhere in the Philippines without need to pay any
other similar taxes. Hence, Atty. Kabuyao's Aklan-issued PTR
can be used anywhere, including Kalookan.

Collection of Local Taxes

CHAPTER 3 — COLLECTION OF TAXES

Sec. 165. Tax Period and Manner of Payment. — Unless
otherwise provided in this Code, the tax period of all local taxes, fees
and charges shall be the calendar year. Such taxes, fees and charges
may be paid in quarterly installments.

Sec. 166. Accrual of Tax. — Unless otherwise provided In this
Code, all local taxes, fees, and charges shall accrue on the first (1st)
day of January of each year. However, new taxes, fees or charges,
or changes in the rates thereof, shall accrue on the first (1st) day of
the quarter next following the effectivity of the ordinance imposing
such new levies or rates.
Sec. 167. Time of Payment. — Unless otherwise provided in this
Code, all local taxes, fees, and charges shall be paid within the first
twenty (20) days of January or of each subsequent quarter, as the
case may be. The sanggunian concerned may, for a justifiable reason
or cause, extend the time for payment of such taxes, fees, or charges
without surcharges or penalties, but only for a period not exceeding
six (6) months.

All local taxes, fees, and charges accrue on January 1 and must
be paid by January 20, or of each subsequent quarter.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

563

Surcharges and penalties
Sec. 168. Surcharges and Penalties on Unpaid Taxes, Fees,
or Charges. — The sanggunian may impose a surcharge not
exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of taxes, fees or
charges not paid on time and an interest at the rate not exceeding
two percent (2%) per month of the unpaid taxes, fees or charges
including surcharges, until such amount is fully paid but in no case
shall the total interest on the unpaid amount or portion thereof
exceed thirty-six (36) months.

Sec. 169. Interests on Other Unpaid Revenues. — Where the
amount of any other revenue due a local government unit, except
voluntary contributions or donations, is not paid on the date fixed in
the ordinance, or in the contract, expressed or implied, or upon the
occurrence of the event which has given rise to its collection, there
shall be collected as part of that amount an interest thereon at the
rate not exceeding two percent (2%) per month from the date it
is due until it is paid, but in no case shall the total interest on the
unpaid amount or a portion thereof exceed thirty-six (36) months.
Sec. 170. Collection of Local Revenues by Treasurer. — All
local taxes, fees, and charges shall be collected by the provincial,
city, municipal, or barangay treasurer, or their duly authorized
deputies. The provincial, city or municipal treasurer may designate
the barangay treasurer as his deputy to collect local taxes, fees, or
charges. In case a bond is required for the purpose, the provincial,
city or municipal government shall pay the premiums thereon in
addition to the premiums of bond that may be required under this
Code.

■

J9JC9B0M

Sec. 171. Examination of Books of Accounts and Pertinent
Records of Businessmen by Local Treasurer. — The provincial,
city, municipal or barangay treasurer may, by himself or through
any of his deputies duly authorized in writing, examine the books,
accounts, and other pertinent records of any person, partnership,
corporation, or association subject to local taxes, fees and charges
in order to ascertain, assess, and collect the correct amount of
the tax, fee, or charge. Such examination shall be made during
regular business hours, only once for every tax period, and shall be
certified to by the examining official. Such certificate shall be made
of record In the books of accounts of the taxpayer examined. In
case the examination herein authorized is made by a duly authorized
deputy of the local treasurer, the written authority of the deputy
concerned shall specifically state the name, address, and business
of the taxpayer whose books, accounts, and pertinent records are
to be examined, the date and place of such examination, and the
procedure to be followed in conducting the same. For this purpose,
the records of the revenue district office of the Bureau of Internal
Revenue shall be made available to the local treasurer, his deputy or
duly authorized representative.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

564

Surcharge: 25% of the amount of taxes, fees, or charges NOT
paid on time

•

With interest: 2% per MONTH on amount including surcharges

o

BUT in no case shall the total interest on the unpaid
amount or portion exceed 36 months

•

•

The surcharge should not be applied in a yearly accrual basis. To
do so would be unconscionable and against the wording of Section
168. (NPC v. City of Cabanatuan, G.R. No. 177332, October 1,
2014)

•

For other dues: 2% per month, subject to the 36-month rule.
o

E.

Is there really a three-month rule after you break up? Ask
Popoy.

Retirement of Businpqc

Sec. 145. Retirement of Business. — A business subject to tax
pursuant to the preceding sections shall, upon termination thereof,
submit a sworn statement of its gross sales or receipts for the current
year. If the tax paid during the year be less than the tax due on said
gross sales or receipts of the current year, the difference shall be
paid before the business Is considered officially retired.
If the tax paid during the year is less than the tax due on said
gross sales or receipts of the current year, the difference shall be
paid before the business is considered official retired.

o

But what if the tax paid is more than the tax due on said
gross sales or receipts of the current year?

•

The case of Mobil Philippines, Inc. v. Makati (G.R. No.
154092, July 14, 2005) is instructive.
Remember: local business tax is paid for the privilege
of carrying a business during the year it is paid, and
not for the previous year.

■

In that case, the City of Makati would use the gross
receipts of the previous year as the basis for the local
business tax of the current year. The gross receipts
were, of course, mere estimates for the gross
receipts of the current year, such that if the estimate
is more than the actual receipts of the current year,
the company would be entitled to the difference in
the form of a refund.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

565

I

For example, in 2009, Zombie Costumes Unlimited,
Inc.'s gross receipts were a whopping Pl,000,000.
The business tax rate is 5%. On January 1, 2010,
Zombie Costumes Unlimited, Inc. paid their business
tax of P50,000, which was based on their gross
receipts of 2009. However, in August, 2010, Zombie
Costumes Unlimited, Inc. decided to close down
their operations and move to Cebu City. At the end
of August, 2010, their gross receipts were only
P700,000 since Halloween season had not started
yet. What happens?
•

Zombie Costumes Unlimited, Inc. will be entitled
to a refund of P15,000. Since the previous year's
gross receipts are used as the basis for the
current year's business tax (and is only a mere
estimate thereof), if the business closes down
within the year, and its gross receipts are lower
than that of the previous year, they are entitled
to a credit.
At the time they closed down, their gross receipts
were P700,000. Hence, the tax was only P35,000.
At the start of the year, they paid P50,000 for the
privilege for carrying their business for the entire
year. Since the P50,000 tax paid is more than the
amount computed based on Zombie Costumes
Unlimited, Inc.'s actual gross receipts for 2010,
they are entitled to a refund.

F.

Remedies for Collection of Local Taxes

Chapter 4 — Civil Remedies for Collection of Revenues
Sec. 172. Application of Chapter. — The provisions of this Chapter
and the remedies provided herein may be availed of for the collection
of any delinquent local tax, fee, charge, or other revenue.

Sec. 173. Local Government's Lien. — Local taxes, fees, charges
and other revenues constitute a lien, superior to all liens, charges
or encumbrances in favor of any person, enforceable by appropriate
administrative or judicial action, not only upon any property or rights
therein which may be subject to the lien but also upon property used
in business, occupation, practice of profession or calling, or exercise
of privilege with respect to which the lien is imposed. The lien may
only be extinguished upon full payment of the delinquent local taxes
fees and charges including related surcharges and interest.

J9JC9B0M

566

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Sec. 174. Civil Remedies. — The civil remedies for the collection
of local taxes, fees, or charges, and related surcharges and interest
resulting from delinquency shall be:
(a) By administrative action through distraint of goods, chattels, or
effects, and other personal property of whatever character, including
stocks and other securities, debts, credits, bank accounts, and
interest in and rights to personal property, and by levy upon real
property and interest in or rights to real property; and

(b) By judicial action. Either of these remedies or all may be
pursued concurrently or simultaneously at the discretion of the local
government unit concerned.
Sec. 175. Distraint of Persona! Property. — The remedy by
distraint shall proceed as follows:

(a) Seizure — Upon failure of the person owing any local tax, fee, or
charge to pay the same at the time required, the local treasurer or
his deputy may, upon written notice, seize or confiscate any personal
property belonging to that person or any personal property subject
to the lien in sufficient quantity to satisfy the tax, fee, or charge in
question, together with any increment thereto incident to delinquency
and the expenses of seizure. In such case, the local treasurer or
his deputy shall issue a duly authenticated certificate based upon
the records of his office showing the fact of delinquency and the
amounts of the tax, fee, or charge and penalty due. Such certificate
shall serve as sufficient warrant for the distraint of personal property
aforementioned, subject to the taxpayer's right to claim exemption
under the provisions of existing laws. Distrained personal property
shall be sold at public auction in the manner herein provided for.
(b) Accounting of distrained goods — The officer executing the
distraint shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods,
chattels or effects distrained, a copy of which signed by himself
shall be left either with the owner or person from whose possession
the goods, chattels or effects are taken, or at the dwelling or place
of business of that person and with someone of suitable age and
discretion, to which list shall be added a statement of the sum
demanded and a note of the time and place of sale.
(c) Publication — The officer shall forthwith cause a notification to be
exhibited in not less than three (3) public and conspicuous places in
the territory of the local government unit where the distraint is made,
specifying the time and place of sale, and the articles distrained. The
time of sale shall not be less than twenty (20) days after notice to
the owner or possessor of the property as above specified and the
publication or posting of the notice. One place for the posting of
the notice shall be at the office of the chief executive of the local
government unit in which the property is distrained.

(d) Release of distrained property upon payment prior to sale — If
at any time prior to the consummation of the sale, all the proper
charges are paid to the officer conducting the sale, the goods or
effects distrained shall be restored to the owner.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

567

(e) Procedure of sale — At the time and place fixed in the notice,
the officer conducting the sale shall sell the goods or effects so
distrained at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. Within
five (5) days after the sale, the local treasurer shall make a report
of the proceedings in writing to the local chief executive concerned.
Should the property distrained be not disposed of within one hundred
and twenty (120) days from the date of distraint, the same shall
be considered as sold to the local government unit concerned for
the amount of the assessment made thereon by the Committee on
Appraisal and to the extent of the same amount, the tax delinquencies
shall be cancelled. Said Committee on Appraisal shall be composed
of the city or municipal treasurer as chairman, with a representative
of the Commission on Audit and the city or municipal assessor as
members.

(f) Disposition of proceeds — The proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to satisfy the tax, including the surcharges, interest, and
other penalties incident to delinquency, and the expenses of the
distraint and sale. The balance over and above what is required to
pay the entire claim shall be returned to the owner of the property
sold. The expenses chargeable upon the seizure and sale shall
embrace only the actual expenses of seizure and preservation of
the property pending the sale, and no charge shall be imposed for
the services of the local officer or his deputy. Where the proceeds
of the sale are insufficient to satisfy the claim, other property may,
in like manner, be distrained until the full amount due, including all
expenses, is collected.
Sec. 176. Levy on Real Property — After the expiration of the
time required to pay the delinquent tax, fee, or charge, real property
may be levied on before, simultaneously, or after the distraint of
personal property belonging to the delinquent taxpayer. To this end,
the provincial, city or municipal treasurer, as the case may be, shall
prepare a duly authenticated certificate showing the name of the
taxpayer and the amount of the tax, fee, or charge, and penalty
due from him. Said certificate shall operate with the force of a legal
execution throughout the Philippines. Levy shall be effected by writing
upon said certificate the description of the property upon which levy
is made. At the same time, written notice of the levy shall be mailed
to or served upon the assessor and the Registrar of Deeds of the
province or city where the property is located who shall annotate
the levy on the tax declaration and certificate of title of the property,
respectively, and the delinquent taxpayer or, if he be absent from the
Philippines, to his agent or the manager of the business in respect to
which the liability arose, or if there be none, to the occupant of the
property in question. In case the levy on real property is not issued
before or simultaneously with the warrant of distraint on personal
property, and the personal property of the taxpayer is not sufficient
to satisfy his delinquency, the provincial, city or municipal treasurer,
as the case may be, shall within thirty (30) days after execution of
the distraint, proceed with the levy on the taxpayer's real property.

J9JC9B0M

568

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

A report on any levy shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of
the warrant, be submitted by the levying officer to the sanggunian
concerned.

Sec. 177. Penalty for Failure to Issue and Execute Warrant.
— Without prejudice to criminal prosecution under the Revised Penal
Code and other applicable laws, any local treasurer who fails to issue
or execute the warrant of distraint or levy after the expiration of
the time prescribed, or who is found guilty of abusing the exercise
thereof by competent authority shall be automatically dismissed
from the service after due notice and hearing.
Sec. 178. Advertisement and Sale. — Within thirty (30) days after
levy, the local treasurer shall proceed to publicly advertise for sale or
auction the property or a usable portion thereof as may be necessary
to satisfy the claim and cost of sale; and such advertisement shall
cover a period of at least thirty (30) days. It shall be effected by
posting a notice at the main entrance of the municipal building or city
hall, and in a public and conspicuous place in the barangay where
the real property is located, and by publication once a week for three
(3) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the province, city
or municipality where the property is located. The advertisement
shall contain the amount of taxes, fees or charges, and penalties due
thereon, and the time and place of sale, the name of the taxpayer
against whom the taxes, fees, or charges are levied, and a short
description of the property to be sold. At any time before the date
fixed for the sale, the taxpayer may stay the proceedings by paying
the taxes, fees, charges, penalties and interests. If he fails to do so,
the sale shall proceed and shall be held either at the main entrance
of the provincial, city or municipal building, or on the property to
be sold, or at any other place as determined by the local treasurer
conducting the sale and specified in the notice of sale. Within thirty
(30) days after the sale, the local treasurer or his deputy shall make
a report of the sale to the sanggunian concerned, and which shall
form part of his records. After consultation with the sanggunian, the
local treasurer shall make and deliver to the purchaser a certificate
of sale, showing the proceedings of the sale, describing the property
sold, stating the name of the purchaser and setting out the exact
amount of all taxes, fees, charges, and related surcharges, Interests,
or penalties: Provided, however, That any excess in the proceeds
of the sale over the claim and cost of sales shall be turned over to
the owner of the property. The local treasurer may, by ordinance
duly approved, advance an amount sufficient to defray the costs
of collection by means of the remedies provided for in this Title,
including the preservation or transportation in case of personal
property, and the advertisement and subsequent sale, in cases of
personal and real property including improvements thereon.
Sec. 179. Redemption of Property Sold. — Within one (1) year
from the date of sale, the delinquent taxpayer or his representative
shall have the right to redeem the property upon payment to the

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

569

local treasurer of the total amount of taxes, fees, or charges,
and related surcharges, interests or penalties from the date of
delinquency to the date of sale, plus interest of not more than two
percent (2%) per month on the purchase price from the date of
purchase to the date of redemption. Such payment shall invalidate
the certificate of sale issued to the purchaser and the owner shall
be entitled to a certificate of redemption from the provincial, city or
municipal treasurer or his deputy. The provincial, city or municipal
treasurer or his deputy, upon surrender by the purchaser of the
certificate of sale previously issued to him, shall forthwith return to
the latter the entire purchase price paid by him plus the interest of
not more than two percent (2%) per month herein provided for, the
portion of the cost of sale and other legitimate expenses incurred by
him, and said property thereafter shall be free from the lien of such
taxes, fees, or charges, related surcharges, interests, and penalties.
The owner shall not, however, be deprived of the possession of said
property and shall be entitled to the rentals and other income thereof
until the expiration of the time allowed for its redemption.
Sec. 180. Final Deed to Purchaser. — In case the taxpayer fails
to redeem the property as provided herein, the local treasurer shall
execute a deed conveying to the purchaser so much of the property
as has been sold, free from liens of any taxes, fees, charges, related
surcharges, interests, and penalties. The deed shall succinctly recite
all the proceedings upon which the validity of the sale depends.

Sec. 181. Purchase of Property By the Local Government
Units for Want of Bidder. — In case there is no bidder for the
real property advertised for sale as provided herein, or if the highest
bid is for an amount insufficient to pay the taxes, fees, or charges,
related surcharges, interests, penalties and costs, the local treasurer
conducting the sale shall purchase the property in behalf of the local
government unit concerned to satisfy the claim and within two (2)
days thereafter shall make a report of his proceedings which shall
be reflected upon the records of his office. It shall be the duty of
the Registrar of Deeds concerned upon registration with his office
of any such declaration of forfeiture to transfer the title of the
forfeited property to the local government unit concerned without
the necessity of an order from a competent court. Within one (1)
year from the date of such forfeiture, the taxpayer or any of his
representative, may redeem the property by paying to the local
treasurer the full amount of the taxes, fees, charges, and related
surcharges, interests, or penalties, and the costs of sale. If the
property is not redeemed as provided herein, the ownership thereof
shall be fully vested on the local government unit concerned.
Sec. 182. Resale of Real Estate Taken for Taxes, Fees, or
Charges. — The sanggunian concerned may, by ordinance duly
approved, and upon notice of not less than twenty (20) days, sell and
dispose of the real property acquired under the preceding section at

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

570

public auction. The proceeds of the sale shall accrue to the general
fund.
Sec. 183. Collection of Delinquent Taxes, Fees, Charges or
other Revenues through Judicial Action. —The local government
unit concerned may enforce the collection of delinquent taxes, fees,
charges or other revenues by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The civil action shall be filed by the local treasurer within
the period prescribed in Section 194 of this Code.

Sec. 184. Further Distraint or Levy. — The remedies by distraint
and levy may be repeated if necessary until the full amount due,
including all expenses, is collected.
Sec. 185. Persona! Property Exempt from Distraint or Levy. —
The following property shall be exempt from distraint and the levy,
attachment or execution thereof for delinquency in the payment of
any local tax, fee or charge, including the related surcharge and
interest:

(a) Tools and the implements necessarily used by the delinquent
taxpayer in his trade or employment;

(b) One (1) horse, cow, carabao, or other beast of burden, such as
the delinquent taxpayer may select, and necessarily used by him in
his ordinary occupation;
(c)

His necessary clothing, and that of all his family;

(d) Household furniture and utensils necessary for housekeeping
and used for that purpose by the delinquent taxpayer, such as he
may select, of a value not exceeding Ten thousand pesos (PIO,000);
(e) Provisions, including crops, actually provided for Individual or
family use sufficient for four (4) months;

(f) The professional libraries of doctors, engineers, lawyers and
judges;
(g) One fishing boat and net, not exceeding the total value of Ten
thousand pesos (PIO,000), by the lawful use of which a fisherman
earns his livelihood; and

(h) Any material or article forming part of a house or Improvement
of any real property.
•

The LGC authorizes the LGU to purchase the auctioned property
only in instances where there is no bidder or the highest bid is
insufficient.

O

A disqualified bidder is not among the authorized grounds.
(Spouses Plaza v. Lustiva, G.R. No. 172909, March 5, 2014)

4

I

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

571

Miscellaneous

CHAPTER 5 — MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 186. Power To Levy Other Taxes, Fees or Charges.
— Local government units may exercise the power to levy taxes,
fees or charges on any base or subject not otherwise specifically
enumerated herein or taxed under the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, or other applicable laws:
Provided, That the taxes, fees, or charges shall not be unjust,
excessive, oppressive, confiscatory or contrary to declared national
policy: Provided, further. That the ordinance levying such taxes,
fees or charges shall not be enacted without any prior public hearing
conducted for the purpose.

Sec. 187. Procedure for Approval and Effectivity of Tax
ordinances and Revenue Measures; Mandatory Public
Hearings. — The procedure for approval of local tax ordinances
and revenue measures shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this Code: Provided, That public hearings shall be conducted for
the purpose prior to the enactment thereof: Provided, further, That
any question on the constitutionality or legality of tax ordinances
or revenue measures may be raised on appeal within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity thereof to the Secretary of Justice who shall
render a decision within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of
the appeal: Provided, however, That such appeal shall not have the
effect of suspending the effectivity of the ordinance and the accrual
and payment of the tax, fee, or charge levied therein: Provided,
finally, That within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision or
the lapse of the sixty-day period without the Secretary of Justice
acting upon the appeal, the aggrieved party may file appropriate
proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 188. Publication of Tax ordinances and Revenue
Measures. — Within ten (10) days after their approval, certified true
copies of all provincial, city, and municipal tax ordinances or revenue
measures shall be published in full for three (3) consecutive days in a
newspaper of local circulation: Provided, however, That in provinces,
cities and municipalities where there are no newspapers of local
circulation, the same may be posted in at least two (2) conspicuous
and publicly accessible places.
Sec. 189. Furnishing of Copies of Tax ordinances and Revenue
Measures. — Copies of all provincial, city, and municipal and
barangay tax ordinances and revenue measures shall be furnished
the respective local treasurers for public dissemination.
Sec. 190. Attemptto Enforce Void or Suspended Tax ordinances
and revenue measures. — The enforcement of any tax ordinance
or revenue measure after due notice of the disapproval or suspension
thereof shall be sufficient ground for administrative disciplinary
action against the local officials and employees responsible therefor.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

572

Note that public hearings are mandatory for the approval and
effectivity of tax ordinances.

o

How do we assail tax ordinances? We'll discuss more about
that in the remedies section.

Sec. 191. Authority of Local Government Units to Adjust
Rates of Tax ordinances. — Local government units shall have
the authority to adjust the tax rates as prescribed herein not oftener
than once every five (5) years, but in no case shall such adjustment
exceed ten percent (10%) of the rates fixed under this Code.

•

•

The application of Section 191 requires the concurrence of two
elements:
O

There is a tax ordinance that already imposes a tax in
accordance with the provisions of the LGC; and

O

There is a second tax ordinance that made adjustment on the
tax rate fixed by the first tax ordinance. (De Lima v. City of
Manila, G.R. No. 222886, October 17, 2018)

The option to increase the tax rates arises every five years
reckoned from the enactment of the ordinance sought to be
adjusted. The decision of whether or not to exercise such option
falls upon the LGU's sanggunian.
o

If the LGU fails to make such adjustment within the five-year
period, the option to increase the prevailing ordinance remains
open until such right is exercised. However, once exercised,
the basis for the increase would still be the prevailing tax
rate.

o

So, if the LGU wants to adjust its rates, it has to do so
gradually every five years. It can't just shock the taxpayers
with a super increase in rates beyond the 10% limit just
because it hasn't adjusted in 20 years. The taxpayers will be
like whoa, hold up there, Suga, you can't do that. (De Lima
v. City of Manila, G.R. No. 222886, October 17, 2018)

Authority to grant exemptions

Sec. 192. Authority to Grant Tax Exemption Privileges. — Local
government units may, through ordinances duly approved, grant tax
exemptions, incentives or reliefs under such terms and conditions as
they may deem necessary.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

573

LGUs have the power to grant tax incentives through ordinances.
The distinction between local business taxes and real property
taxes in terms of the power of the LGU to grant exemptions:
O

For real property tax, the LGUs cannot add to the exemptions
stated in the LGC.

O

For local business taxes, the LGUs are free to grant
exemptions.

Sanggunians have the power to grant tax exemptions, tax
incentives, and tax reliefs. These, however, do not cover
regulatory fees imposed by the LGU.
O

O

For tax exemptions:

•

The tax exemptions should be conferred via a tax
exemption certificate;

•

The grant of exemption and reliefs must be through an
ordinance;

■

They may be granted in cases of natural calamities,
civil disturbances, general failure of crops, or adverse
economic conditions;

•

Any exemption or relief granted to a type or kind of
business shall apply to all business similarly situated; and

•

The exemption or reliefs are only to last for a period not
exceeding 12 months.

For tax incentives:
•

The tax incentive shall be granted only to new investments
in the locality and the ordinance shall prescribe the terms
and conditions therefore;

■

The grant of the tax incentive shall be for a definite period
not exceeding one (1) calendar year;

•

The grant of tax incentives shall be by ordinance passed
prior to the first (1st) day of January of any year; and

■

Any tax incentive granted to a type or kind of business
shall apply to all businesses similarly situated. (Article
282, I.R.R. of R.A. 7160)

J9JC9B0M

574

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Sec. 193. Withdrawal of Tax Exemption Privileges. — Unless
otherwise provided in this Code, tax exemptions or incentives
granted to, or presently enjoyed by all persons, whether natural or
juridical, including government-owned or -controlled corporations,
except local water districts, cooperatives duly registered under
R.A. No. 6938, non-stock and non-profit hospitals and educational
institutions, are hereby withdrawn upon the effectivity of this Code.

Tax exemptions or incentives granted to, or presently enjoyed by
all persons, whether natural or juridical, including GOCCs, were
withdrawn upon the enactment of the LGC.

•

o

Except:
•

Unless provided in the Code,

■

Local water districts,

•

Cooperatives duly registered under R.A. 6938, and

•

Non-stock and
institutions.

non-profit

hospitals

and

educational

•

Indicative of the legislative intent to carry out the Constitutional
mandate of vesting broad tax powers to local government units,
the LGC has effectively withdrawn tax exemptions or incentives
theretofore enjoyed by certain entities. (Manila Electric Company
v. Province of Laguna, G.R. No. 131359, May 5, 1999)

•

One of the most significant provisions of the LGC is the removal
of the blanket exclusion of instrumentalities and agencies of the
national government from the coverage of local taxation.
o

Although as a general rule, LGUs cannot impose taxes,
fees or charges of any kind on the National Government,
its agencies and instrumentalities, this rule now admits an
exception: when specific provisions of the LGC authorize the
LGUs to impose taxes, fees or charges on the aforementioned
entities. Note that Section 133 states that "unless otherwise
provided herein...", the National Government, its agencies
and instrumentalities cannot be taxed.

O

Hence, when a specific provision of the LGC authorizes the
LGU to impose tax on the national government, then it can.
(National Power Corporation v. Cabanatuan, G.R. No. 149110,
April 9, 2003)

How about exemptions granted after the LGC was enacted?

o

Congress has the power to grant tax exemptions over and
above the power of the local government's delegated power

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

575

to tax. (Quezon City v. Bayan Telecommunications, Inc., G.R.
No. 162015, March 6, 2006, which dealt with exemption from
real property taxes)

■

However, the grant of congress must be unequivocal.

•

H.

In the cases of Quezon City v. ABS-CBN (G.R. No.
166408, October6,2008) and Smart Communications,
Inc. v. Davao (G.R. No. 155491, July 21, 2009), ABSCBN and Smart were to pay franchise tax "in lieu of all
taxes" under their respective franchises. The clauses
in both their franchises were construed to apply only
to national internal revenue taxes and not to local
taxes.

Prescriptive Periods and Taxpayer's Remedies in Local
Taxation

Prescriptive Periods for Assessment and Collection
Sec. 194. Periods of Assessment and Collection. — (a) Local
taxes, fees, or charges shall be assessed within five (5) years from
the date they became due. No action for the collection of such
taxes, fees, or charges, whether administrative or judicial, shall be
instituted after the expiration of such period: Provided, That, taxes,
fees or charges which have accrued before the effectivity of this Code
may be assessed within a period of three (3) years from the date
they became due.

(b) In case of fraud or Intent to evade the payment of taxes, fees,
or charges, the same may be assessed within ten (10) years from
discovery of the fraud or intent to evade payment.

(c) Local taxes, fees, or charges may be collected within five (5)
years from the date of assessment by administrative or judicial
action. No such action shall be instituted after the expiration of said
period: Provided, however, That, taxes, fees or charges assessed
before the effectivity of this Code may be collected within a period of
three (3) years from the date of assessment.
(d) The running of the periods of prescription provided in the
preceding paragraphs shall be suspended for the time during which:

(1) The treasurer Is legally prevented from making the assessment
of collection;
(2) The taxpayer requests for a reinvestigation and executes a
waiver in writing before expiration of the period within which to
assess or collect; and
(3) The taxpayer is out of the country or otherwise cannot be
located.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

576

For assessment:
O

Within five years from the date they become due11

O

Within 10 years in case of fraud or intent to evade the
payment of taxes, from time of discovery

For collection:

O

Within five years from the date of assessment by administrative
or judicial action

Suspension of prescriptive period:

1.

When the treasurer is legally prevented from making the
assessment or collection of the tax

2.

When the taxpayer requests for a reinvestigation and executes
a waiver in writing before the expiration of the period12

3.

The taxpayer is out of the country or otherwise cannot be
located

Tax Remedies of the Taxpayer

In local taxation, the taxpayer has three remedies:

1.

Question the newly enacted ordinance

2.

Protest against an assessment

3.

Claim for refund or tax credit

It is important to know each one, because the taxpayer, when
choosing what course of action to take, must follow the procedure
set down by law for each.
Question the newly enacted ordinance

Sec. 187. Procedure for Approval and Effectivity of Tax
ordinances and Revenue Measures; Mandatory Public
Hearings. — The procedure for approval of local tax ordinances
and revenue measures shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this Code: Provided, That public hearings shall be conducted for
the purpose prior to the enactment thereof: Provided, further, That
any question on the constitutionality or legality of tax ordinances
or revenue measures may be raised on appeal within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity thereof to the Secretary of Justice who shall

“Compare with National Taxes (three years to assess).
12Compare with National Taxes (no need for waiver).

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

577

render a decision within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of
the appeal: Provided, however, That such appeal shall not have the
effect of suspending the effectivity of the ordinance and the accrual
and payment of the tax, fee, or charge levied therein: Provided,
finally, That within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision or
the lapse of the sixty-day period without the Secretary of Justice
acting upon the appeal, the aggrieved party may file appropriate
proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 188. Publication of Tax ordinances and Revenue
Measures. — Within ten (10) days after their approval, certified true
copies of all provincial, city, and municipal tax ordinances or revenue
measures shall be published in full for three (3) consecutive days in a
newspaper of local circulation: Provided, however, That in provinces,
cities and municipalities where there are no newspapers of local
circulation, the same may be posted in at least two (2) conspicuous
and publicly accessible places.

Any question on the constitutionality or legality of tax ordinances
or revenue measures may be raised on appeal within 30 days
from effectivity thereof to the Secretary of Justice.
O

Section 187 is limited to tax ordinances or revenue measures.
Thus, an ordinance that imposes a regulatory fee should not
be brought to the Secretary of Justice. Instead, it can be
questioned in the regular courts. (Cagayan de Oro v. Cagayan
Electric Power and Light, Co., G.R. No. 224825, October 17,
2018)

Remember that prior to the enactment of ordinances, you need:
O

Public hearings, and

O

Within 10 days of enactment, there should be publication in
full for three consecutive days

Procedure:

1.

Appeal within 30 days from effectivity of the ordinance to the
Secretary of Justice

2.

Secretary must render a decision within 60 days from receipt
of the appeal

3.

Within 30 days from the lapse of the 60 days without any
action from the Secretary of Justice, or within 30 days from
receipt of the decision, the aggrieved taxpayer may go to
court

Failure to follow the procedure in enactment of tax measures
renders the same null and void.

J9JC9B0M

578

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
O

What is void may not be amended. (Coca-Cola Bottlers
Philippines, Inc. v. City of Manila, G.R. No. 156252, June 27,
2006)

O

What is dead may never die.

The Secretary of Justice can only review the constitutionality or
legality of the tax ordinance, and, if warranted, to revoke it on
either or both of these grounds. (Driion v. Mayor Lim, G.R. No.
112497, August 4, 1994)
O

He cannot replace it with his own version of what the
ordinance should be. (Power of Control)

O

He has no right to determine or declare that the ordinance is
unjust, excessive, oppressive or confiscatory.

When disputing a tax or revenue ordinance, the appeal to the
DOJ is mandatory. If no appeal to the DOJ was made, the RTC will
dismiss the case. (Jardine Davies Insurance Brokers v. AHposa,
G.R. No. 118900, February 27, 2003)

•

o

•

If the DOJ does act on the appeal, the next step is to question the
decision by Rule 43 or Rule 65 (as the case may be) to the Court
of Appeals, not the RTC, because the DOJ is exercising quasijudicial powers. (De Lima v. City of Manila, G.R. No. 222886,
October 17, 2018—Alta Vista and De Lima can be reconciled, as
Alta Vista would allow the RTC in the first instance to rule on an
ordinance while De Lima refers to the situation where the DOJ
has acted on the appeal J

•

Also, when disputing an ordinance, there is no need for a written
protest to be made. The written protest is only needed when
protesting against an assessment.
o

I

Except In pure questions of law, the appeal to the DOJ
is not mandatory. It can be brought straight to the
RTC. (Alta Vista Golf and Country Club v. Cebu, G.R. No.
180235, January 20, 2016)

A taxpayer may file a complaint assailing the validity of
the ordinance and praying for a refund of its perceived
overpayments without first filing a protest to the payment of
taxes due under the ordinance. (Jardine v. AHposa)

In 2014, M City approved an ordinance levying customs duties and
fees on goods coming into the territorial jurisdiction of the city.
Said city ordinance was duly published on February 15, 2014 with
effectivity date on March 1, 2014.

a)

Is there a ground for opposing said ordinance?

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

579

b) What is the proper procedural remedy and applicable time
periods for challenging the ordinance? (2015 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer:

Yes, there's a ground. The LCGprohibits LGUs from imposing customs
duties and fees on goods coming into the territorial jurisdiction. M
City's ordinance clearly violates this.
The ordinance must be brought to the Secretary of Justice within 30
days from effectivity. The Secretary must decide in 60 days. After,
the concerned party must hie an appeal with the proper court within
30 days from the expiration of the 60-day period or from receipt of
the decision, as the case may be.

Protest of assessment
Sec. 195. Protest of Assessment. — When the local treasurer or
his duly authorized representative finds that correct taxes, fees, or
charges have not been paid, he shall issue a notice of assessment
stating the nature of the tax, fee or charge, the amount of deficiency,
the surcharges, interests and penalties. Within sixty (60) days from
the receipt of the notice of assessment, the taxpayer may file a
written protest with the local treasurer contesting the assessment;
otherwise, the assessment shall become final and executory. The
local treasurer shall decide the protest within sixty (60) days from
the time of its filing. If the local treasurer finds the protest to be
wholly or partly meritorious, he shall issue a notice canceling wholly
or partially the assessment. However, if the local treasurer finds the
assessment to be wholly or partly correct, he shall deny the protest
wholly or partly with notice to the taxpayer. The taxpayer shall have
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the denial of the protest or from
the lapse of the sixty (60)-day period prescribed herein within which
to appeal with the court of competent jurisdiction otherwise the
assessment becomes conclusive and unappealable.
Procedure for assessments:

1.

Treasurer to issue an assessment.

2.

Taxpayer to file a written protest with the local treasurer
within 60 days from the receipt of the notice of assessment,
otherwise it shall become final and executory.

■ 3.

The treasurer has to decide within 60 davs from the time of
its filing. If treasurer finds the protest meritorious, he will
cancel the assessment; if not, he will deny the protest.

4.

Taxpayer has 30 davs from receipt of denial, or 30 days
from the lapse of the 60-dav period within which to appeal
to the proper court of competent jurisdiction: otherwise, the
assessment shall become final and executory.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

580

After, go to the CTA within 30 davc via:

5.

o

Petition for review to the CTA Division under Rule 42 (if
from RTC acting original), or

O

Petition for review to the CTA En Banc under Rule 43 (if
from the RTC acting in its appellate jurisdiction) (see CTA
Jurisdiction notes)

•

The combo of municipal license receipts, mayor's permit, business
taxes and other charges—all of which are required to renew
a business permit in a LGU—is not the notice of assessment
contemplated by Section 195, as these do not contain any amount
of deficiency, surcharge, interests, and penalties due from the
taxpayer. (International Container Terminal Services v. City of
Manila, G.R. No. 185622, October 17, 2018)

•

A written protest is mandatory when protesting an assessment.
You can't go straight to court. (Jardine Davies Insurance Brokers
v. AHposa, G.R. No. 118900, February 27, 2003)
As a corollary to assailing the validity of an ordinance, no
appeal to the DOJ is necessary when protesting against an
assessment.

O

Compared with real property tax, there is no requirement of
payment under protest in protesting an assessment of local
business taxes. (In real property tax, it is required before
protesting.)

Don't get me wrong though. You can still pay it under protest
if you want to and then file for a refund when you appeal the
denial/inaction in court. (City Treasurer of Manila v. Philippine
Beverage Partners, G.R. No. 233556, September 11, 2019)

o

•

Lol. If I'm not required to pay under the law, why should
I? Because you might find it difficult to get a business
permit. Or you might want to pay it to avoid further
penalties. That's why.

Can injunctions be issued in the case of local taxes?

o

Yes. The LGC does not specifically prohibit an injunction
enjoining the collection of taxes. (Angeles City v. Angeles
Electric Corporation, G.R. No. 166134, June 29, 2010)
■

Compare this with national taxes wherein the NIRC
explicitly prohibits courts from enjoining the collection of
cases, with the sole exception of the CTA.

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

581

On May 15, 2009, La Manga Trading Corporation received a
deficiency business tax assessment of Pl,500,000 from the Pasay
City Treasurer. On June 30, 2009, the corporation contested the
assessment by filing a written protest with the City Treasurer.
On October 10, 2009, the corporation received a collection letter
from the City Treasurer, drawing it to file on October 25, 2009 an
appeal against the assessment before the Pasay Regional Trial Court
(RTC).
a) Was the protest of the corporation filed on time? Explain. (2010
Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Yes, the period to protest local business taxes
is 60 days within the receipt of the assessment. In this case, the
protest was filed well within the 60-day period; hence, the protest
was filed on time.
b)

Was the appeal with the Pasay RTC filed on time? Explain.

Suggested answer: Yes, the period to appeal the denial of the
treasurer is 30 days from receipt of the denial of the protest. Here,
the appeal was filed well within the 30-day period; hence, the appeal
was filed on time!

In accordance with the Local Government Code (LGC), the
Sangguniang Panglungsod (SP) of Baguio City enacted Tax
Ordinance No. 19, Series of 2014, imposing a P50.00 tax on all the
tourists and travellers going to Baguio City. In imposing the local
tax, the SP reasoned that the tax collected will be used to maintain
the cleanliness of Baguio City and for the beautification of its tourist
attractions.

i

Claiming the tax to be unjust, Baguio Travellers Association (BTA),
an association of travel agencies in Baguio City, filed a petition for
declaratory relief before the Regional Trial Court (RTC) because BTA
was apprehensive that tourists might cancel their bookings with BTA's
member agencies. BTA also prayed for the issuance of a Temporary
Restraining Order (TRO) to enjoin Baguio City from enforcing the
local tax on their customers and on all tourists going to Baguio City.

The RTC Issued a TRO enjoining Baguio City from imposing the local
tax. Aggrieved, Baguio City filed a petition for certiorari before the
Supreme Court (SC) seeking to set aside the TRO issued by the RTC
on the ground that collection of taxes cannot be enjoined. Will the
petition prosper? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The petition will not prosper. Unlike the NIRC
which expressly prohibits courts from issuing injunctions against the
collection of taxes, the LGC is silent on the manner. There Is no
prohibition in the LGC. Case law has likewise ruled on this matter.
Hence, the petition filed by the city on this ground will not prosper.

■

J9JC9B0M

582

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Claim a refund or tax credit
Sec. 196. Claim for Refund of Tax Credit. — No case or proceeding
shall be maintained in any court for the recovery of any tax, fee,
or charge erroneously or illegally collected until a written claim for
refund or credit has been filed with the local treasurer. No case or
proceeding shall be entertained in any court after the expiration of
two (2) years from the date of the payment of such tax, fee, or
charge, or from the date the taxpayer is entitled to a refund or credit.

Requirements in tax credit or refund cases:

1.

Written claim filed with the local treasurer

2.

Filed within two years from

a.

Date of payment, or

b.

Date when taxpayer is entitled to a refund or credit.

•

Distinguished from refunds for national taxes, in local taxation,
supervening causes are allowed as reckoning points for prescriptive
period purposes. (In national taxes, supervening causes are not
considered.)

•

If a taxpayer wins a case against an LGU regarding local taxes
already paid, should the taxpayer move for the issuance of a writ
of execution to get his/her money back?
o

•

No, the taxpayer should just request from the LGU the
implementation of the tax refund or credit. (Coca-Cola
Bottlers v. City of Manila, G.R. No. 197561, April 7, 2014)

Welp! I got an assessment. What should I do?

o

Protest it. That's the first thing you should do. While you're
protesting, you have two choices:

Don t pay the tax and appeal the assessment In court
under Section 195, or

Pay it—even if it's not required by law—and then appeal
tne assessment in court and at the same time seek a
refund.
•

If you choose the second option though, you have to
ring an action in court (either as an appeal from an
assessment and/or claim for refund) within 30 days
f°!V the decisi°n or inaction of the treasurer. Even
i 1 s a refund, you can't use the two-year period to
claim a refund under Section 196. You still follow the
periods for protesting an assessment, because the

J9JC9B0M

LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXATION

583

assessment triggers the application of Section 195.
If you don't protest the assessment (or subsequently
question the denial/inaction of your protest in
court), the assessment will become conclusive and
unappealable. (City Treasurer of Manila v. Philippine
Beverage Partners, G.R. No. 233556, September 11,
2019)

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION
A.

General Principles and Definitions

Fundamental principles
TITLE II. REAL PROPERTY TAXATION
CHAPTER 1 — GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 197. Scope. — This Title shall govern the administration,
appraisal, assessment, levy and collection of real property tax.

Sec. 198. Fundamental Principles. — The appraisal, assessment,
levy and collection of real property tax shall be guided by the
following fundamental principles:
(a) Real property shall be appraised at its current and fair market
value;
(b) Real property shall be classified for assessment purposes on the
basis of its actual use;

(c) Real property shall be assessed on the basis of a uniform
classification within each local government unit;
(d) The appraisal, assessment, levy and collection of real property
tax shall not be let to any private person; and
(e) The appraisal and assessment of real property shall be equitable.
Real property shall be:

•

1.

Appraised at its current and fair market value:

2.

Classified for assessment purposes on the basis of its actual
use; and

3.

Assessed on the basis of a uniform classification within each
LGU.

The appraisal, assessment, levy and collection shall:
1.

Not be let to any private person

2.

Be equitable
584

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

585

Definitions

Sec. 199. Definitions. — When used in this Title:

(a) "Acquisition Cost" for newly-acquired machinery not yet
depreciated and appraised within the year of its purchase, refers to
the actual cost of the machinery to its present owner, plus the cost
of transportation, handling, and installation at the present site;
(b) "Actual Use" refers to the purpose for which the property is
principally or predominantly utilized by the person in possession
thereof;

(c) "Ad Valorem Tax" is a levy on real property determined on the
basis of a fixed proportion of the value of the property;
(d) "Agricultural Land" is land devoted principally to the planting
of trees, raising of crops, livestock and poultry, dairying, salt
making, inland fishing and similar aquacultural activities, and
other agricultural activities, and is not classified as mineral, timber,
residential, commercial or industrial land;
(e) "Appraisal" is the act or process of determining the value of
property as of a specific date for a specific purpose;
(f) "Assessment" is the act or process of determining the value
of a property, or proportion thereof subject to tax, including the
discovery, listing, classification, and appraisal of properties;

(g) "Assessment Level" is the percentage applied to the fair market
value to determine the taxable value of the property;

(h) "Assessed Value" is the fair market value of the real property
multiplied by the assessment level. It Is synonymous to taxable
value;
(I) "Commercial Land" is land devoted principally for the object of
profit and is not classified as agricultural, industrial, mineral, timber,
or residential land;

(j) "Depreciated Value" Is the value remaining after deducting
depreciation from the acquisition cost;
(k) "Economic Life" Is the estimated period over which it is anticipated
that a machinery or equipment may be profitably utilized;

(l) "Fair Market Value" is the price at which a property may be sold
by a seller who is not compelled to sell and bought by a buyer who is
not compelled to buy;
(m) "Improvement" is a valuable addition made to a property or an
amelioration in its condition, amounting to more than a mere repair
or replacement of parts involving capital expenditures and labor,
which is intended to enhance its value, beauty or utility or to adapt
it for new or further purposes;

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

586

(n) "Industrial Land" is land devoted principally to industrial activity
as capital investment and is not classified as agricultural, commercial,
timber, mineral or residential land;

mechanical
(o) "Machinery" embraces machines, equipment,
contrivances, instruments, appliances or apparatus which may or may
not be attached, permanently or temporarily, to the real property. It
includes the physical facilities for production, the installations and
appurtenant service facilities, those which are mobile, self-powered
or self-propelled, and those not permanently attached to the real
property which are actually, directly, and exclusively used to meet
the needs of the particular industry, business or activity and which
by their very nature and purpose are designed for, or necessary
to its manufacturing, mining, logging, commercial, industrial or
agricultural purposes;

(p) "Mineral Lands" are lands in which minerals, metallic or nonmetallic, exist in sufficient quantity or grade to justify the necessary
expenditures to extract and utilize such materials;
(q) "Reassessment" is the assigning of new assessed values to
property, particularly real estate, as the result of a general, partial,
or individual reappraisal of the property;
(r) "Remaining Economic Life" is the period of time expressed in
years from the date of appraisal to the date when the machinery
becomes valueless;

(s) "Remaining Value" is the value corresponding to the remaining
useful life of the machinery;

(t) "Replacement or Reproduction Cost" is the cost that would
be incurred on the basis of current prices, in acquiring an equally
desirable substitute property, or the cost of reproducing a new replica
of the property on the basis of current prices with the same or closely
similar material; and
(u) "Residential Land" is land principally devoted to habitation.
Sec. 200. Administration of the Rea! Property Tax. — The
provinces and cities, including the municipalities within the
Metropolitan Manila Area, shall be primarily responsible for the
proper, efficient and effective administration of the real property tax.

•

Note that only the following LGUs can impose real property tax:

O

Provinces,

O

Cities, and

O

Municipalities within Metro Manila.

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION
B.

587

Real Property and Machinery

For taxation purposes, real property consists of the following:

1.

The list of immovables in Article 415 of the Civil Code, and

2.

The definition of machinery under Section 199(0) clarified by
the DOF Local Finance Circular 001-2002

Immovables
Civil Code, Art. 415. The following are immovable property:

(1) Land, buildings, roads and constructions of all kinds adhered to
the soil;
(2) Trees, plants, and growing fruits, while they are attached to the
land or form an integral part of an immovable;
(3) Everything attached to an immovable in a fixed manner, in such
a way that it cannot be separated therefrom without breaking the
material or deterioration of the object;
(4) Statues, reliefs, paintings or other objects for use or
ornamentation, placed in buildings or on lands by the owner of the
Immovable in such a manner that it reveals the intention to attach
them permanently to the tenements;

(5) Machinery, receptacles, Instruments or implements intended by
the owner of the tenement for an industry or works which may be
carried on in a building or on a piece of land, and which tend directly
to meet the needs of the said industry or works;
(6) Animal houses, plgeon-houses, beehives, fish ponds or breeding
places of similar nature, in case their owner has placed them or
preserves them with the intention to have them permanently
attached to the land, and forming a permanent part of it; the animals
in these places are included;

(7) Fertilizer actually used on a piece of land;
(8) Mines, quarries, and slag dumps, while the matter thereof forms
part of the bed, and waters either running or stagnant;

(9) Docks and structures which, though floating, are intended by
their nature and object to remain at a fixed place on a river, lake, or
coast;
(10) Contracts for public works, and servitudes and other real
rights over immovable property. (334a)

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

588

Machinery
LGC, Sec. 199 (o) "Machinery" embraces machines, equipment,
mechanical contrivances, instruments, appliances or apparatus
which may or may not be attached, permanently or temporarily, to
the real property. It includes the physical facilities for production,
the installations and appurtenant service facilities, those which are
mobile, self-powered or self-propelled, and those not permanently
attached to the real property which are actually, directly, and
exclusively used to meet the needs of the particular industry, business
or activity and which by their very nature and purpose are designed
for, or necessary to its manufacturing, mining, logging, commercial,
industrial or agricultural purposes;

DOF Local Finance Circular 001-2002 (April25, 2002):

Summary of the rules on Machinery
1. Machinery that is permanently attached to land and buildings
is subject to the real property tax, even though this Is actually^
directly and exclusively used for religious, charitable or educational
purposes.

2.

Machinery that is not permanently attached
a.

Subject to the real property tax if it is an essential and
principal element of an industry, work or activity without
which such industry, work or activity cannot function; and

b.

Not subject to the real property tax if it is not an essential
and principal element of an industry, work or activity.

non-machinery
3. Notwithstanding Rules 1 and 2, machiner
y of non-stock. non
profit educational institutions used actually, directly, and eXClUSlVSiVfor educational purposes is not subject to real property tax.

lf propertV is not within the Civil Code, but under Section
199(0), they are still subject to real property tax.
machinery which are actually, directly and
exdusivAi^,'On
arF > Teet the needs of the particular industry,
business or activity
ivity of an enterprise, are liable for real property
tax.

o

Hence, if the machinery is only used in a general purpose,
/.e., not directly, actually and exclusively for the needs of the
business, it is NOT real property

Rules on machinery:

o

As long as permanently attached to land and buildings:
subject to real property tax

o

If not permanently attached:

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

O
I

J9JC9B0M

589

•

If essential and principal element of an industry, work or
activity without which such cannot function: subject to
real property tax

•

If not essential and principal element of an industry: not
subject to real property tax

BUT:
Machinery of non-stock, non-profit educational
institutions used actually, directly and exclusively for
educational purposes: not subject to real property tax

As between the Civil Code and the LGC though, the latter shall
prevail, as the LGC is a special law granting the LGUs the power
to impose real property tax. (Manila Electric Company v. City
Assessor and City Treasurer of Lucena City, G.R. No. 166102,
August5, 2015)

Hence, in determining whether machinery is real property subject
to RPT, the definition and requirements under the LGC are
controlling over the Civil Code. (Manila Electric Company v. City
Assessor and City Treasurer of Lucena City, G.R. No. 166102,
August 5, 2015 which stated that the 1964 case of Board of
Assessment Appeals v. Manila Electric Co. is no longer controlling
because of the enactment of the LGC)

•

O

In this case, MERALCO insisted that their transformers,
electric posts, transmission lines, insulators, and electric
meters were not immovables under the Civil Code because
Article 415(5) imposed additional requirements for machinery
to be considered immovable. (The additional requirements
were [1] being placed In the tenement by the owner of such
tenement and [2] destined for use in the industry or work in
the tenement).

o

The SC stated that this would mean imposing additional
requirements for classifying machinery as real property for
RPT purposes not provided for in the LGC.

The transformers, electric posts, transmission lines, insulators,
and electric meters of MERALCO may qualify as "machinery"
under the LGC subject to RPT. (Manila Electric Company v. City
Assessor and City Treasurer of Lucena City, G.R. No. 166102,
August 5, 2015)
o

•

Using the LGC definition of "machinery," the SC stated that
even if these are not permanently attached, they are still
actually, directly, and exclusively used to meet the needs of
the particular industry and by their very nature and purpose
necessary for the business' purpose.

Machinery which are not immobilized by destination and only
incidental to the business are not subject to real property

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

590

tax. {Mindanao Bus Co. v. City Assessor, G.R. No. L-17870,
September 29, 1962 — in this case, since the equipment were not
immobilized, they were not real property under the Civil Code,
and since they were not actually, directly and exclusively used in
the business, they are not "machinery" under Section 199[O])

Gasoline station equipment and machineries are permanent
fixtures for purposes of realty taxation, even if these are on leased
land. (Caitex [Philippines], Inc. v. CBAA, G.R. No. L-50466, May
31, 1982)
o

These are the underground tanks, elevated water tanks,
gasoline pumps, computing pump, water pumps, car washers,
etc. They are necessary to the operation of the gas station,
for without them the gas station would be useless.

The storage tanks of Meralco are classified as real property and
subject to tax since they are machinery or improvements. (Manila
Electric Co. v. CBAA, G.R. No. L-47943, May 31, 1982)

o

While the two storage tanks are not embedded in the land,
they may, nevertheless, be considered as improvements on
the land, enhancing its utility and rendering it useful to the
oil industry. It is undeniable that the two tanks have been
installed with some degree of permanence as receptacles for
the considerable quantities of oil needed by Meralco for its
operations.

Appraisal and Assessment

C.

On appraisal at its current and fair market value

Appraisal of real property
Sec. 201. Appraisal of Real Property. — All real property, whether
taxable or exempt, shall be appraised at the current and fair market
value prevailing in the locality where the property is situated. The
Department of Finance shall promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations for the classification, appraisal, and assessment of real
property pursuant to the provisions of this Code.

Sec. 199. (I). "Fair Market Value" is the price at which a property
may be sold by a seller who is not compelled to sell and bought by a
buyer who is not compelled to buy;
All real property shall be appraised at the current and fair market
value prevailing at the locality where the property is situated.
o

This also implies that an LGU may only collect real estate
taxes on properties falling within its territorial jurisdiction.

8

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

■

591

Hence, the boundary dispute between two LGUs is
a prejudicial question that must be resolved before
determining the RPT liability of property that straddles
the border. (Sta. Lucia Realty v. City of Pasig, G.R. No.
166838, June 15, 2011)

FMV is the price at which property may be sold by a seller who is
not compelled to sell and bought by a buyer who is not compelled
to buy.
Appraisal of machinery
Sec. 224. Appraisal and Assessment of Machinery. — (a) The
fair market value of a brand-new machinery shall be the acquisition
cost. In all other cases, the fair market value shall be determined by
dividing the remaining economic life of the machinery by its estimated
economic life and multiplied by the replacement or reproduction cost.

’ (b) If the machinery is imported, the acquisition cost includes
freight, insurance, bank and other charges, brokerage, arrastre
and handling, duties and taxes, plus cost of inland transportation,
handling, and installation charges at the present site. The cost in
foreign currency of imported machinery shall be converted to peso
cost on the basis of foreign currency exchange rates as fixed by the
Central Bank.

Sec. 225. Depreciation Allowance for Machinery. — For
purposes of assessment, a depreciation allowance shall be made for
machinery at a rate not exceeding five percent (5%) of its original
cost or its replacement or reproduction cost, as the case may be, for
each year of use: Provided, however, That the remaining value for
all kinds of machinery shall be fixed at not less than twenty percent
(20%) of such original, replacement, or reproduction cost for so long
as the machinery is useful and in operation.
•

For FMV of brand-new machinery, the basis will be acquisition
cost.

•

In all other cases, the basis will be the book value, depreciation
having been taken into account.

•

If the machinery is imported, the acquisition cost will include all
the charges necessary to bring the thing into the Philippines.

•

Specific to machinery, only a 5% depreciation rate can be used.

o

However, as long as the machinery is useful and in operation,
the value will not be less than 20% of its original value. It can
never be zero.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

592

On classification for assessment purposes on the basis of its actual
use
Sec. 217. Actual Use of Real Property as Basis for Assessment.
— Real property shall be classified, valued and assessed on the basis
of its actual use regardless of where located, whoever owns it, and
whoever uses it.
•

Actual use is the basis, regardless of who owns the property.

•

This is for assessment purposes only

•

Unpaid real estate taxes attach to the property and is generally
chargeable against the owner of the property at the time the tax
accrues. (Herarc Realty Corp. v. Provincial Treasurer of Batangas,
G.R. No. 210736, September 5, 2018)
O

However, where the tax liability is imposed on the beneficial
use of the real property, such as those owned by the
government but leased to private persons or entities, or
when the assessment is made on the basis of the actual use
thereof, the personal liability is on any person who has such
beneficial or actual use at the time of the accrual of the tax.
(Herarc Realty Corp. v. Provincial Treasurer of Batangas)

O

Hence, an estate should not pay for real estate taxes for
periods when it was neither the registered owner nor the
beneficial user of the property. It would not only be contrary
to law but also unjust. (Testate Estate of Lim v. Manila, G.R,
No. 90639, February 21, 1990)

o

The contractual assumption to pay real property tax, by
itself, is not sufficient to make one legally compellable by the
government to pay the taxes due; the person liable must also
have use and possession of the property.

Classes of real property
Sec. 215. Classes of Real Property for Assessment Purposes.
For purposes of assessment, real property shall be classified as
residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, mineral, timberland
or special. The city or municipality within the Metropolitan Manila
Area, through their respective sanggunian, shall have the power
to classify lands as residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial,
mineral, timberland, or special in accordance with their zoning
ordinances.

Sec. 216. Special Classes of Rea! Property. — All lands, buildings,
and other improvements thereon actually, directly and exclusively

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

593

used for hospitals, cultural, or scientific purposes, and those
owned and used by local water districts, and government-owned or
-controlled corporations rendering essential public services in the
supply and distribution of water and/or generation and transmission
of electric power shall be classified as special.
Real property shall be classified as:
O

Residential,

O

Agricultural,

O

Commercial,

O

Industrial,

O

Mineral,

O

Timberland, or

O

Special, which are:
■

Lands, buildings, and other improvements actually,
directly, and exclusively used for hospitals, cultural, or
scientific purposes, and

•

Those owned and used by local water districts and GOCCs
rendering essential public services in the supply and
distribution of water and electricity.

A hospital which was previously classified as "special" cannot be
reclassified to "commercial" simply because it charges rental for
the use of its offices by its accredited physicians.
o

I

A facility which is incidental and reasonably necessary for
the operations of a hospital should likewise be classified as
"special." (City Assessor of Cebu v. Association of Benevola
de Cebu, G.R. No. 152904, June 8, 2007)

The Phllipplne-British Association, Inc. (Association) is a nonstock, non-profit organization which owns the St. Michael's Hospital
(Hospital). Sec. 216 in relation to Sec. 215 of the LGC classifies all
lands, buildings and other improvements thereon actually, directly,
and exclusively used for hospitals as "special. "A special classification
prescribes a lower assessment than a commercial classification.

Within the premises of the Hospital, the Association constructed the
St. Michael's Medical Arts Center (Center) which will house medical
practitioners who will lease the spaces therein for their clinics at
prescribed rental rates. The doctors who treat the patients confined
in the Hospital are accredited by the Association.

J9JC9B0M

594

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

The City Assessor classified the Center as "commercial" instead of
"special" on the ground that the Hospital owner gets income from
the lease of its spaces to doctors who also entertain out-patients. Is
the City Assessor correct in classifying the Center as "commercial"?
Explain. (2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The City Assessor is wrong (just like pineapples
on pizza). The Supreme Court has previously held that an incomegenerating facility which is incidental and reasonably necessary
for the operations of a hospital, such as offices held out for lease
to accredited doctors, does not justify the change in the class of
real property from "special" to "commercial." The facility remains
"special" (just like truffles on pizza).
Declaration by the owner or by the assessor; listing of real property
in the assessment rolls

Sec. 202. Declaration of Real Property by the Owner or
Administrator. — It shall be the duty of all persons, natural or
juridical, owning or administering real property, including the
improvements therein, within a city or municipality, or their duly
authorized representative, to prepare, or cause to be prepared, and
file with the provincial, city or municipal assessor, a sworn statement
ec aring the true value of their property, whether previously declared
or undeclared, taxable or exempt, which shall be the current and fair
market value of the property, as determined by the declarant. Such
.ef" a.rf ion shall contain a description of the property sufficient in
e ai to enable the assessor or his deputy to identify the same for
sessment purposes. The sworn declaration of real property herein
re erre to shall be filed with the assessor concerned once every
tnree (3) years during the period from January first (1st) to June

Sec. 203. Duty of Person Acquiring Rea! Property or Making
Improvement Thereon. — It shall also be the duty of any person,
or his authorized representative, acquiring at any time real property
in any municipality or city or making any improvement on real
property, to prepare, or cause to be prepared, and file with the
provincial, city or municipal assessor, a sworn statement declaring
the true value of subject property, within sixty (60) days after the
acquisition of such property or upon completion or occupancy of the
improvement, whichever comes earlier.
Sec. 204. Declaration of Real Property by the Assessor. —
When any person, natural or juridical, by whom real property is
required to be declared under Section 202 hereof, refuses or fails
for any reason to make such declaration within the time prescribed,
the provincial, city or municipal assessor shall himself declare the
property in the name of the defaulting owner, if known, or against an
unknown owner, as the case may be, and shall assess the property
for taxation in accordance with the provision of this Title. No oath

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

595

shall be required of a declaration thus made by the provincial, city or
municipal assessor.
Sec. 205. Listing of Real Property in the Assessment Rolls. —
(a) In every province and city, including the municipalities within the
Metropolitan Manila Area, there shall be prepared and maintained
by the provincial, city or municipal assessor an assessment roll
wherein shall be listed all real property, whether taxable or exempt,
located within the territorial jurisdiction of the local government unit
concerned. Real property shall be listed, valued and assessed in the
name of the owner or administrator, or anyone having legal interest
in the property.

(b) The undivided real property of a deceased person may be listed,
valued and assessed in the name of the estate or of the heirs and
devisees without designating them individually; and undivided real
property other than that owned by a deceased may be listed, valued
and assessed in the name of one or more co-owners: Provided,
however, That such heir, devisee, or co-owner shall be liable severally
and proportionately for all obligations Imposed by this Title and
the payment of the real property tax with respect to the undivided
property.
(c) The real property of a corporation, partnership, or association
shall be listed, valued and assessed in the same manner as that of
an individual.

(d) Real property owned by the Republic of the Philippines, its
instrumentalities and political subdivisions, the beneficial use of
which has been granted, for consideration or otherwise, to a taxable
person, shall be listed, valued and assessed in the name of the
possessor, grantee or of the public entity if such property has been
acquired or held for resale or lease.

Sec. 207. Real Property Identification System. — All declarations
of real property made under the provisions of this Title shall be kept
and filed under a uniform classification system to be established by
the provincial, city or municipal assessor.
Sec. 208. Notification of Transfer of Real Property Ownership.
— Any person who shall transfer real property ownership to another
shall notify the provincial, city or municipal assessor concerned
within sixty (60) days from the date of such transfer. The notification
shall include the mode of transfer, the description of the property
alienated, the name and address of the transferee.

Preparation of schedules of fair market value
Sec. 212. Preparation of Schedule of Fair Market Values. —
Before any general revision of property assessment is made pursuant
to the provisions of this Title, there shall be prepared a schedule of
fair market values by the provincial, city and the municipal assessors
of the municipalities within the Metropolitan Manila Area for the

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

596

different classes of real property situated in their respective local
government units for enactment by ordinance of the sanggunian
concerned. The schedule of fair market values shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the province, city or municipality
concerned, or in the absence thereof, shall be posted in the provincial
capitol, city or municipal hall and in two other conspicuous public
places therein.
Sec. 213. Authority of Assessor to Take Evidence. — For the
purpose of obtaining information on which to base the market value
of any real property, the assessor of the province, city or municipality
or his deputy may summon the owners of the properties to be
affected or persons having legal interest therein and witnesses,
administer oaths, and take deposition concerning the property, its
ownership, amount, nature, and value.

Sec. 214. Amendment of Schedule of Fair Market Values. —
The provincial, city or municipal assessor may recommend to the
sanggunian concerned amendments to correct errors in valuation in
the schedule of fair market values. The sanggunian concerned shall,
by ordinance, act upon the recommendation within ninety (90) days
from receipt thereof.
Computing the tax

After determining if the property is subject to real property tax
or not, you now have to know how much to pay. So...

1.

Get the assessed value by multiplying the fair market value x
assessment level (refer to Section 218).

2.

Then multiply the assessed value by the real property tax rate
(Section 233 below).

n cipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area, at the rates not
exceeding the following:

(a) On Lands:
CLASS
Residential
Agricultural
Commercial
Industrial
Mineral
Timberland

ASSESSMENT LEVELS
20%
40%
50%
50%
50%
20%

J9JC9B0M

597

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

(b) On Buildings and Other Structures:

(1) Residential
Fair Market Value

Over

Not Over

P 175,000.00

Assessment
Levels

0%

P 175,000.00

300,000.00

10%

300,000.00

500,000.00

20%

500,000.00

750,000.00

25%

750,000.00

1,000,000.00

30%

1,000,000.00

2,000,000.00

35%

2,000,000.00

5,000,000.00

40%

5,000,000.00

10,000,000.00

50%

10,000,000.00

60%

(2) Agricultural
Fair Market Value

Over

Not Over

Assessment
Levels

P 300,000.00

25%

300,000.00

500,000.00

30%

500,000.00

750,000.00

35%

750,000.00

1,000,000.00

40%

1,000,000.00

2,000,000.00

45%

2,000,000.00

50%

(3) Commercial/Industrial

Fair Market Value

Over

Not Over

Assessment
Levels

30%

P 300,000.00
P 300,000.00

500,000.00

35%

500,000.00

750,000.00

40%

750,000.00

1,000,000.00

50%

1,000,000.00

2,000,000.00

60%

2,000,000.00

5,000,000.00

70%

5,000,000.00

10,000,000.00

75%

10,000,000.00

30%

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

598

(4) Timber land
Fair Market Value

Over

Assessment
Levels

Not Over

45%

P 300,000.00
P 300,000.00
500,000.00
750,000.00

1,000,000.00
2,000,000.00

500,000.00
750,000.00
1,000,000.00
2,000,000.00

50%

55%
60%
65%
70%

(c) On Machineries

Class
Agricultural

Assessment Levels

40%

Residential

50%

Commercial

80%

Industrial

80%

(d) On Special Classes: The assessment levels
buildings, machineries and other improvements;
Actual Use
Cultural
Scientific

Hospital

local water districts
Government-owned or
controlled corporations
engaged in the supply and
distribution of water and/or
generation and transmission of
electric power

for all

lands,

Assessment Level

15%
15%
15%
10%

10%

Sec. 219. General Revision of assessments and Property
Classification. — The provincial, city or municipal assessor shall
undertake a general revision of real property assessments within
two (2) years after the effectlvity of this Code and every three (3)
years thereafter.
Sec. 220. Valuation of Rea! Property. — In cases where (a) real
property is declared and listed for taxation purposes for the first time;
(b) there is an ongoing general revision of property classification and
assessment; or (c) a request is made by the person in whose name
the property is declared, the provincial, city or municipal assessor or

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

599

his duly authorized deputy shall, in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter, make a classification, appraisal and assessment of the
real property listed and described in the declaration irrespective of
any previous assessment or taxpayer's valuation thereon: Provided,
however, That the assessment of real property shall not be increased
oftener than once every three (3) years except in case of new
improvements substantially increasing the value of said property or
of any change in its actual use.

Sec. 221. Date of Effectivity of Assessment or Reassessment.
— All assessments or reassessments made after the first (1st)
day of January of any year shall take effect on the first (1st) day
of January of the succeeding .year: Provided, however, That the
reassessment of real property due to its partial or total destruction,
or to a major change in its actual use, or to any great and sudden
inflation or deflation of real property values, or to the gross illegality
of the assessment when made or to any other abnormal cause, shall
be made within ninety (90) days from the date any such cause or
causes occurred, and shall take effect at the beginning of the quarter
next following the reassessment.
Sec. 222. Assessment of Property Subject to Back Taxes. —
Real property declared for the first time shall be assessed for taxes
for the period during which it would have been liable but in no case
for more than ten (10) years prior to the date of initial assessment:
Provided, however, That such taxes shall be computed on the basis
of the applicable schedule of values in force during the corresponding
period.

If such taxes are paid on or before the end of the quarter following
the date the notice of assessment was received by the owner or his
representative, no interest for delinquency shall be imposed thereon;
otherwise, such taxes shall be subject to an Interest at the rate of
two percent (2%) per month or a fraction thereof from the date of
the receipt of the assessment until such taxes are fully paid.
Sec. 223. Notification of New or Revised Assessment. — When
real property is assessed for the first time or when an existing
assessment is Increased or decreased, the provincial, city or
municipal assessor shall within thirty (30) days give written notice
of such new or revised assessment to the person in whosd name the
property Is declared. The notice may be delivered personally or by
registered mail or through the assistance of the punong barangay to
the last known address of the person to be served.

•

The LGU's assessor shall undertake a general revision of real
property assessments within two years after effectivity of the
LGC and every three years thereafter.

•

Assessments made after the first day of January of any year shall
take effect on the first day of January of the next year.

J9JC9B0M

600

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Mr. Jose Castillo is a resident Filipino Citizen. He purchased a parcel
of land in Makati City in 1970 at a consideration of Pl Million. In
2011, the land, which remained undeveloped and idle, had a fair
market value of P20 Million. Mr. Antonio Ayala, another Filipino
citizen, is very much interested in the property and he offered to buy
the same for P20 Million. The Assessor of Makati City re-assessed in
2011 the property at Pl 0 Million.
When is Mr. Castillo liable for real property tax on the land beginning
2011 or beginning 2012? Explain your answer. (2012 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: Mr. Castillo is liable for real property tax on the
reassessed valued of the land at the start of the succeeding year.
The LGC states that reassessments made during the year shall take
effect at the start of the succeeding year.

In 2015, Kerwin bought a three-story house and lot in Kidapawan,
North Cotabato. The property has a floor area of 600 sq.m, and
is located inside a gated subdivision. Kerwin initially declared the
property as residential for real property tax purposes.
In 2016, Kerwin started using the property in his business of
manufacturing garments for export. The entire ground floor is now
occupied by state-of-the-art sewing machines and other equipment,
while the second floor is used as offices. The third floor is retained
by Kerwin as his family's residence. Kerwin's neighbors became
suspicious of the activities going on Inside the house, and they
decided to report it to the Kidapawan City Hall. Upon inspection,
the local government discovered that the property was being
utilized for commercial use. Immediately, the Kidapawan Assessor
reclassified the property as commercial with an assessment level
of 50°/o effective January 2017, and assessed Kerwin back taxes
and interest. Kerwin claims that only 2/3 of the building was used
for commercial purposes since the third floor remained as family
residence. He argues that the property should have been classified
as partly commercial and partly residential.
a) Is the Kidapawan assessor correct in assessing back taxes and
interest?

b) Is Kerwin correct that only 2/3 of the property should be
considered commercial?
c) I? Kerwin wants to file an administrative protest against the
assessment, Is he required to pay the assessment taxes first? With
whom^ shall the protest be filed and within what period? (2018 Bar
Suggested answers:

a)

No, the assessor is wrong. Under the LGC, when there is a major
change in the actual use of the property (such as in the case
at hand), a reassessment shall be made within 90 days and
the reassessment shall take effect at the beginning of the next

I

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

601

quarter following the reassessment. Hence, the reclassification
should be prospective and no back taxes may be assessed
against Kerwin.

D.

b)

Yes, he is correct. Real property is classified by actual use. In
the building, it is clearly delineated and seen that only 2/3 of the
building was used for commercial purposes and that 1/3 was
used for residential purposes. Hence, only 2/3 of the building
should be considered commercial.

c)

He is required to pay the assessment taxes first. Under the LGC,
no protest or appeal shall be entertained unless the taxpayer
first pays the real property tax. It also states that appeals
on assessment shall in no case suspend the collection of real
property tax. Thereafter, his recourse is to appeal to the LBAA
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the written notice of
assessment, as he is questioning the act of the assessor and the
reclassification.

Imposition of Real Property Tax and Special Levies

Power to levy RPT
Sec. 232. Power to Levy Real Property Tax. — A province or
city or a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area may levy
an annual ad valorem tax on real property such as land, building,
machinery, and other improvement not hereinafter specifically
exempted.

The following may levy real property tax:

1.

A province,

2.

A city, and

3.

A municipality within the Metro Manila area (Municipalities
outside Metro Manila cannot levy real property taxes. They
can, however, impose special levies.)

Rates of levy
Sec. 233. Rates of Levy. — A province or city or a municipality
within the Metropolitan Manila Area shall fix a uniform rate of basic
real property tax applicable to their respective localities as follows:
(a) In the case of a province, at the rate not exceeding one percent
(1%) of the assessed value of real property; and
(b) In the case of a city or a municipality within the Metropolitan
Manila Area, at the rate not exceeding two percent (2%) of the
assessed value of real property.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

602

•

A prOYIDGS can impose a real property tax rate not exceeding 1%
of the assessed value of the property

•

A City Ora JBUni.Cipglity within the Metro Manila area, not exceeding
2% of the assessed value of the property

Special Education Fund (SEF)
Sec. 235. Additional Levy on Rea! Property for the Special
Education Fund. — A province or city, or a municipality within the
Metropolitan Manila Area, may levy and collect an annual tax of one
percent (1%) on the assessed value of real property which shall be
in addition to the basic real property tax. The proceeds thereof shall
exclusively accrue to the Special Education Fund (SEF).
•

On top of the real property tax rate, the province, city or Metro
Manila municipality, may levy an annual tax of 1% of the assessed
value for the Special Education Fund.

•
•

This is in addition to the real property tax.
The LGU can impose SEF at a rate of less than 1%. Nothing In
the LGC states that it has to be 1%. (Demaala v. COA, G.R. No.
199752, February 17, 2015)

Tax on idle lands

Sec. 237. Idle Lands, Coverage. — For purposes of real property
taxation, idle lands shall include the following:
(a) Agricultural lands, more than one (1) hectare in area, suitable
for cultivation, dairying, inland fishery, and other agricultural uses,
one-half (1/2) of which remain uncultivated or unimproved by the
owner of the property or person having legal Interest therein."
Agricultural lands planted to permanent or perennial crops with
a least fifty (50) trees to a hectare shall not be considered Idle
ands. Lands actually used for grazing purposes shall likewise not be
considered idle lands.

(b) Lands, other than agricultural, located in a city or municipality,
thousand (1,000) square meters in area one-half
which remain unutilized or unimproved by the owner of
If^nH°PertV
p®rson having legal interest therein. Regardless
of land area this Section shall likewise apply to residential lots in
subdivisfons duly approved by proper authorities, the ownership of
haJLb^een transferred to individual owners, who shall be liable
for the additional tax: Provided, however. That individual lots of such
subdivisions, the ownership of which has not been transferred to
the buyer shall be considered as part of the subdivision, and shall
be subject to the additional tax payable by subdivision owner or
operator.

f

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

603

Idle lands are:

o

If agricultural — more than one hectare in area and suitable
for whatever (see coda I) and 1/2 of which is uncultivated or
unimproved

o

Other than agricultural — more than 1,000 square meters,
and 1/2 of which is uncultivated or unimproved

Sec. 236. Additional Ad Valorem Tax on Idle Lands. — A
province or city, or a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila
Area, may levy an annual tax on idle lands at the rate not exceeding
five percent (5%) of the assessed value of the property which shall
be in addition to the basic real property tax.
Idle lands are taxed a rate not exceeding 5%, in addition to the
basic real property tax.
So, the SEF and the tax on idle lands may be imposed in addition
to basic real property tax.

Sec. 238. Idle Lands Exempt from Tax. — A province or city
or a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area may exempt
idle lands from the additional levy by reason of force majeure, civil
disturbance, natural calamity or any cause or circumstance which
physically or legally prevents the owner of the property or person
having legal interest therein from improving, utilizing or cultivating
the same.

However, idle lands may be exempted from tax, because of:
o

Force majeure,

o

Civil disturbance,

o

Natural calamity, or

o

Any cause or circumstance which physically or legally
prevents the owner of the property or person having legal
interest therein from improving, utilizing or cultivating the
same.

Special levy
Sec. 240. Special Levy by Local Government Units. — A
province, city or municipality may impose a special levy on the
lands comprised within its territorial jurisdiction specially benefited
by public works projects or improvements funded by the local

J9JC9B0M

604

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

government unit concerned: Provided, however, That the special
levy shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the actual cost of such
projects and improvements, including the costs of acquiring land and
such other real property in connection therewith: Provided, further,
That the special levy shall not apply to lands exempt from basic
real property tax and the remainder of the land portions of which
have been donated to the local government unit concerned for the
construction of such projects or improvements.
Sec. 241. Ordinance Imposing a Special Levy. — A tax ordinance
imposing a special levy shall describe with reasonable accuracy
the nature, extent, and location of the public works projects or
improvements to be undertaken, state the estimated cost thereof,
specify the metes and bounds by monuments and lines and the
number of annual installments for the payment of the special levy
which in no case shall be less than five (5) nor more than ten
(10) years. The Sanggunian concerned shall not be obliged, in the
apportionment and computation of the special levy, to establish a
uniform percentage of all lands subject to the payment of the tax
for the entire district, but it may fix different rates for different parts
or sections thereof, depending on whether such land is more or less
benefited by the proposed work.
Sec. 242. Publication of Proposed Ordinance Imposing a
Special Levy. — Before the enactment of an ordinance imposing
a special levy, the Sanggunian concerned shall conduct a public
hearing thereon; notify in writing the owners of the real property to
be affected or the persons having legal interest therein as to the date
and place thereof and afford the latter the opportunity to express
their positions or objections relative to the proposed ordinance.
Sec. 243. Fixing the Amount of Special Levy. — The special levy
authorized herein shall be apportioned, computed, and assessed
according to the assessed valuation of the lands affected as shown
by the books of the assessor concerned, or its current assessed value
as fixed by said assessor if the property does not appear of record
in his books. Upon the effectivity of the ordinance imposing special
levy, the assessor concerned shall forthwith proceed to determine
the annual amount of special levy assessed against each parcel of
land comprised within the area especially benefited and shall send to
each landowner a written notice thereof by mail, personal service or
publication In appropriate cases.
Sec. 244. Taxpayers' Remedies Against Special Levy. — Any
owner of real property affected a special levy or any person having
a legal interest therein may, upon receipt of the written notice of
assessment of the special levy, avail of the remedies provided for in
Chapter 3, Title Two, Book II of this Code.
Sec. 245. Accrual of Special Levy. — The special levy shall accrue
on the first day of the quarter next following the effectivity of the
ordinance imposing such levy.

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

605

!

J9JC9B0M

Special levies are imposed when lands are benefited by public
works projects or improvements funded by the LGU concerned.

O

But no special levy will be imposed:

-

On lands exempt from RPT, and

•

Remainders of land portions of which were donated to
LG Us for the projects.

Special levy by province, city, or municipality: should NOT exceed
60% of the total cost of the government improvements

Note the rules on the ordinance:
O

Public hearing

o

Notification

o

Opportunity for owner of subject land to object

Even municipalities outside Metro Manila can impose this.
E.

Exemption from Real Property Tax

Properties exempt from RPT

Sec. 234. Exemptions from Real Property Tax. — The following
are exempted from payment of the real property tax:
(a) Real property owned by the Republic of the Philippines or any of
its political subdivisions except when the beneficial use thereof has
been granted, for consideration or otherwise, to a taxable person;

(b) Charitable institutions, churches, parsonages or convents
appurtenant thereto, mosques, nonprofit or religious cemeteries
and all lands, buildings, and Improvements actually, directly, and
exclusively used for religious, charitable or educational purposes;

(c) All machineries and equipment that are actually, directly and
exclusively used by local water districts and government-owned or
-controlled corporations engaged in the supply and distribution of
water and/or generation and transmission of electric power;
(d) All real property owned by duly registered cooperatives as
provided for under R.A. No. 6938; and
(e) Machinery and equipment used
environmental protection.

for pollution control

and

Except as provided herein, any exemption from payment of real
property tax previously granted to, or presently enjoyed by, all
persons, whether natural or juridical, including all governmentowned or -controlled corporations are hereby withdrawn upon the
effectivity of this Code.

J9JC9B0M

606

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Upon enactment of the LGC, any exemption from real property
tax given to all persons, whether natural or juridical, including all
GOCCs, were withdrawn.

•

MERALCO's steel poles are no longer exempt from real
property tax, as MERALCO's previous exemptions have been
withdrawn by the LGC. Moreover, its transformers, electric
posts, transmission lines, insulators and electric meters do
not qualify under any of the exemptions under Section 234.
(Manila Electric Company v. City Assessor and City Treasurer
of Lucena City, G.R. No. 166102, August 5, 2015)

o

•

However, Congress has the power to grant exemptions over
the power of local government units to impose taxes. (Quezon
City v. Bayantel, G.R. No. 162015, March 6, 2006, wherein
the reenactment of a franchise law after the LGC in favor of
Bayantel was said to revive its exemption, but see Digital
Telecommunications, Inc. v. Batangas, G.R. No. 156040,
December 11, 2008, which revolved around the same provision
of a franchise, but the Court ruled that the said provision was too
vague to merit an exemption.)

•

The list is an exclusive one and local government units cannot
add on to the exemptions.
The exemptions
assessments.

o

includes

exemption

from

special

The following properties are exempt from real property tax:

•

Real property owned by the Government or anv of its political
subdivision
•

EXCEPT when the beneficial use thereof has been granted, for
consideration or otherwise, to a taxable person.

•

This exception to the exemption is the only instance when
the national government, its agencies and instrumentalities
are subject to any kind of tax by local governments. (Manila
International Airport Authority v. CA, G.R. No. 155650, July
20, 2006)

o

Who pays then?
•

•

The taxable entity having beneficial use of the
property is liable for the real property taxes thereon.
(GSIS v. Manila, G.R. No. 186242, December 23,
2009)

Because of Section 133(0) related with this section, the Court
has construed "political subdivision" to mean government

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

607

instrumentalities vested with corporate powers or government
corporate entities. (Manila International Airport Authority
v. CA, G.R. No. 155650, July 20, 2006) The following are
examples of GCEs:
O

BSP, Philippine Rice Research Institute, Laguna Lake
Development Authority (LLDA), Fisheries Development
Authority, Bases Conversion Development Authority
(BCDA), Philippine Ports Authority, Philippine National
Railways, UP, Manila International Airport Authority

O

An instrumentality is neither a stock or a non-stock
corporation and it performs governmental or public
functions. (Philippine Fisheries Development Authority v.
CA, G.R. No. 169836, July 31, 2007)
-

The GSIS is exempt from RPT because it is an
instrumentality and because of R.A. 8291 which
granted it full exemptions from RPT. (GSIS v. Manila,
G.R. No. 186242, December 23, 2009, where the
SC also held that its properties were exempt from
execution as well)

•

The Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA) is
also exempt as it is an instrumentality. (City of LapuLapu v. Philippine Economic Zone Authority, G.R. No.
184203, November 26, 2014)

•

The Light Rail Transit Authority (LRTA) is also exempt
as it is a government instrumentality vested with
corporate powers. (LRTA v. Quezon City, G.R. No.
221626, October 9, 2019)

Hence, GOCCs are liable for real property tax. (Mactan Cebu
International Airport Authority v. City of Lapu-Lapu, G.R. No.
181756, June 15, 2015)

Reclaimed lands, as part of the public domain, are not subject
to real property tax. (Philippine Reclamation Authority (PRA)
v. Paranaque, G.R. No. 191109, July 18, 2012, where PRA
was also considered an instrumentality, not a GOCC.)
To sum:

2.

O

GCEs: exempt

O

GOCCs: not exempt

Charitable institutions, churches, parsonages or convents
appurtenant thereto, mosques, non-profit or religious cemeteries

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

608

and all lands, buildings, and improvements, actually, directly and
exclusively used for religious, charitable or educational purposes.
•

Keep in mind that Local Finance Circular No. 01-2001 stated
that improvements do not include machinery. Hence, the
rules:

•

Machinery that is permanently attached to land and buildings
is subject to the real property tax, even though this is
actually, directly and exclusively used for religious, charitable
or educational purposes.

Improvements, however, are exempt.

O

But for non-stock, non-profit educational institutions,
machinery used actually, directly, and exclusively for
educational purposes is not subject to real property tax.
O

The fine distinction was lifted from the Constitutional
provisions.
educational
For
non-stock,
non-profit
institutions (Article XIV, Section 4[3]), the exemption
covered "assets," while for property actually, directly and
exclusively used for religious, charitable, or educational
purposes (Article VI, Section 28[3]), the exemption
covered "improvements."

O

Hence, when the assets are actually, directly, and
exclusively used for educational purposes by a NSNP
educational institution, such assets of the NSNP
educational institution shall be exempt from real property
tax. (CIR v. DLSU, G.R. No. 196596, November 8, 2016)

"Actual, direct, and exclusive use" of the property for
charitable purposes means the direct and immediate and
actual application of the property itself to the purposes for
which the charitable institution is organized.
o

It is not the use of the income from the real property
that is determinative of whether the property is used for
tax-exempt purposes. [Test of use of property, not use
of income derived from property] (Lung Center of the
Philippines v. Quezon City, G.R. No. 144104, June 29,
2004)
-

O

If some portions are leased for activities which are
not for charitable, religious, or educational purposes,
then those portions will be subject to real property
tax.

A charitable institution does not lose its character as
such and its exemption from taxes simply because it

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

609

derives income from paying patients, whether outpatient, or confined in the hospital, or receives subsidies
from the government, so long as the money received is
devoted or used altogether to the charitable object which
it is intended to achieve; and no money inures to the
private benefit of the persons managing or operating the
institution. (Lung Center of the Philippines v. Quezon
City, G.R. No. 144104, June 29, 2004)

3.

•

See further comments in section on General Principles,
particularly comments on Article VI, Section 28(3).

•

Note also that the SC seems to have made a different
test for classifying classes of property, as seen in City
Assessor of Cebu v. Association of Benevola de Cebu,
G.R. No. 152904, June 8, 2007.

All machineries and equipment that are actually, directly and
exclusively used by local water districts and GOCCs engaged
in the supply and distribution of water and/or generation and
transmission of electric power

•

Take note that only the machineries and equipment are
exempt from the real property tax, not the lands or buildings.

•

Two elements must comply:
o

First, the machineries and equipment are actually,
directly, and exclusively used by local water districts and
GOCCs, and

o

Second, the local water districts and GOCCs must be
engaged in the supply and distribution of water and/or
the generation and transmission of electric power.
•

Hence, if a GOCC loans its equipment to a taxable
entity and that taxable entity is the one that uses the
equipment, it will become taxable, as it is no longer
exclusively used by the GOCC. (National Power
Corporation [NPC] v. Province of Quezon, G.R. No.
171586, January 25, 2010)

What if a GOCC, which supplies electric power, enters into an
agreement with a taxable entity for the lease of the former's
equipment — and the agreement states that the GOCC will be
the one to assume the real property tax, will the exemption
extend to the taxable entity?

o

No. In FELS Energy, Inc. v. Provincial Assessor of Batangas
(G.R. No. 168557, February 16, 2007), the SC stated

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

610

that the undertaking of NPC (a GOCC) that it shall be
responsible for the payment of all real estate taxes does
not justify the exemption. The privilege granted to NPC
cannot be extended to the lessee FELS. The agreement
is between the two and does not bind a third person not
privy thereto, which in that case, was the Province of
Batangas.

4.

In short, the tax assumption clause is binding only
between the two parties, and not to the government
or LGU.

•

This was reiterated in NPC v. Province of Quezon.

All real property owned by duly registered cooperatives

•

The RPT exemption given to cooperatives applies even if the
land owned by the cooperative is leased to a taxable entity.

o

5.

•

The exemption is given without distinction. The law
doesn't care if the property owned by the cooperative is
used by the cooperative or not. {Provincial Assessor of
Agusan det Sur v. Fiiipinas Palm OH Plantation, Inc., G.R.
No. 183416, October 5, 2016, where the cooperative
leased the land to a private corporation)

Machinery and equipment
environmental protection

used

for

pollution

control

and

•

Now, R.A. 7942 has expanded pollution control equipment to
include infrastructures and improvements.13

•

Mactan Cebu International Airport Authority v. Marcos (G.R.
No. 120082, September 11, 1996) gives another perspective
on this provision. It states that the exemptions are based on
ownership, character and use of property.

o

Ownership — real properties owned by the Republic,
LGUs and registered cooperatives are exempt from real
property tax.

13Section 91 — Incentives for Pollution Control Devices — Pollution control
devices acquired, constructed or installed by contractors shall not be considered
as improvements on the land or building where they are placed, and shall not be
subject to real property and other taxes or assessments: Provided, however, That
payment of mine wastes and tailings fees is not exempted.
Sec. 3(am) — Pollution control and infrastructure devices refers to
infrastructure, machinery, equipment and/or improvements used for impounding,
treating or neutralizing, precipitating, filtering, conveying and cleansing mine
industrial waste and tailings as well as eliminating or reducing hazardous effects of
solid particles, chemicals, liquids or other harmful byproducts and gases emitted
from any facility utilized in mining operations for their disposal.

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

611

O

Character — real properties of charitable institutions,
houses and temples of prayer, and non-profit or religious
cemeteries are exempt from real property tax.

O

Usage — this covers (i) lands, buildings, etc. used
actually, directly and exclusively for religious, charitable,
or educational purposes, and (ii) machineries and
equipment actually used, directly and exclusively by
local water districts and GOCCs engaged in the supply of
electricity, and (iii) machinery and equipment for pollution
control and environmental protection.

A inherited a two-storey building in Makati from his father, a real
estate broker in the '60s. A group of Tibetan monks approached A
and offered to lease the building in order to use it as a venue for their
Buddhist rituals and ceremonies. A accepted the rental of Pl million
for the whole year.
The following year, the City Assessor issued an assessment against
A for non-payment of real property taxes.
Is the assessor Justified In assessing A's deficiency real property
taxes? Explain. (2010 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The assessor is wrong. Real property is assessed
based on actual use. The use in this case is actually, exclusively, and
directly used for religious purposes, which is exempted from real
property taxes under the LGC. Hence, no real property taxes may
be assessed.

Mr. Amado leased a piece of land owned by the Municipality of
Pinagsabitan and built a warehouse on the property for his business
operations. The Municipal Assessor assessed Mr. Amado for real
property taxes on the land and the warehouse. Mr. Amado objected
to the assessment, contending that he should not be asked to pay
realty taxes on the land since it is municipal property.
Was the assessment proper? (2013 Bar Exam)

Suggested Answer: The assessment Is proper. Generally, real property
owned by local government units are not subject to tax. However,
when the beneficial use has been granted for a consideration to a
taxable person, then such property will be subject to real property
taxes. In this case, the land Is leased to a taxable person and thus is
subject to real property taxes. Moreover, the unpaid tax attaches to
the property and is chargeable against the taxable person who had
actual or beneficial use and possession of it regardless of whether
or not he is the owner. Hence, the assessment against Mr. Amado
is proper.

J9JC9B0M

612

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

LLL is a government instrumentality created by Executive Order to
be primarily responsible for integrating and directing all reclamation
projects for the National Government. It was not organized as a
stock or a nonstock corporation, nor was it intended to operate
commercially and compete in the private market.

By virtue of its mandate, LLL reclaimed several portions of the
foreshore and offshore areas of the Manila Bay, some of which were
within the territorial jurisdiction of Q City. Certificates of title to the
reclaimed properties in Q City were issued in the name of LLL in
2008. In 2014, Q City issued Warrants of Levy on said reclaimed
properties of LLL based on the assessment for delinquent property
taxes for the years 2010 to 2013.
a) Are the reclaimed properties registered in the name of LLL
subject to real property tax?
b) Will your answer be the same in (a) if from 2010 to the present
time, LLL Is leasing portions of the reclaimed properties for the
establishment and use of popular fastfood restaurants J Burgers, G
Pizza, and K Chicken? (2015 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a) The reclaimed properties are not subject to real property tax.
The Supreme Court has held that reclaimed lands are part of the
public domain and not subject to real property tax. In this case,
the subject property were properties reclaimed by a government
instrumentality. Hence, these are not subject to real property tax.

b) My answer would be different. The LGC states that when
beneficial use of property of the national government has been
granted, for consideration or otherwise, to a taxable person, said
property will no longer be exempt. In this case, the lease to taxable
persons (the fastfood restaurants) makes the properties subject to
real property tax.

!

Philippine National Railways (PNR) operates the rail transport of
passengers and goods by providing train stations and freight customer
facilities from Tutuban, Manila to the Bicol Province. As the operator
of the railroad transit, PNR administers the land, Improvements and
equipment within its main station in Tutuban, Manila.
Invoking Section 193 of the Local Government Code (LGC) expressly
withdrawing the tax exemption privileges of government-owned and
controlled corporations upon the effectivity of the Code in 1992, the
City Government of Manila issued Final Notices of Real Estate Tax
Deficiency in the amount of P624,000,000.00 for the taxable years
2006 to 2010. On the other hand, PNR, seeking refuge under the
principle that the government cannot tax itself, insisted that the PNR
lands and buildings are owned by the Republic.

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

613

Is the PNR exempt from real property tax? Explain your answer.
(2016 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: The PNR is exempt from real property tax. Case
law has clarified that government instrumentalities are exempt
from RPT. The PNR is a government instrumentality, as it performs
governmental or public functions. It is therefore exempt from RPT.

Kilusang Krus, Inc. (KKI) is a nonstock, non-profit religious
organization which owns a vast tract of land in Kalinga.

KKI has devoted 1 /2 of the land for various uses: a church with a
cemetery exclusive for deceased priests and nuns, a school providing
K to 12 education, and a hospital which admits both paying and
charity patients. The remaining 1/2 portion has remained idle.

The KKI Board of Trustees decided to lease the remaining 1 /2
portion to a real estate developer which constructed a community
mall over the property.
Since the rental income from the lease of the property was
substantial, the KKI decided to use the amount to finance (1) the
medical expenses of the charity patients in the KKI Hospital and
(2) the purchase of books and other educational materials for the
students of KKI School.
Is KKI liable for real property taxes on the land? (2018 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer: KKI is liable for real property tax on the portion
leased to a real estate developer and the portion of the hospital
which admits paying patients. Under the Constitution and the
LGC, all lands, buildings, and improvements actually, directly, and
exclusively used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes
shall be exempt from taxation. In KKI's case, the leased portion to
the real estate developer and the portion of the hospital which admits
paying patients are used for commercial purposes. Hence, those
portions will be subject to real property tax. The rest of the property
Is devoted to the actual, exclusive, and direct use of either religious,
educational, or charitable purposes, and is therefore exempt.

City R owns a piece of land which it leased to 1/ Corp. In turn, V Corp,
constructed a public market thereon and leased the stalls to vendors
and small storeowners. The City Assessor then issued a notice of
assessment against V Corp, for the payment of real property taxes
(RPT) accruing on the public market building, as well as on the land
where said market stands.

Is the City Assessor correct in Including the land in its assessment of
RPT against V Corp., even if the same is owned by City R? Explain.
(2019 Bar Exam)

J9JC9B0M

614

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Suggested answer: The Assessor is correct. The LGC and case law
state that government-owned real property are taxable when its
beneficial use is given to a taxable entity. It likewise states that the
taxable entity will be liable for the taxes on said property. Here, the
land is being used by a taxable entity, V Corp. Hence, the Assessor
was correct in including the land in the assessment.

Proof of exemption
Sec. 206. Proof of Exemption of Real Property from Taxation.
— Every person by or for whom real property is declared, who shall
claim tax exemption for such property under this Title shall file with
the provincial, city or municipal assessor within thirty (30) days from
the date of the declaration of real property sufficient documentary
evidence in support of such claim including corporate charters, title
of ownership, articles of incorporation, bylaws, contracts, affidavits,
certifications and mortgage deeds, and similar documents. If
the required evidence is not submitted within the period herein
prescribed, the property shall be listed as taxable in the assessment
roll. However, if the property shall be proven to be tax exempt, the
same shall be dropped from the assessment roll.

•

The burden of proving exemption from local taxation is upon
whom the subject real property is declared; thus, said person
shall be considered by law as the taxpayer thereof. (Camp John
Hay Development Corporation v. Central Board of Assessment
Appeals, G.R. No. 169234, October 2, 2013)

F.

Collection of RPT and LGU Remedies for Collection

CHAPTER 6 — COLLECTION OF REAL PROPERTY TAX

Sec. 246. Date of Accrual of Tax. — The real property tax for any
year shall accrue on the first day of January and from that date It
shall constitute a lien on the property which shall be superior to any
other lien, mortgage, or encumbrance of any kind whatsoever, and
shall be extinguished only upon the payment of the delinquent tax.

Sec. 247. Collection of Tax. — The collection of the real property
tax with interest thereon and related expenses, and the enforcement
of the remedies provided for in this Title or any applicable laws, shall
be the responsibility of the city or municipal treasurer concerned. The
city or municipal treasurer may deputize the barangay treasurer to
collect all taxes on real property located in the barangay: Provided,
That the barangay treasurer is properly bonded for the purpose:
Provided, further. That the premium on the bond shall be paid by the
city or municipal government concerned.

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

615

Sec. 248. Assessor to Furnish Local Treasurer with Assessment
Roll. — The provincial, city or municipal assessor shall prepare and
submit to the treasurer of the local government unit, on or before
the thirty-first (31st) day of December each year, an assessment roil
containing a list of all persons whose real properties have been newly
assessed or reassessed and the values of such properties.
Sec. 249. Notice of Time for Collection of Tax. — The city or
municipal treasurer shall, on or before the thirty-first (31st) day of
January each year, in the case of the basic real property tax and the
additional tax for the Special Education Fund (SEF) or on any other
date to be prescribed by the sanggunian concerned in the case of
any other tax levied under this Title, post the notice of the dates
when the tax may be paid without interest at a conspicuous and
publicly accessible place at the city or municipal hall. Said notice
shall likewise be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the locality once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks.
Sec. 250. Payment of Real Property Taxes in Installments. —
The owner of the real property or the person having legal interest
therein may pay the basic real property tax and the additional tax for
Special Education Fund (SEF) due thereon without interest in four (4)
equal installments; the first installment to be due and payable on or
before March Thirty-first (31st); the second installment, on or before
June Thirty (30); the third installment, on or before September
Thirty (30); and the last installment on or before December Thirtyfirst (31st), except the special levy the payment of which shall be
governed by ordinance of the sanggunian concerned. The date for the
payment of any other tax imposed under this Title without interest
shall be prescribed by the sanggunian concerned. Payments of real
property taxes shall first be applied to prior years delinquencies,
interests, and penalties, if any, and only after said delinquencies are
settled may tax payments be credited for the current period.

Sec. 251. Tax Discount for Advanced Prompt Payment. — If
the basic real property tax and the additional tax accruing to the
Special Education Fund (SEF) are paid in advance in accordance
with the prescribed schedule of payment as provided under Section
250, the sanggunian concerned may grant a discount not exceeding
twenty percent (20%) of the annual tax due.

Sec. 254. Notice of Delinquency in the Payment of the Real
Property Tax. — (a) When the real property tax or any other
tax Imposed under this Title becomes delinquent, the provincial,
city or municipal treasurer shall immediately cause a notice of the
delinquency to be posted at the main entrance of the provincial
capitol, or city or municipal hall and in a publicly accessible and
conspicuous place in each barangay of the local government unit
concerned. The notice of delinquency shall also be published once
a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the province, city, or municipality.
(b) Such notice shall specify the date upon which the tax became
delinquent and shall state that personal property may be distrained

J9JC9B0M

616

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

to effect payment. It shall likewise state that at any time before the
distraint of personal property, payment of the tax with surcharges,
interests and penalties may be made in accordance with the next
following Section, and unless the tax, surcharges and penalties
are paid before the expiration of the year for which the tax is due
except when the notice of assessment or special levy is contested
administratively or judicially pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3,
Title II, Book II of this Code, the delinquent real property will be sold
at public auction, and the title to the property will be vested in the
purchaser, subject, however, to the right of the delinquent owner of
the property or any person having legal interest therein to redeem
the property within one (1) year from the date of sale.

Sec. 255. Interests on Unpaid Rea! Property Tax. — In case of
failure to pay the basic real property tax or any other tax levied under
this Title upon the expiration of the periods as provided in Section
250, or when due, as the case may be, shall subject the taxpayer to
the payment of interest at the rate of two percent (2%) per month
on the unpaid amount or a fraction thereof, until the delinquent tax
shall have been fully paid: Provided, however, That in no case shall
the total interest on the unpaid tax or portion thereof exceed thirtysix (36) months.

LGU remedies for collection

Sec. 256. Remedies for the Collection of Rea! Property Tax.
— For the collection of the basic real property tax and any other tax
levied under this Title, the local government unit concerned may
avail of the remedies by administrative action through levy on real
property or by judicial action.
Sec. 257. Local Governments Lien. — The basic real property
tax and any other tax levied under this Title constitutes a lien
on the property subject to tax, superior to all liens, charges or
encumbrances in favor of any person, Irrespective of the owner or
possessor thereof, enforceable by administrative or judicial action,
and may only be extinguished upon payment of the tax and the
related interests and expenses.
Sec. 258. Levy on Real Property. — After the expiration of
the time required to pay the basic real property tax or any other
tax levied under this Title, real property subject to such tax may
be levied upon through the issuance of a warrant on or before,
or simultaneously with, the institution of the civil action for the
collection of the delinquent tax. The provincial or city treasurer, or
a treasurer of a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area, as
the case may be, when issuing a warrant of levy shall prepare a duly
authenticated certificate showing the name of the delinquent owner
of the property or person having legal interest therein, the description
of the property, the amount of the tax due and the interest thereon.

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

617

The warrant shall operate with the force of a legal execution
throughout the province, city or a municipality within the Metropolitan
Manila Area. The warrant shall be mailed to or served upon the
delinquent owner of the real property or person having legal interest
therein, or in case he is out of the country or cannot be located, to
the administrator or occupant of the property. At the same time,
written notice of the levy with the attached warrant shall be mailed
to or served upon the assessor and the Registrar of Deeds of the
province, city or a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area
where the property is located, who shall annotate the levy on the tax
declaration and certificate of title of the property, respectively. The
levying officer shall submit a report on the levy to the sanggunian
concerned within ten (10) days after receipt of the warrant by the
owner of the property or person having legal interest therein.
Sec. 259. Penalty for Failure to Issue and Execute Warrant.
— Without prejudice to criminal prosecution under the Revised Penal
Code and other applicable laws, any local treasurer or his deputy who
fails to issue or execute the warrant of levy within one (1) year from
the time the tax becomes delinquent or within thirty (30) days from
the date of the issuance thereof, or who is found guilty of abusing
the exercise thereof in an administrative or judicial proceeding shall
be dismissed from the service.
Sec. 260. Advertisement and Sale. — Within thirty (30) days
after service of the warrant of levy, the local treasurer shall proceed
to publicly advertise for sale or auction the property or a usable
portion thereof as may be necessary to satisfy the tax delinquency
and expenses of sale. The advertisement shall be effected by posting
a notice at the main entrance of the provincial, city or municipal
building, and in a publicly accessible and conspicuous place in the
barangay where the real property is located, and by publication once
a week for two (2) weeks In a newspaper of general circulation in
the province, city or municipality where the property is located. The
advertisement shall specify the amount of the delinquent tax, the
Interest due thereon and expenses of sale, the date and place of sale,
the name of the owner of the real property or person having legal
Interest therein, and a description of the property to be sold. At any
time before the date fixed for the sale, the owner of the real property
or person having legal interest therein may stay the proceedings by
paying the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon and the expenses
of sale. The sale shall be held either at the main entrance of the
provincial, city or municipal building, or on the property to be sold, or
at any other place as specified in the notice of the sale. Within thirty
(30) days after the sale, the local treasurer or his deputy shall make
a report of the sale to the sanggunian concerned, and which shall
form part of his records. The local treasurer shall likewise prepare
and deliver to the purchaser a certificate of sale which shall contain
the name of the purchaser, a description of the property sold, the
amount of the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon, the expenses
of sale and a brief description of the proceedings: Provided, however,

J9JC9B0M

618

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

That proceeds of the sale in excess of the delinquent tax, the interest
due thereon, and the expenses of sale shall be remitted to the owner
of the real property or person having legal interest therein. The local
treasurer may, by ordinance duly approved, advance an amount
sufficient to defray the costs of collection through the remedies
provided for in this Title, including the expenses of advertisement
and sale.

Sec. 261. Redemption of Property Sold. — Within one (1) year
from the date of sale, the owner of the delinquent real property
or person having legal interest therein, or his representative, shall
have the right to redeem the property upon payment to the local
treasurer of the amount of the delinquent tax, including the interest
due thereon, and the expenses of sale from the date of delinquency
to the date of sale, plus interest of not more than two percent (2%)
per month on the purchase price from the date of sale to the date
of redemption. Such payment shall invalidate the certificate of
sale issued to the purchaser and the owner of the delinquent real
property or person having legal interest therein shall be entitled to a
certificate of redemption which shall be issued by the local treasurer
or his deputy. From the date of sale until the expiration of the
period of redemption, the delinquent real property shall remain in
the possession of the owner or person having legal interest therein
who shall be entitled to the income and other fruits thereof. The
local treasurer or his deputy, upon receipt from the purchaser of
the certificate of sale, shall forthwith return to the latter the entire
amount paid by him plus interest of not more than two percent (2%)
per month. Thereafter, the property shall be free from the lien of
such delinquent tax, interest due thereon and expenses of sale.
•

Only the registered owner of the property is deemed the taxpayer
who is entitled to a notice of delinquency and other proceedings
relative to the tax sale. (Lukban v. Optimum Development Bank,
G.R. No. 205785, January 20, 2016)

•

The owner of the delinquent real property or person having legal
interest therein, or his representative, has the right to redeem
the property within one (1) year from the date of sale upon
payment of the delinquent tax and other fees, (compare this with
start of redemption period for foreclosed properties. (City Mayor
of Quezon City v. RCBC, G.R. No. 171033, August 3, 2010)
o
However, when the local ordinance states that the redemption

period starts from the date of annotation of the sale of the
property at the proper registry, then the local ordinance
should be followed because it is more favorable to the original
owner or redemptioner. (City Mayor of Quezon City v. RCBC)

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

619

Sec. 262. Final Deed to Purchaser. — In case the owner or person
having legal interest therein fails to redeem the delinquent property
as provided herein, the local treasurer shall execute a deed conveying
to the purchaser said property, free from lien of the delinquent tax,
interest due thereon and expenses of sale. The deed shall briefly
state the proceedings upon which the validity of the sale rests.

I

J9JC9B0M

Sec. 263. Purchase of Property By the Local Government
Units for Want of Bidder. — In case there is no bidder for the real
property advertised for sale as provided herein, or if the highest bid
is for an amount insufficient to pay the real property tax and the
related interest and costs of sale the local treasurer conducting the
sale shall purchase the property in behalf of the local government
unit concerned to satisfy the claim and within two (2) days thereafter
shall make a report of his proceedings which shall be reflected upon
the records of his office. It shall be the duty of the Registrar of Deeds
concerned upon registration with his office of any such declaration
of forfeiture to transfer the title of the forfeited property to the
local government unit concerned without the necessity of an order
from a competent court. Within one (1) year from the date of such
forfeiture, the taxpayer or any of his representative, may redeem
the property by paying to the local treasurer the full amount of the
real property tax and the related interest and the costs of sale. If the
property is not redeemed as provided herein, the ownership thereof
shall be fully vested on the local government unit concerned.
Sec. 264. Resale of Real Estate Taken for Taxes, Fees, or
Charges. — The sanggunian concerned may, by ordinance duly
approved, and upon notice of not less than twenty (20) days, sell and
dispose of the real property acquired under the preceding section at
public auction. The proceeds of the sale shall accrue to the general
fund of the local government unit concerned.
Sec. 265. Further Distraint or Levy. — Levy may be repeated
if necessary until the full amount due, including all expenses, is
collected.
Sec. 266. Collection of Real Property Tax Through the Courts.
— The local government unit concerned may enforce the collection
of the basic real property tax or any other tax levied under this Title
by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The civil action
shall be filed by the local treasurer within the period prescribed in
Section 270 of this Code.
Sec. 267. Action Assailing Validity of Tax Sale. — No court shall
entertain any action assailing the validity of any sale at public auction
of real property or rights therein under this Title until the taxpayer
shall have deposited with the court the amount for which the real
property was sold, together with interest of two percent (2%) per
month from the date of sale to the time of the institution of the
action. The amount so deposited shall be paid to the purchaser at the
auction sale if the deed is declared invalid but it shall be returned to
the depositor if the action fails. Neither shall any court declare a sale

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

620

at public auction invalid by reason of irregularities or informalities
in the proceedings unless the substantive rights of the delinquent
owner of the real property or the person having legal interest therein
have been impaired.
Sec. 268. Payment of Delinquent Taxes on Property Subject of
Controversy. — In any action involving the ownership or possession
of, or succession to, real property, the court may, motu propio or
upon representation of the provincial, city, or municipal treasurer
or his deputy, award such ownership, possession, or succession
to any party to the action upon payment to the court of the taxes
with interest due on the property and all other costs that may have
accrued, subject to the final outcome of the action.

Sec. 269. Treasurer to Certify Delinquencies Remaining
Uncollected. — The provincial, city or municipal treasurer or
their deputies shall prepare a certified list of all real property tax
delinquencies which remained uncollected or unpaid for at least one
(1) year in his jurisdiction, and a statement of the reason or reasons
for such non-collection or non-payment, and shall submit the same
to the sanggunian concerned on or before December thirty-first
(31st) of the year immediately succeeding the year in which the
delinquencies were incurred, with a request for assistance in the
enforcement of the remedies for collection provided herein.

For redemption of property after forfeiture to the state (Section
263), the reckoning date to count the redemption period is the
date of the sale of the property to the state, not the declaration
of forfeiture. (City of Davao v. Intestate Estate of Daiisay, G.R.
No. 207791, July 15, 2015)
o

This rule applies when there is no bidder and the property is
forfeited to the state.

O

Differentiate this rule from the redemption period for sale of
property.

Prescriptive period to collect

Sec. 270. Periods Within Which to Collect Real Property Taxes.
The basic real property tax and any other tax levied under this Title
shall be collected within five (5) years from the date they become
due. No action for the collection of the tax, whether administrative
or judicial, shall be instituted after the expiration of such period. In
case of fraud or intent to evade payment of the tax, such action may
be instituted for the collection of the same within ten (10) years from
the discovery of such fraud or intent to evade payment. The period
of prescription within which to collect shall be suspended for the time
during which:
(1) The local treasurer is legally prevented from collecting the tax;

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

621

(2) The owner of the property or the person having legal interest
therein requests for reinvestigation and executes a waiver in writing
before the expiration of the period within which to collect; and
(3) The owner of the property or the person having legal interest
therein is out of the country or otherwise cannot be located.
The period to collect by the government is five years from the
date the real property taxes are due.
But if there's fraud or intent to evade payment of the tax, the
period is 10 years.

Similar to local business taxes, the period to collect is suspended
when:

1.

The local treasurer is legally prevented from collecting the
tax.

2.

The owner of the property or the person having legal interest
requests for reinvestigation and executes a waiver in writing.

3.

The owner cannot be located or is out of the country.

Condonation or reduction of the RPT and interest
Sec. 276. Condonation or Reduction of Real Property Tax
and Interest. — In case of a general failure of crops or substantial
decrease in the price of agricultural or agribased products, or calamity
in any province, city, or municipality, the sanggunian concerned, by
ordinance passed prior to the first (1st) day of January of any year
and upon recommendation of the Local Disaster Coordinating Council,
may condone or reduce, wholly or partially, the taxes and interest
thereon for the succeeding year or years in the city or municipality
affected by the calamity.
Sec. 277. Condonation or Reduction of Tax by the President
of the Philippines. — The President of the Philippines may, when
public interest so requires, condone or reduce the real property tax
and interest for any year in any province or city or a municipality
within the Metropolitan Manila Area.

G.

Taxpayer's Remedies

•

When dealing with remedies, whether for local business taxes or
real property taxes, always identify what you want to achieve;
this will determine the procedure, specifically:
o

To whom do I protest or appeal?

o

What periods?

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

622

•

The taxpayer has the following remedies in real property taxation:

enacted

1.

Protest against a
measure;

2.

Remedy against an assessment;

3.

Payment under protest and tax refund or credit;

4.

Claim a refund.

newly

ordinance

or

revenue

Protest against a newly enacted ordinance or revenue measure

Sec. 187. Procedure for Approval and Effectivity of Tax
ordinances and Revenue Measures; Mandatory Public
Hearings. — The procedure for approval of local tax ordinances
and revenue measures shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this Code: Provided, That public hearings shall be conducted for
the purpose prior to the enactment thereof: Provided, further, That
any question on the constitutionality or legality of tax ordinances
or revenue measures may be raised on appeal within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity thereof to the Secretary of Justice who shall
render a decision within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of
the appeal: Provided, however, That such appeal shall not have the
effect of suspending the effectivity of the ordinance and the accrual
and payment of the tax, fee, or charge levied therein: Provided,
finally, That within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision or
the lapse of the sixty-day period without the Secretary of Justice
acting upon the appeal, the aggrieved party may file appropriate
proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction.

This Is the same as in local taxation.
Remedy against an assessment

Sec. 226. Local Board of Assessment Appeals. — Any owner
or person having legal interest in the property who is not satisfied
with the action of the provincial, city or municipal assessor in the
assessment of his property may, within sixty (60) days from the date
of receipt of the written notice of assessment, appeal to the Board of
Assessment appeals of the province or city by filing a petition under
oath in the form prescribed for the purpose, together with copies of
the tax declarations and such affidavits or documents submitted in
support of the appeal.

Sec. 229. Action by the Local Board of Assessment Appeals.
— (a) The Board shall decide the appeal within one hundred twenty
(120) days from the date of receipt of such appeal. The Board, after
hearing, shall render its decision based on substantial evidence or

I

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

623

such relevant evidence on record as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support the conclusion.

I

J9JC9B0M

(b) In the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, the Board shall have
the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, conduct ocular
inspection, take depositions, and issue subpoena and subpoena
duces tecum. The proceedings of the Board shall be conducted solely
for the purpose of ascertaining the facts without necessarily adhering
to technical rules applicable in judicial proceedings.
(c) The secretary of the Board shall furnish the owner of the property
or the person having legal interest therein and the provincial or
city assessor with a copy of the decision of the Board. In case the
provincial or city assessor concurs in the revision or the assessment,
it shall be his duty to notify the owner of the property or the person
having legal interest therein of such fact using the form prescribed
for the purpose. The owner of the property or the person having legal
interest therein or the assessor who is not satisfied with the decision
of the Board, may, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision
of said Board, appeal to the Central Board of Assessment appeals, as
herein provided. The decision of the Central Board shall be final and
executory.

Sec. 231. Effect of appeal on the Payment of Real Property
Tax. — Appeal on assessments of real property made under the
provisions of this Code shall, in no case, suspend the collection of
the corresponding realty taxes on the property involved as assessed
by the provincial or city assessor, without prejudice to subsequent
adjustment depending upon the final outcome of the appeal.

You resort to this if you want to question an act of the assessor,
like when the assessor makes an appraisal on the real property,
classifies the property according to actual use, fixes the assessed
value of the property, and gives a notice of assessment to the
owner.

If a taxpayer having legal interest in the property is not satisfied
with the action of the assessor in the assessment of the property,
he must appeal to the Local Board of Assessment Appeals (LBAA)
within 60 days from date of receipt of the written notice of
assessment.
O

The LBAA has 120 days from receipt of the appeal to decide.
(Section 229)

O

If still unsatisfied, appeal to the CBAA within 30 days after
receipt of the decision of the LBAA.

o

If still unsatisfied, appeal to the CTA en banc within 30 days.
-

Why en banc? Remember that decisions of the CBAA and
the RTC in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction are
appealable to the CTA via Rule 43.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

624

•

A taxpayer's failure to question the assessment before the Local
Board of Assessment Appeals renders the assessment of the
local assessor final, executory and demandable. (National Power
Corporation v. Province of Quezon, G.R. No. 171586, January 25,
2010)

•

The taxpayer protesting must have legal interest.

O

Hence, in a contract wherein one party assumes the tax
liabilities of another, and the latter operates and uses the
property in question, the former does not have legal interest
to protest the tax imposed by law on the latter. (National
Power Corporation v. Province of Quezon, G.R. No. 171586,
January 25, 2010)

Appeals on assessment shall in no case suspend the collection of
real property taxes.

•

O

However, where the taxpayer has shown a clear and
unmistakable right to refuse or to hold in abeyance of taxes,
an injunction can be granted. (Taiento v. Escalada, G.R. No.
180844, June 27, 2008, where the SC upheld the injunction
granted by the RTC)

Payment Under Protest
Sec. 252. Payment Under Protest. — (a) No protest shall be
entertained unless the taxpayer first pays the tax. There shall be
annotated on the tax receipts the words "paid under protest." The
protest in writing must be filed within thirty (30) days from payment
of the tax to the provincial, city treasurer or municipal treasurer, in
the case of a municipality within Metropolitan Manila Area, who shall
decide the protest within sixty (60) days from receipt.

(b) The tax or a portion thereof paid under protest, shall be held In
trust by the treasurer concerned.

(c) In the event that the protest is finally decided In favor of the
taxpayer, the amount or portion of the tax protested shall be refunded
to the protestant, or applied as tax credit against his existing or
future tax liability.
(d) In the event that the protest is denied or upon the lapse of the
sixty day period prescribed in subparagraph (a), the taxpayer may
avail of the remedies as provided for in Chapter 3, Title II, Book II of
this Code.

You resort to this when the taxpayer questions the excessiveness
of the amount of tax imposed on him.
o

This covers a specific imposition on the taxpayer.

I

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

625

The protest contemplated here is needed when there is a question
on the reasonableness or correctness of the amount assessed. It
involves a question of fact.
O

A claim for tax exemption, whether full or partial, raises a
question of correctness. Hence, payment under protest
is required. It does not question the authority of the local
assessor to assess real property tax. (National Power
Corporation v. Province of Quezon, G.R. No. 171586, January
25, 2010)

O

However, when the taxpayer questions the legality or validity
of an assessment—a question of law—direct recourse to
the local courts is allowed. (National Power Corporation
v. Municipal Government of Navotas, G.R. No. 192300,
November 24, 2014, where what was being questioned was
the authority of the assessor to impose the assessment and
the authority of the treasurer collect real property taxes. The
issue involved the interpretation of a BOT contract and as to
which party actually, directly, and exclusively used machinery
and equipment for exemption purposes under Section
234[c]).

The procedure is as follows:

1.

Pay first and cause the annotation "paid under protest";

2.

Protest in writing within 30 davs from payment with the local
treasurer;

3.

The treasurer has 60 days to resolve it;

4.

In case of denial or lapse of 60 days, follow the procedure in
questioning an assessment, i.e.:
a.

Appeal to the LBAA within 60 days;

b.

Then appeal to the CBAA within 30 days;
Appeal to the CTA En Banc within 30 days.

Again, comparing this with local business taxation where no
payment under protest is needed.

Posting a surety bond before filing an appeal of the assessment
with the LBAA is substantial compliance of the requirement of
payment under protest. (Manila Electric Company v. City Assessor
and City Treasurer of Lucena City, G.R. No. 166102, August 5,
2015)

J9JC9B0M

626

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Madam X owns real property in Caloocan City. On July 1, 2014, she
received a notice of assessment from the City Assessor, informing
her of a deficiency tax on her property. She wants to contest the
assessment.
a) What are the administrative remedies available to Madam X in
order to contest the assessment and their respective prescriptive
periods?
b) May Madam X refuse to pay the deficiency tax assessment
during the pendency of her appeal? (2014 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:

a) Madam X may protest the assessment. She must first pay the
tax under protest and then protest in writing within 30 days to the
local treasurer. The treasurer has 60 days to resolve the protest. If
unresolved or the decision is adverse to the taxpayer, Madam X may
file an appeal with the LBAA within 60 days, and then subsequently
appeal to the CBAA within 30 days. Afterward, if she still loses, she
can then file an appeal to the CTA en banc within 30 days.
b) No, she may not refuse to pay the deficiency tax assessment.
The LGC requires the payment of tax under protest as a prerequisite
to the protest.

■

The City of Kabankalan issued a notice of assessment against KKK,
Inc. for deficiency real property taxes for the taxable years 2013
to 2017 in the amount of PhP 20 million. KKK paid the taxes under
protest and instituted a complaint entitled "Recovery of Illegally and/
or Erroneously-Collected Local Business Tax, Prohibition with Prayer
to Issue TRO and Writ of Preliminary Injunction" with the RTC of
Negros Occidental.
The RTC denied the application for TRO. Its motion for reconsideration
having been denied as well, KKK filed a petition for certiorari with the
Court of Appeals (CA) assailing the denial of the TRO.

Will the petition prosper? (2018 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The petition will not prosper. The proper remedy
to question an assessment is to pay under protest and protest in
writing with the local treasurer within 30 days. The taxpayer should
not have filed a complaint with the RTC. Hence, the petition will not
prosper because the initial step was wrong to begin with.

ABC, Inc. owns a 950-square meter commercial lot in Quezon
City. It received a notice of assessment from the City Assessor,
subjecting the property to real property taxes (RPT). Believing that
the assessment was erroneous, ABC, Inc. filed a protest with the City
Treasurer. However, for failure to pay the RPT, the City Treasurer
dismissed the protest.

!

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

627

a) Was the City Treasurer correct in dismissing ABC, Inc.'s protest?
Explain.
b) Assuming that ABC, Inc. decides to appeal the dismissal, where
should the appeal be filed? (2019 Bar Exam)

Suggested answer:
a)

The City Treasurer is correct. Under the LGC, no protest shall be
entertained until the taxpayer first pays the real property tax.
Here, ABC, Inc. did not pay the RPT in protest. Hence, the City
Treasurer is correct.

b)

ABC, Inc. should file with the LBAA. Under the LGC, the next
step to protesting with the local treasurer is elevating the issue
to the LBAA within 60 days from the dismissal by the treasurer.

Refunds
Sec. 253. Repayment of Excessive Collections. — When an
assessment of basic real property tax, or any other tax levied under
this Title, is found to be illegal or erroneous and the tax is accordingly
reduced or adjusted, the taxpayer may file a written claim for refund
or credit for taxes and interests with the provincial or city treasurer
within two (2) years from the date the taxpayer is entitled to such
reduction or adjustment. The provincial or city treasurer shall decide
the claim for tax refund or credit within sixty (60) days from receipt
thereof. In case the claim for tax refund or credit is denied, the
taxpayer may avail of the remedies as provided in Chapter 3, Title
II, Book II of this Code.
Like local business taxes, refunds must be claimed within two
years from the date the taxpayer is entitled, /.e., the supervening
clause doctrine applies.
It must be filed with the treasurer who must decide within 60
days.
o

H.

If the treasurer denies the claim, follow the procedure in
questioning an assessment (Appeal to LBAA, and then CBAA,
and then CTA en banc).

Disposition and Allotment of Local Taxes

CHAPTER 7 — DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS

Sec. 271. Distribution of Proceeds. — The proceeds of the basic
real property tax, including interest thereon, and proceeds from the
use, lease or disposition, sale or redemption of property acquired at

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

628

a public auction in accordance with the provisions of this Title by the
province or city or a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila Area
shall be distributed as follows:

(a) In the case of provinces

(1) province — Thirty-five percent (35%) shall accrue to the general
fund;
(2) municipality — Forty percent (40%) to the general fund of the
municipality where the property is located; and
(3) barangay — Twenty-five percent (25%) shall accrue to the
barangay where the property is located.
(b) In the case of cities:
(1) city — Seventy percent (70%) shall accrue to the general fund
of the city; and
(2) Thirty percent (30%) shall be distributed among the component
barangays of the cities where the property is located in the following
manner:
(i)

Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue to the barangay where the
property is located;

(ii) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue equally to all component
barangays of the city; and

(c) In the case of a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila
Area:

(1) Metropolitan Manila Authority — Thirty-five percent (35%) shall
accrue to the general fund of the authority;
(2) municipality — Thirty-five percent (35%) shall accrue to the
general fund of the municipality where the property is located;

(3) barangays — Thirty percent (30%) shall be distributed among
the component barangays of the municipality where the property is
located in the following manner:
(i)

Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue to the barangay where the
property is located;

(ii) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue equally to all component
barangays of the municipality.
(d) The share of each barangay shall be released, without need of
any further action, directly to the barangay treasurer on a quarterly
basis within five (5) days after the end of each quarter and shall not
be subject to any lien or holdback for whatever purpose.

Sec. 272. Application of Proceeds of the Additional One
Percent SEF Tax. — The proceeds from the additional one percent
(1%) tax on real property accruing to the Special Education Fund

J9JC9B0M

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

629

(SEF) shall be automatically released to the local school boards:
Provided, That, in case of provinces, the proceeds shall be divided
equally between the provincial and municipal school boards: Provided,
however, That the proceeds shall be allocated for the operation and
maintenance of public schools, construction and repair of school
buildings, facilities and equipment, educational research, purchase
of books and periodicals, and sports development as determined and
approved by the Local School Board.
Sec. 273. Proceeds of the Tax on Idle Lands. — The proceeds
of the additional real property tax on idle lands shall accrue to the
respective general fund of the province or city where the land is
located. In the case of a municipality within the Metropolitan Manila
Area, the proceeds shall accrue equally to the Metropolitan Manila
Authority and the municipality where the land is located.

Sec. 274. Proceeds of the Special Levy. — The proceeds of
the special levy on lands benefited by public works, projects and
other improvements shall accrue to the general fund of the local
government unit which financed such public works, projects or other
improvements.

TITLE III. — SHARES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS IN THE
PROCEEDS OF NATIONAL TAXES
CHAPTER 1 — ALLOTMENT OF INTERNAL REVENUE
Sec. 284. Allotment of Internal Revenue Taxes. — Local
government units shall have a share in the national internal revenue
taxes based on the collection of the third fiscal year preceding the
current fiscal year as follows:

(a) On the first year of the effectivity of this Code, thirty percent
(30%);
(b) On the second year, thirty-five percent (35%); and

(c)

On the third year and thereafter, forty percent (40%).

Provided, That In the event that the national government incurs an
unmanageable public sector deficit, the President of the Philippines
is hereby authorized, upon the recommendation of Secretary of
Finance, Secretary of Interior and Local Government and Secretary
of Budget and Management, and subject to consultation with the
presiding officers of both Houses of Congress and the presidents of
the liga, to make the necessary adjustments in the internal revenue
allotment of local government units but in no case shall the allotment
be less than thirty percent (30%) of the collection of national internal
revenue taxes of the third fiscal year preceding the current fiscal
year: Provided, further, That in the first year of the effectivity of
this Code, the local government units shall, in addition to the thirty
percent (30%) internal revenue allotment which shall include the
cost of devolved functions for essential public services, be entitled
to receive the amount equivalent to the cost of devolved personal
services.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

630

•

The phrase "internal revenue" has been declared unconstitutional,
as it violates the Constitutional mandate that LGUs shall have
a just share in national taxes. (Mandanas v. Ochoa, G.R. No.
199802, July 3, 2018)
O

As Section 21, NIRC does not include customs duties as an
internal revenue tax, LGUs are unduly deprived of their just
share in the allocation of customs duties (which is a national
tax). LGUs should get their just share from customs duties.

o

Hence, the phrase "internal revenue" has been deleted
in Sections 284, 285, 287, and 290 of the LGC and their
corresponding articles in the LGC's IRR.

Sec. 285. Allocation to Local Government Units. — The share
of local government units in the internal revenue allotment shall be
allocated in the following manner:
(a) Provinces — Twenty-three percent (23%);

(b) Cities — Twenty-three percent (23%);

(c) Municipalities — Thirty-four percent (34%); and
(d) barangays — Twenty percent (20%) Provided, however, That
the share of each province, city, and municipality shall be determined
on the basis of the following formula:
(a) Population — Fifty percent (50%);

(b) Land Area — Twenty-five percent (25%); and

(c) Equal sharing — Twenty-five percent (25%): Provided,
further, That the share of each barangay with a population of not
less than one hundred (100) inhabitants shall not be less than
Eighty thousand pesos (P80,000.00) per annum chargeable
against the twenty percent (20%) share of the barangay from
the internal revenue allotment, and the balance to be allocated
on the basis of the following formula
(a) On the first year of the effectivity of this Code:

(1) Population — Forty percent (40%); and
(2) Equal Sharing — Sixty percent (60%)

(b) On the second year:

(1) Population — Fifty percent (50%); and
(2) Equal Sharing — Fifty percent (50%)
(c) On the third year and thereafter

(1) Population — Sixty percent (60%); and

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

631

(2) Equal Sharing — Forty percent (40%). Provided, finally,
That the financial requirements of barangays created by local
government units after the effectivity of this Code shall be the
responsibility of the local government unit concerned.
Sec. 286. Automatic Release of Shares. — (a) The share of each
local government unit shall be released, without need of any further
action, directly to the provincial, city, municipal or barangay treasurer,
as the case may be, on a quarterly basis within five (5) days after
the end of each quarter, and which shall not be subject to any lien
or holdback that may be imposed by the national government for
whatever purpose.
(b) Nothing in this Chapter shall be understood to diminish the
share of local government units under existing laws.

Sec. 287. Local Development Projects. — Each local government
unit shall appropriate in its annual budget no less than twenty percent
(20%) of its annual internal revenue allotment for development
projects. Copies of the development plans of local government units
shall be furnished the Department of Interior and Local Government.

Sec. 288. Rules and Regulations. — The Secretary of Finance, in
consultation with the Secretary of Budget and Management, shall
promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for a simplified
disbursement scheme designed for the speedy and effective
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 2 — SHARE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS
IN THE NATIONAL WEALTH
Sec. 289. Share in the Proceeds from the Development
and Utilization of the National Wealth. — Local government
units shall have an equitable share in the proceeds derived from
the utilization and development of the national wealth within their
respective areas, including sharing the same with the inhabitants by
way of direct benefits.

Sec. 290. Amount of Share of Local Government Units. — Local
government units shall, in addition to the internal revenue allotment,
have a share of forty percent (40%) of the gross collection derived by
the national government from the preceding fiscal year from mining
taxes, royalties, forestry and fishery charges, and such other taxes,
fees, or charges, including related surcharges, interests, or fines,
and from its share in any co-production, joint venture or production
sharing agreement in the utilization and development of the national
wealth within their territorial jurisdiction.
Sec. 291. Share of the Local Governments from any
Government Agency or -Owned and -Controlled Corporation.
— Local government units shall have a share based on the preceding
fiscal year from the proceeds derived by any government agency
or government-owned or -controlled corporation engaged in the

I

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

632

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

utilization and development of the national wealth based on the
following formula whichever will produce a higher share for the local
government unit:

(a) One percent (1%) of the gross sales or receipts of the preceding
calendar year; or
(b) Forty percent (40%) of the mining taxes, royalties, forestry
and fishery charges and such other taxes, fees or charges, including
related surcharges, interests, or fines the government agency or
government -owned or -controlled corporation would have paid if it
were not otherwise exempt.

Sec. 292. Allocation of Shares. — The share in the preceding
Section shall be distributed in the following manner:

(a) Where the natural resources are located in the province

(1) province — Twenty percent (20%);

(2) Component city/municipafity — Forty-five percent (45%);
and
(3) barangay — Thirty-five percent (35%): Provided, however,
That where the natural resources are located in two (2) or
more provinces, or in two (2) or more component cities or
municipalities or in two (2) or more barangays, their respective
shares shall be computed on the basis of:

(1) Population — Seventy percent (70%); and

(2) Land area — Thirty percent (30%).
(b) Where the natural resources are located in a highly urbanized or
independent component city:

(1) city — Sixty-five percent (65%); and
(2) barangay — Thirty-five percent (35%) Provided, however,
That where the natural resources are located in such two (2)
or more cities, the allocation of shares shall be based on the
formula on population and land area as specified in paragraph
(a) of this Section.

Sec. 293. Remittance of the Share of Local Government Units.
— The share of local government units from the utilization and
development of national wealth shall be remitted in accordance with
Section 286 of this Code: Provided, however, That in the case of any
government agency or government-owned or -controlled corporation
engaged in the utilization and development of the national wealth,
such share shall be directly remitted to the provincial, city, municipal
or barangay treasurer concerned within five (5) days after the end
of each quarter.
Sec. 294. Development and Livelihood Projects. — The proceeds
from the share of local government units pursuant to this chapter

REAL PROPERTY TAXATION

shall be appropriated by their respective sanggunian to finance local
development and livelihood projects: Provided, however, That at least
eighty percent (80%) of the proceeds derived from the development
and utilization of hydrothermal, geothermal, and other sources of
energy shall be applied solely to lower the cost of electricity in the
local government unit where such a source of energy is located.

I
i

J

J9JC9B0M

633

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION
AND TARIFF ACT (R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)
A. Tariff and Duties

Definition

•

Tariff can mean:
o

The list or schedule of articles with their corresponding duties
imposed on the same; or

o

The duties imposed on the articles which are payable to the
government.

Customs duties are:

o

Taxes on the importation and exportation of commodities;

o

The tariff or tax assessed upon merchandise imported from, or
exported to, a foreign country (Garcia v. Executive Secretary,
G.R. No. 101273, July 3, 1992)

Purpose of Imposition

•

Customs duties like internal revenue taxes are rarely, if ever,
designed to achieve one policy objective only.

o

Customs duties are imposed for both revenue-raising and for
regulatory purposes.

o

The levying of customs duties on imported goods may have
in some measure the effect of protecting local industries—
where such local industries actually exist and are producing
comparable goods. Simultaneously, however, the very same
customs duties inevitably have the effect of producing
governmental revenues. (Garcia v. Executive Secretary)

Kinds or Classification of Duties
•

Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of duties:
o

Ordinary/regular duties, and

o

Special duties.
634

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)
Ordinary/regular duties
Ad valorem and specific taxes

•

Ad valorem is a tax, duty, or imposition based on the specified
value of the goods. (CIR v. Pilipinas Shell Petroleum, G.R. No.
188497, February 19, 2014)

•

Specific tax is based on the weight or volume capacity and other
physical unit of measurement. (CIR v. Pilipinas Shell)

R.A. 10863 (CMTA)

Sec. 1611. Tariff Nomenclature and Rates of Import Duty. The provisions of Section 104 on Rates of Import Duty of Presidential
Decree No. 1464, otherwise known as the Tariff and Customs Code
of the Philippines of 1978, as amended, specifically providing for the
tariff sections, chapters, headings and subheadings and the rates
of import duty, shall still apply and shall supplement this Act. There
shall be levied, collected and paid upon all imported goods the rates
of duty indicated thereon except as otherwise specifically provided
for in this Act: Provided, That the maximum rate shall not exceed
one hundred percent (100%) ad valorem.

The rates of duty provided or subsequently fixed pursuant to Sections
1608 and 1609 of this Act shall be subject to periodic investigation
by the Tariff Commission and may be revised by the President, upon
the recommendation of the NEDA.
It shall also apply to all products, whether imported directly or
indirectly, of all foreign countries, which do not discriminate against
Philippine export products. An additional one hundred percent
(100%) across-the-board duty shall be levied on the products of
any foreign country which discriminates against Philippine export
products.

Sec. 1612. Tariff Nomenclature and Rates of Export Duty. The provisions of Section 514 on Export Products Subject to Duty
and Rates of Presidential Decree No. 1464, otherwise known as the
Tariff and Customs Code of 1978, as amended, specifically providing
for the export products subject to duty and rates, shall still apply and
shall supplement this Act.

1

i

J9JC9B0M

635

•

Generally, the maximum rate for the duties shall not exceed
100% ad valorem.

•

Since ad valorem duties are based on the value of the goods, it is
important to know how the value of the goods are determined.

o

However, since the methods of valuation are generally
excluded from the coverage of bar exams, I'll just briefly
enumerate the methods and simply indicate the codal
provisions for reference.

J9JC9B0M

636

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES
O

There are six methods of valuing the articles which are
imported. These are actually listed in sequence, meaning if
the value cannot be determined using the first method, the
second method will be resorted to.14

1.

15

2.

Transaction value of identical goods (Section 702)16

3.

Transaction value of similar goods (Section 703)17

4.

Deductive value (Section 704)18

5.

Computed value (Section 705)19

6.

Fallback value (Section 706)20

Sec. 105. Effective Date of Rate of Import Duty. - Imported
goods shall be subject to the import duty rates under the applicable
tariff heading that are effective at the date of importation or
upon withdrawal from the warehouse for consumption. In case of

14Sec. 700. Sequential Application of Valuation Methods. - Imported goods
shall be valued in accordance with the provisions of Section 701 of this Act whenever
the conditions prescribed therein are fulfilled.
Where the customs value cannot be determined under the provisions of
Section 701 of this Act, it is to be determined by proceeding sequentially through
the succeeding sections hereof to the first such section under which the customs
value can be determined. Except as provided in Section 704 of this Act, It is only
when the customs value cannot be determined under the provisions of a particular
section that the provisions of the next section in the sequence can be used.
If the importer does not request that the order of Sections 704 and 705 of this Act
be reversed, the normal order of the sequence is to be followed. If the importer so
requests but it is impossible to determine the customs value under Section 705 of
this Act, the customs value shall be determined under Section 704.
When the customs value cannot be determined under Sections 701 through
705, It may be determined under Section 706 of this Act.
15Basically, the transaction value uses the price actually paid nr navable for
the goods when sold for export to the Philippines.
16Identical goods are those which are the same in all respects. There are
•minor differences but these differences do not Influence the price.
17Slmilar goods are those, which, although not alike in all respects, have like
characteristics and like component materials which enable them to perform the
same functions and to be commercially interchangeable.
18The deductive value shall be based on the unit price at which the imported
goods or identical or similar imported goods are sold in the Philippines, in the same
condition as when imported in the greatest aggregate quantity.
19Simply, the computed value is the amount or price when all the components
of the article are added up.
20The fallback value is determined using other reasonable means and on the
basis of data available in the Philippines.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

637

withdrawal from free zones for introduction to the customs territory,
the duty rate at the time of withdrawal shall be applicable on the
goods originally admitted, whether withdrawn in its original or
advanced form.

In case of goods sold at customs public auction, the duty rates at the
date of the auction, shall apply for purposes of implementing Section
1143(a) of this Act.
The rates to apply are those existing at the time of importation or
withdrawal from the warehouse for consumption.

o

But for those withdrawn from a free zone (like PEZA), the
duty rate at the time of withdrawal shall be applicable on the
goods originally admitted, whether these are withdrawn in its
original state or advanced form.

Special Duties

•

So, now that weTe done with ordinary duties, let's discuss special
duties.

•

The special duties are:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Dumping duties

Countervailing duties
Marking duties
Discriminatory duties

Safeguard measures

Dumping duties
R.A. 10863 (CMTA)

Sec. 711. Dumping Duty. - The provisions of Republic Act No.
8752, otherwise known as the "Anti-Dumping Act of 1999," are
hereby adopted.

R.A. 8752 (Anti-Dumping Act)
IRR, Section 2 (B) - "ANTI-DUMPING DUTY" refers to a special
duty imposed on the importation of a product into the Philippines at
less than its normal value when destined for domestic consumption
in the country of export or origin, it being the difference between the
export price and the normal value of such product.

Sec. 301. Anti-Dumping Duty. a. Whenever any product, commodity or article of commerce
imported into the Philippines at an export price less than its normal

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

638

value in the ordinary course of trade for the like product, commodity
or article destined for consumption in the exporting country is
causing or is threatening to cause material injury to a domestic
industry, or materially retarding the establishment of a domestic
industry, or materially retarding the establishment of a domestic
industry producing the like product, the Secretary of Trade and
Industry, in the case of non-agricultural product, commodity or
article, or the Secretary of Agriculture, in the case of agricultural
product, commodity or article (both of whom are hereinafter referred
to as the Secretary, as the case may be), after formal investigation
and affirmative finding of the Tariff Commission (hereinafter referred
to as the Commission), shall cause the imposition of an anti-dumping
duty equal to the margin of dumping on such product, commodity or
article and on like product, commodity or article thereafter imported
to the Philippines under similar circumstances, in addition to ordinary
duties, taxes and charges imposed by law on the imported product,
commodity or article. However, the anti-dumping duty may be less
than the margin if such lesser duty will be adequate to remove the
injury to the domestic industry. Even when all the requirements
for the imposition have been fulfilled, the decision whether or not
to impose a definitive anti-dumping duty remains the prerogative
of the Commission. It may consider, among others, the effect of
imposing an anti-dumping duty on the welfare of consumers and/or
the general public, and other related local industries.
X

•

X

X

Anti-dumping duty refers to a special duty imposed on the
importation of a product, commodity or article of commerce into
the Philippines at less than its normal value when destined for
domestic consumption in the exporting country, which is the
difference between the export price and the normal value of such
product, commodity or article.
o

A dumped import/product is a foreign article which is being
imported into, or sold or is likely to be sold for exportation
to or in the Philippines at a price less than the fair value,
the importation or sale of which might injure or retard the
establishment of an industry producing like goods in the
Philippines.

There has to be:

o

Dumping (selling at less than the fair value)

o

Injury

o

Causal relationship between dumping and injury

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

639

Countervailing duties
R.A. 10863 (CMTA)
Sec. 713. Countervailing Duty. — The provisions of Republic Act
No. 8751, otherwise known as "An Act Strengthening the Mechanisms
for the Imposition of Countervailing Duties on Imported Subsidized
Products, Commodities or Articles of Commerce in Order to Protect
Domestic Industries from Unfair Trade Competition, Amending for
the Purpose Section 302, Part 2, Title II, Book I of Presidential
Decree No. 1464," otherwise known as the "Tariff and Customs Code
of the Philippines, as Amended," are hereby adopted.
R.A. 8751 (Countervailing Duty Act)

Sec. 2(d) IRR "COUNTERVAILING DUTY" refers to a special duty
levied for the purpose of offsetting any kind or form of specific subsidy
bestowed directly or indirectly upon the exportation or manufacture
of any product. The countervailing duty shall be in addition to any
ordinary duties, taxes and charges imposed by law on such imported
product.
Sec. 302. Countervailing Duty. — Whenever any product,
commodity or article of commerce is granted directly or indirectly
by the government in the country of origin or exportation, any
kind or form of specific subsidy upon the production, manufacture
or exportation of such product, commodity or article, and the
importation of such subsidized product, commodity or article has
caused or threatens to cause material injury to a domestic industry
or has materially retarded the growth or prevents the establishment
of a domestic industry as determined by the Tariff Commission
(hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") the Secretary of Trade
and Industry, in the case of non-agricultural product, commodity or
article, or the Secretary of Agriculture, in the case of agricultural
product, commodity or article (both of whom are hereinafter simply
referred to as 'the Secretary/ as the case may be) shall issue a
department order imposing a countervailing duty equal to the
ascertained amount of the subsidy. The same levy shall be imposed
on the like product, commodity or article thereafter imported to the
Philippines under similar circumstances. The countervailing duty shall
be in addition to any ordinary duties, taxes and charges imposed by
law on such imported product, commodity or article.

This is a duty imposed on articles, upon the production,
manufacture or export of which anv subsidy is directly or
indirectly granted in the country of origin and/or exportation, and
the exportation of which into the Philippines will likely injure an
industry in the Philippines or retard the establishment of such

industry.
Subsidy refers to any specific assistance (e.g., financial
contribution, income or price support schemes) provided directly

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

640

or indirectly by the government of the country of export or origin
in respect of the product imported into the Philippines, which
confers a benefit to the foreign exporter or producer of said
product.

O

Examples of financial contributions are grants, soft loans,
guarantees and certain equity infusions, tax credits, and
goods and services provided by governments.

O

It can be an export subsidy, aimed at assisting exports,
or it can be a domestic subsidy, which provides assistance
irrespective of whether the product is exported or not.

There must be a causal link between the importation of the
subsidized product and
o

the material injury or the threat thereof, or

o

the material retardation of the growth of, or

o

the prevention of the establishment of,
■

the domestic industry involved.

Marking duties

Sec. 710. Marking of Imported Goods and Containers. — (A)
Marking of Goods. - Except as hereinafter provided, all goods of
foreign origin imported into the Philippines or their containers, as
provided in subsection (B) hereof shall be conspicuously marked
in any official language of the Philippines as legibly, indelibly and
permanently as the nature of the goods or container will permit
and in such manner as to Indicate to an ultimate purchaser In the
Philippines the name of the country of origin of the goods. Pursuant
thereto, the Commissioner shall, with the approval of the Secretary
of Finance:
(1) Determine the character of words and phrases or abbreviation
thereof which shall be acceptable as indicating the country of
origin and prescribe any reasonable method of marking, whether
by printing, stenciling, stamping, branding, labeling or by any other
reasonable method, and in a conspicuous place on the goods or
container where the marking shall appear;

(2) Require the addition of other words or symbols which may
be appropriate to prevent deception or mistake as to the origin of
the goods or as to the origin of any other goods with which such
imported goods is usually combined subsequent to importation but
before delivery to an ultimate purchaser; and

(3) Authorize the exception of any goods from the requirements of
marking if:

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

(i)

641

Such goods are incapable of being marked;

(ii) Such goods cannot be marked prior to shipment to the Philippines
without injury;

(iii) Such goods cannot be marked prior to shipment to the
Philippines, except at an expense economically prohibitive of their
importation;
(iv) The marking of a container of such goodswill reasonably indicate
the origin of such goods;
(v) Such goods are crude substances;
(vi) Such goods are imported for use by the importer and not
intended for sale in their imported or any other form;

(vii) Such goods are to be processed in the Philippines by the
importer or for the importer's account other than for the purpose
of concealing the origin of such goods and in such manner that any
mark contemplated by this section would necessarily be obliterated,
destroyed, or permanently concealed;

(viii) An ultimate purchaser, by reason of the character of such
goods or by reason of the circumstances of their importation, must
necessarily know the country of origin of such goods even though
they are not marked to indicate their origin;
(ix) Such goods were produced more than twenty (20) years prior to
their importation into the Philippines; or
(x) Such goods cannot be marked after importation except at an
expense which is economically prohibitive, and the failure to mark
the goods before importation was not due to any purpose of the
importer, producer, seller or shipper to avoid compliance with this
section.

(B) Marking of Containers. - Whenever goods are exempt under
paragraph (3) of subsection (A) of this section from the requirements
of marking, the immediate container, if any, of such goods, or such
other container or containers of such goods, shall be marked in such
manner as to indicate to an ultimate purchaser in the Philippines the
name of the country of origin of such goods in any official language
of the Philippines, subject to all provisions of this section, including
the same exceptions as are applicable to goods under paragraph (3)
of subsection (A).
(C) Pine for Failure to Mark. - If, at the time of importation any
good or its container, as provided in subsection (B) hereof, is not
marked in accordance with the requirements of this section, there
shall be levied, collected, and paid upon such good a marking duty of
five percent (5%) of dutiable value, which shall be deemed to have
accrued at the time of importation.

(D) Release Withheld Until Marked. - No imported goods held in
customs custody for inspection, examination, or assessment shall be

J9JC9B0M

642

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

released until such goods or their containers shall have been marked
in accordance with the requirements of this section and until the
amount of duty estimated to be payable under subsection (C) of this
section shall have been deposited.

(E) The failure or refusal of the owner or importer to mark the goods
as herein required within a period of thirty (30) days after due notice
shall constitute as an act of abandonment of said goods and their
disposition shall be governed by the provisions of this Act relative to
abandonment of imported goods.
•

This a duty imposed on imported articles or containers which
have not been properly marked in any official language of the
Philippines as to indicate the name of the country, planet or origin
of the article.

•

The purpose is to prevent the deception of consumers.

Retaliatory/discriminatory duties

Sec. 714. Discrimination by Foreign Countries. - Without
prejudice to the Philippine commitment in any ratified international
agreements or treaty, the following recourse shall be applicable in
case of discrimination by foreign countries:

(a) When the President finds that the public interest will be served
thereby, the President shall, by proclamation, specify and declare
new or additional duties in an amount not exceeding one hundred
percent (100%) ad valorem upon goods wholly or in part the growth
or product of, or imported in a vessel of any foreign country whenever
the President shall find as a fact that such country:
(1) Imposes, directly or Indirectly, upon the disposition or
transportation in transit or through re-exportation from such country
of any goods wholly or in part the growth or product of the Philippines,
any unreasonable charge, exaction, regulation or limitation which is
not equally enforced upon the like goods of every foreign country; or
(2) Discriminates in fact against the commerce of the Philippines,
directly or indirectly, by law or administrative regulation or practice,
by or in respect to any customs, tonnage, or port duty, fee,
charge, exaction, classification, regulation, condition, restriction
or prohibition, in such manner as to place the commerce of the
Philippines at a disadvantage compared with the commerce of any
foreign country.

(b) If at any time the President shall find it to be a fact that any
foreign country has not only discriminated against the commerce
of the Philippines, as aforesaid, but has, after the issuance of
a proclamation as authorized in subsection (a) of this section,
maintained or increased its said discrimination against the commerce
of the Philippines, the President is hereby authorized, if deemed

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

643

consistent with the interests of the Philippines and of public interest,
to issue a further proclamation directing that such product of said
country or such goods imported in their vessels be excluded from
importation into the Philippines.
(c) Any proclamation issued by the President under this section
shall, if the President deems it consistent with the interest of the
Philippines, extend to the whole of any foreign country or may be
confined to any subdivision or subdivisions thereof: Provided, That
the President may, whenever the public interest requires, suspend,
revoke, supplement or amend any such proclamation.
(d) All goods imported contrary to the provisions of this section shall
be forfeited to the government of the Philippines and shall be liable
to be seized, prosecuted and condemned in like manner and under
the same regulations, restrictions, and provisions as may from time
to time be established for the recovery, collection, distribution, and
remission or forfeiture to the government by the tariff and customs
laws. Whenever the provision of this section shall be applicable
to importations into the Philippines of goods wholly or in part the
growth or product of any foreign country, it shall be applicable
thereto, whether such goods are imported directly or indirectly.

(e) It shall be the duty of the Commission to ascertain and at all
times be informed whether any of the discriminations against the
commerce of the Philippines enumerated in subsections (a) and
(b) of this section are practiced by any country; and if and when
such discriminatory acts are disclosed, it shall be the duty of the
Commission to bring the matter to the attention of the President,
and to recommend measures to address such discriminatory acts.
(f) The Secretary of Finance shall make such rules and regulations
as are necessary for the execution of a proclamation that the
President may issue in accordance with the provisions of this section.

This is a duty imposed upon articles of a foreign country which
discriminates against Philippine commerce in such a manner to
place it a disadvantage compared with the commerce of another
foreign country

Safeguard measures
Sec. 712. Safeguard Duty. - The provisions of Republic Act No.
8800, otherwise known as the "Safeguard Measures Act," are hereby
adopted.
R.A. 8800 (Safeguard Measures Act)

SEC. 5. Conditions for the Application of General Safeguard
Measures. - The Secretary shall apply a general safeguard measure
upon a positive final determination of the Commission that a product

J9JC9B0M

644

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

is being imported into the country in increased quantities, whether
absolute or relative to the domestic production, as to be a substantial
cause of serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry;
however, in the case of non-agricultural products, the Secretary shall
first establish that the application of such safeguard measures will
be in the public interest.

A safeguard measure can be imposed when a product is being
imported into the Philippines in increased quantities and is
causing or threatens serious injury to the domestic industry.
Flexible Tariff Clause

Sec. 1608. Flexible Clause. - (a) In the interest of the general
welfare and national security, and, subject to the limitations
prescribed under this Act, the President, upon the recommendation
of the NEDA, is hereby empowered to:

(1) Increase, reduce, or remove existing rates of import duty
including any necessary change in classification. The existing rates
may be increased or decreased to any level, in one or several stages,
but in no case shall the increased rate of import duty be higher than
a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) ad valorem-,
(2) Establish import quotas or ban imports of any commodity, as
may be necessary; and
(3) Impose an additional duty on all imports not exceeding ten
percent (10%) ad valorem whenever necessary: Provided, That upon
periodic investigations by the Commission and recommendation of
the NEDA, the President may cause a gradual reduction of rates
of import duty granted in Section 1611 of this Act, including those
subsequently granted pursuant to this section.

(b) Before any recommendation is submitted to the President by
the NEDA pursuant to the provisions of this section, except in the
imposition of an additional duty not exceeding ten percent (10%) ad
valorem, the Commission shall conduct an investigation and shall hold
public hearings wherein interested parties shall be afforded reasonable
opportunity to be present, to produce evidence and to be heard. The
Commission shall also hear the views and recommendations of any
government office, agency, or instrumentality. The Commission shall
submit its findings and recommendations to the NEDA within thirty
(c) The power of the President to increase or decrease rates of
import duty within the limits fixed in subsection (a) hereof shall
Include the authority to modify the form of duty. In modifying the
form of duty, the corresponding ad valorem or specific equivalents of
the duly with respect to imports from the principal competing foreign

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

645

country for the most recent representative period shall be used as
basis.
(d) Any order issued by the President pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall take effect thirty (30) days after promulgation,
except in the imposition of additional duty not exceeding ten percent
(10%) ad valorem which shall take effect at the discretion of the
President.

(e) The power delegated to the President as provided for in this
section shall be exercised only when Congress is not in session.
(f) The power herein delegated may be withdrawn or terminated by
Congress through a joint resolution.
The NEDA shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to carry
out the provisions of this section.

The President is empowered:
o

to increase, reduce or remove existing rates of import duty;

o

to establish import quota or to ban imports of any commodity,
as may be necessary; and

o

to impose an additional duty on all imports not exceeding
10% ad valorem whenever necessary.
■

B.

The President may do this in the interest of national
economy, general welfare and/or national security, and
upon recommendation of the NEDA.

Requirements of Importation

Beginning and ending of importation
Sec. 103. When Importation Begins and Deemed Terminated.
- Importation begins when the carrying vessel or aircraft enters the
Philippine territory with the intention to unload therein. Importation
is deemed terminated when:
(a) The duties, taxes and other charges due upon the goods have
been paid or secured to be paid, at the port of entry unless the goods
are free from duties, taxes and other charges and legal permit for
withdrawal has been granted; or
(b) In case the goods are deemed free of duties, taxes and other
charges, the goods have legally left the jurisdiction of the Bureau.

Sec. 115. Treatment of Importation. - Imported goods shall
be deemed "entered" in the Philippines for consumption when the
goods declaration is electronically lodged, together with any required
supporting documents, with the pertinent customs office.

l

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

646

•

Importation begins upon entry into the jurisdiction
Philippines with the intention to unload.

O

of the

Note that imported goods are deemed "entered" when the
goods declaration is electronically lodged with the customs
office.

It is terminated upon:

•

O

payment of the duties, taxes, and other charges and the legal
permit for withdrawal has been granted; or

O

when the goods have left the jurisdiction of the Bureau, if
these are tax or duty free.

The importance of knowing what importation is lies in the doctrine
of primary jurisdiction.
O

From the time importation begins until its termination, the
Bureau of Customs has exclusive jurisdiction, to the exclusion
of everyone else.

Obligations of importer
Cargo Manifest

Sec. 1204. Manifest Required of Vessel from Foreign Port. Every vessel from a foreign port must have on board a complete
manifest of all its cargoes.
All cargoes intended to be landed at a port in the Philippines must be
described in separate manifests for each port of call. Each manifest
shall include the port of departure and the port of delivery with, the
marks, numbers, quantity, and description of the packages and the
names of the consignees. Every vessel from a foreign port must
have on board complete manifests of passengers and baggage, In
the prescribed form, setting forth the destination and all particulars
required by immigration laws. Every vessel shall present to the
proper customs officers upon arrival in ports of the Philippines a
complete list of all sea stores then on board. If the vessel does not
carry cargo or passengers, the manifest must show that no cargo
or passenger is carried from the port of departure to the port of
destination in the Philippines.
A true and complete copy of the cargo manifest shall be electronically
sent in advance by the shipping company, NVOCC, freight forwarder,
cargo consolidator, or their agents within the cut-off period as may
be determined by the Bureau before the arrival of the carrying vessel
at the port of entry. Upon arrival of the carrying vessel, the shipping
company, NVOCC, freight forwarder, cargo consolidator, or their
agents shall provide two (2) hard copies of the cargo manifest to the
Bureau in case the port of entry is either the Port of Manila (PoM)

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

647

or the Manila International Container Port (MICP), and one (1) copy
only in the case of the other ports of entry.

A cargo manifest shall in no case be changed or altered after entry
of vessel, except by means of an amendment, under oath, by the
master, consignee or agent thereof, which shall be attached to the
original manifest: Provided, That after the invoice and/or goods
declaration covering an importation have been received and recorded
in the office of the appraiser, no amendment of the manifest shall be
allowed, except when it is obvious that a clerical error or any other
discrepancy has been committed in the preparation of the manifest,
without any fraudulent intent, the discovery of which would not
have been made until after examination of the importation has been
completed.

Sec. 1205. Translation of Manifest. - The cargo manifest and
each copy thereof shall be accompanied by a translation in English,
if originally written in another language.

Import Entry

Sec. 401. Importations Subject to Goods Decla-ration. (sic) Unless otherwise provided for in this Act, all imported goods shall be
subject to the lodgement of a goods declaration. A goods declaration
may be for consumption, for customs bonded warehousing, for
admission, for conditional importation, or for customs transit.
Sec. 102 (y) Goods Declaration refers to a statement made in the
manner prescribed by the Bureau and other appropriate agencies, by
which the persons concerned indicate the procedure to be observed
In the application for the entry or admission of imported goods and
the particulars of which the customs administration shall require;
All imported goods are subject to the lodgement of a goods
declaration.

o

Lodgement is a fancy word referring to the registration of a
goods declaration with the Bureau.

Declaration of correct weight or value
Sec. 107. Rights and Responsibilities of the Decla-rant.
(sic) - The declarant shall be responsible for the accuracy of the
goods declaration and for the payment of all duties, taxes and
other charges due on the Imported goods. The licensed customs
broker shall likewise be responsible for the accuracy of the
goods declaration but shall not be responsible for the payment
of duties, taxes and other charges due on the imported goods.

1

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

648

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

The declarant shall sign the goods declaration, even when assisted
by a licensed customs broker, who shall likewise sign the goods
declaration.
Sec. 108. Penalties for Errors in Goods Declaration. - The
Bureau shall not impose substantial penalties for errors when such
errors are inadvertent and there was no fraudulent intent or gross
negligence in the commission thereof: Provided, That in order to
discourage repetition of such errors, a penalty may be imposed but
shall not be excessive.
Sec. 411. Contents of Goods Declaration. - Goods declaration
shall contain the names of the consignee, importing vessel or aircraft
port of departure, port of destination and date of arrival, the number
and marks of packages, or the quantity, if in bulk, the nature and
correct commodity description of the goods contained therein, its
value as set forth in a proper invoice, and such other information as
may be required by rules and regulations. Where the declarant does
not have all the information required to make the goods declaration,
a provisional or incomplete goods declaration shall, for certain cases
and for reasons deemed valid by the Bureau, be allowed to be lodged:
Provided, That it contains the particulars deemed necessary by the
Bureau for the acceptance of the entry filed and that the declarant
undertakes to complete it within forty-five (45) days from the filing
of the provisional goods declaration in accordance with Section 403
of this Act.

Sec. 412. Statements to be Provided in the Goods Declaration.
- No entry of imported goods shall be allowed unless the goods
declaration has been lodged with the Bureau. The goods declaration
shall, under penalties of falsification or perjury, contain the following
statements:
(a) The invoice and goods declaration contain an accurate and
faithful account of the prices paid or payable for the goods and other
adjustments to the price actually paid or payable, and that nothing
has been omitted therefrom or concealed whereby the government
of the Republic of the Philippines might be defrauded of any part of
the duties and taxes lawfully due on the goods; and

(b) To the best of the declarant's information and belief, all the
invoices and bills of lading or airway bills relating to the goods are
the only ones in existence relating to the importation in question,
and that these documents are in the same state as when they were
received by the declarant, and the declaration thereon are in all
respects genuine and true.
Goods declaration shall be submitted electronically pursuant
to Republic Act No. 8792, otherwise known as the "Electronic
Commerce Act of 2000." Such declarations when printed and certified
by a competent customs officer as a faithful reproduction of the
electronic submission shall be considered as actionable documents
for purposes of prosecuting a declarant if the declarations are found
to be fraudulent.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

649

Sec. 413. Description of Goods. - Under such terms and conditions
prescribed under the rules and regulations, the description of the
goods in the goods declaration must be sufficient and specific in
detail to enable the goods to be identified for customs valuation,
statistical purposes, and classification to the appropriate tariff
heading and subheading in the currency of the invoice, and in such
other particulars necessary for the proper assessment and collection
of duties and taxes. The quantity and value of each of the several
classes of goods shall be separately declared according to their
respective headings or subheadings and the totals of each heading
or subheading shall be duly shown.

Liability for payment of duties
Sec. 404. Owner of Imported Goods. - All goods imported into
the Philippines shall be deemed to be the property of the consignee
or the holder of the bill of lading, airway bill or other equivalent
transport document if duly endorsed by the consignee therein, or, if
consigned to order, duly endorsed by the consignor. The underwriters
of abandoned goods and the salvors of goods saved from wreck at
sea, coast, or in any area of the Philippines, may be regarded as the
consignees.

Sec. 405. Liability of Importer for Duties and Taxes. - Unless
relieved by laws or regulations, the liability for duties, taxes, fees,
and other charges attached to importation constitutes a personal debt
due and demandable against the importer in favor of the government
and shall be discharged only upon payment of duties, taxes, fees and
other charges. It also constitutes a lien on the imported goods which
may be enforced while such goods are under customs' custody.

The person to whom the imported articles are consigned are
liable for the duties. These include:

•

o

Holder of a bill of lading duly indorsed by the consignee;

o

Underwriters of abandoned articles;

o

Salvors of articles saved from a wreck at sea along the coast
or in any area of the Philippines.

The liability of the importer constitutes a personal debt due from
the importer to the government.
o

It can only be discharged by full payment.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

650

Liquidation of duties

Sec. 424. Duty of Customs Officer Tasked to Assess Imported
Goods. - For purposes of assessing duties and taxes on imported
goods, the customs officer shall classify, value, and determine the
duties and taxes to be paid. The customs officer shall prepare and
submit an assessment report as established under this Act.
Sec. 429. Final Assessment. - Assessment shall be deemed final
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of assessment by the
importer or consignee.
Sec. 430. Period of Limitation. - In the absence of fraud and when
the goods have been finally assessed and released, the assessment
shall be conclusive upon all parties three (3) years from the date of
final payment of duties and taxes, or upon completion of the post
clearance audit.

Sec. 431. Release of Goods after Payment of Duties and Taxes.
- Goods declared shall be released when duties and taxes and other
lawful charges have been paid or secured and all the pertinent laws,
rules and regulations have been complied with.

•

Liquidation is another fancy term that basically means the
ascertainment of the duties that have to be paid on the imported

goods.
Keeping of records

Sec. 1003. Requirement to Keep Records. (a) All importers are required to keep at their principal place of
business, in the manner prescribed by regulations to be issued by
the Commissioner and for a period of three (3) years from the date of
final payment of duties and taxes or customs clearance, as the case
may be, all records pertaining to the ordinary course of business and
to any activity or information contained in the records required by
this title in connection with any such activity.

For purposes of the post clearance audit and Section 1005 of this Act,
the term importer shall include the following:
(1) Importer-of-record or consignee, owner or declarant, or a party
who:

(i) Imports goods into the Philippines or withdraws such goods into
the Philippine customs territory for consumption or warehousing;
files a claim for refund or drawback;; or transports or stores such
goods carried or held under security; or

(if) Knowingly causes the importation or transportation or storage of
imported goods referred to above, or the filing of refund or drawback
claim.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

651

(2) An agent of any party described in paragraph (1); or

(3) A person whose activities require the filing of a goods declaration.
A person ordering imported goods from a local importer or supplier
in a domestic transaction shall be exempted from the requirements
imposed by this section unless:

(1) The terms and conditions of the importation are controlled by
the person placing the order; or
(2) The circumstances and nature of the relationship between the
person placing the order and the importer or supplier are such that
the former may be considered as the beneficial or true owner of the
imported goods; or
(3) The person placing the order had prior knowledge that they will
be used in the manufacture or production of the imported goods.
(b) All parties engaged in customs clearance and processing are
required to keep at their principal place of business, in the manner
prescribed by regulations to be issued by the Commissioner and
for a period of three (3) years from the date of filing of the goods
declaration, copies of the abovementioned records covering the
transactions handled.

(c) Locators or persons authorized to bring imported goods into
free zones, such as the special economic zones and free ports, are
required to keep subject-records of all its activities, including in
whole or in part, records on imported goods withdrawn from said
zones into the customs territory for a period of three (3) years from
the date of filing of the goods declaration.
Failure to keep the records required by this Act shall constitute
a waiver of this right to contest the results of the audit based on
records kept by the Bureau.

•

All importers are required to keep at their principal place of
business all the records of their importations and/or books of
accounts, business and computers systems and all customs
commercial date including payment records relevant for the
verification of the accuracy of the transaction value declared by
importers/customs brokers on the import entry.

•

This needs to be done for three years from the date of final
payment of duties and taxes or customs clearance.

•

Importers/customs brokers shall allow any customs officer
authorized by the BOC to enter during office hours into the offices
to conduct audit examination, inspection, verification and/or
investigation.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

652

Post-clearance audit
Sec. 1000. Audit and Examination of Records. - Within three (3)
years from the date of final payment of duties and taxes or customs
clearance, as the case may be, the Bureau may conduct an audit
examination, inspection, verification, and investigation of records
pertaining to any goods declaration, which shall include statements,
declarations, documents, and electronically generated or machine
readable data, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of
the goods declaration and determining the liability of the importer
for duties, taxes and other charges, including any fine or penalty, to
ensure compliance with this Act.

The Bureau has three years from the date of final payment
of duties and taxes or customs clearance to conduct an audit
examination of records pertaining to any goods declaration.

On October 15, 2005, ABC Corp, imported 1,000 kilos of steel ingots
and paid customs duties and VAT to the Bureau of Customs on the
importation. On February 17, 2009, the Bureau of Customs, citing
provisions of the Tariff and Customs Code on post-audit, investigated
and assessed ABC Corp, for deficiency customs duties and VAT.

Is the Bureau of Customs correct? (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: The Bureau of Customs is wrong. Taxpayers are
mandated to keep their books and records for 3 years from date
of importation for post-audit purposes. In this case, more than 3
years have elapsed since importation. Hence, the BOC can no longer
conduct post-audit investigations against the taxpayer.

C. Accrual and Payment of Tax and Duties
General rule

Sec. 104. When Duty and Tax are Due on Imported Goods.
- Except as otherwise provided for in this Act or in other laws, all
goods, when imported into the Philippines, shall be subject to duty
upon importation, including goods previously exported from the
Philippines.
Unpaid duties, taxes and other charges, shall incur legal interest of
twenty percent (20%) per annum computed from the date of final
assessment under Section 429 of this Act, when payment becomes
due and demandable. The legal interest shall likewise accrue on any
fine or penalty imposed.

■

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

653

Upon payment of the duties, taxes and other charges, the Bureau
shall issue the necessary receipt or document as proof of such
payment.

Sec. 406. Importations by the Government. — Except those
provided for in Section 800 of this Act, all importations by the
government for its own use or that of its subordinate branches or
instrumentalities, or corporations, agencies or instrumentalities
owned or controlled by the government, shall be subject to the
duties, taxes, fees and other charges under this Act.
General rule: all imported articles are subject to duties.

o

o

This even includes:

■

Goods previously exported; and

■

Importations by the government.

The exceptions are:
De minimis importations (small value importations);

Conditionally-free importations; and

Relief consignment.
De minimis Importations

Sec. 423. Determination of the De Minimis Value. - No duties
and taxes shall be collected on goods with an FOB or FCA value of
ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) or below. The Secretary of Finance
shall adjust the de minimis value as provided herein every three (3)
years after the effectivity of this Act. The value herein stated shall
be adjusted to its present value using the CPI, as published by the
PSA.
If the value of the goods are PIO,000 or below, they are dutyfree.
Conditionally-free importations
Sec. 800. Conditionally Tax and/or Duty-Exempt Importation.
- The following goods shall be exempt from the payment of import
duties upon compliance with the formalities prescribed in the
regulations which shall be promulgated by the Commissioner with
the approval of the Secretary of Finance: Provided, That goods sold,
bartered, hired or used for purposes other than what they were

i
I

J9JC9B0M

654

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

intended for and without prior payment of the duty, tax or other
charges which would have been due and payable at the time of entry
if the goods had been entered without the benefit of this section,
shall be subject to forfeiture and the importation shall constitute a
fraudulent practice against customs laws: Provided, however, That
a sale pursuant to a judicial order or in liquidation of the estate of
a deceased person shall not be subject to the preceding proviso,
without prejudice to the payment of duties, taxes and other charges:
Provided, further, That the President may, upon the recommendation
of the Secretary of Finance, suspend, disallow or completely
withdraw, in whole or in part, any conditionally free importation
under this section:

(a) Aquatic products such as fishes, crustaceans, mollusks, marine
animals, seaweeds, fish oil, roe, caught or gathered by fishing
vessels of Philippine registry: Provided, That they are imported in
such vessels or in crafts attached thereto: Provided, however, That
they have not been landed in any foreign territory or, if so landed,
that they have been landed solely for transshipment without having
been advanced in condition;

(b) Equipment for use in the salvage of vessels or aircrafts, not
available locally, upon identification and the giving of a security in
an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the ascertained
duties, taxes and other charges thereon, conditioned for the
exportation thereof or payment of corresponding duties, taxes and
other charges within six (6) months from the date of acceptance of
the goods declaration: Provided, That the Bureau may extend the
time for exportation or payment of duties, taxes and other charges
for a term not exceeding six (6) months from the expiration of the
original period;
(c) Cost of repairs, excluding the value of the goods used, made In
foreign countries upon vessels or aircraft documented, registered or
licensed in the Philippines, upon proof satisfactory to the Bureau:
(1) that adequate facilities for such repairs are not afforded in the
Philippines; or (2) that such vessels or aircrafts, while In the regular
course of their voyage or flight, were compelled by stress of weather
or other casualty to put into a foreign port to make such repairs in
order to secure the safety, seaworthiness, or airworthiness of the
vessels or aircrafts to enable them to reach their port of destination;
(d) Goods brought into the Philippines for repair, processing or
reconditioning to be reexported upon completion of the repair,
processing or reconditioning: Provided, That the Bureau shall require
security equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the duties, taxes
and other charges thereon, conditioned for the exportation thereof or
payment of the corresponding duties, taxes and other charges within
six (6) months from the date of acceptance of the goods declaration;
(e) Medals, badges, cups, and other small goods bestowed as
trophies or prizes, or those received or accepted as honorary
distinction;

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

655

(f) Personal and household effects belonging to returning residents
including household appliances, jewelry, precious stones, and other
goods of luxury which were formally declared and listed before
departure and identified under oath before the District Collector
when exported from the Philippines by such returning residents
upon their departure therefrom or during their stay abroad; personal
and household effects including wearing apparel, goods of personal
adornment, toilet goods, instruments related to one's profession and
analogous personal or household effects, excluding luxury items,
vehicles, watercrafts, aircrafts and animals purchased in foreign
countries by residents of the Philippines which were necessary,
appropriate, and normally used for their comfort and convenience
during their stay abroad, accompanying them on their return, or
arriving within a reasonable time which, barring unforeseen and
fortuitous events, in no case shall exceed sixty (60) days after the
owner's return.
For purposes of this section, the phrase "returning residents" shall
refer to nationals who have stayed in a foreign country for a period
of at least six (6) months. Returning residents shall have tax and
duty exemption on personal and household effects: Provided, That:

(1) It shall not be in commercial quantities;
(2) It is not intended for barter, sale or for hire; and
(3) Limited to the FCA or FOB value of:
(i) Three hundred fifty thousand pesos (P350,000.00) for those
who have stayed in a foreign country for at least ten (10) years
and have not availed of this privilege within ten (10) years prior to
returning resident's arrival;

(11) Two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250,000.00) for those who
have stayed in a foreign country for a period of at least five (5) but
not more than ten (10) years and have not availed of this privilege
within five (5) years prior to returning resident's arrival; or
(Hi) One hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000.00) for those who
have stayed in a foreign country for a period of less than five (5)
years and have not availed of this privilege within six (6) months
prior to returning resident's arrival.
Any amount in excess of the above-stated threshold shall be subject
to the corresponding duties and taxes under this Act.

Every three (3) years after the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance shall adjust the amount herein stated to its present value
using the CPI as published by the PSA.
In addition to the privileges granted under the immediately preceding
paragraph, returning Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) shall have
the privilege to bring in, tax and duty-free, home appliances and
other durables, limited to one of every kind once in a given calendar

i

J9JC9B0M

656

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

year accompanying them on their return, or arriving within a
reasonable time which, barring unforeseen and fortuitous events,
in no case shall exceed sixty (60) days after every returning OFW's
return upon presentation of their original passport at the port of
entry: Provided, That any amount in excess of FCA value of one
hundred fifty thousand pesos (Pl.50,000.00) for personal and
household effects or of the number of duty-free appliances as
provided for under this section, shall be subject to the corresponding
taxes and duties: Provided, further, That every three (3) years after
the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary of Finance shall adjust the
amount herein stated to its present value using the CPI as published
by the PSA;
(g) Residents of the Philippines, OFWs or other Filipinos while
residing abroad or upon their return to the Philippines shall be allowed
to bring in or send to their families or relatives in the Philippines
baiikbayan boxes which shall be exempt from applicable duties and
taxes imposed under the NIRC of 1997, as amended: Provided, That
baiikbayan boxes shall contain personal and household effects only
and shall neither be in commercial quantities nor intended for barter,
sale or for hire and that the FCA value of which shall not exceed one
hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000.00): Provided, further, That
every three (3) years after the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance shall adjust the amount herein stated to its present
value using the CPI as published by the PSA: Provided, finally, That
residents of the Philippines, OFWs or other Filipinos can only avail of
this privilege up to three (3) times in a calendar year. Any amount
in excess of the allowable non-dutiable value shall be subject to the
applicable duties and taxes;

(1) For purposes of this Act, OFWs refer to holders of valid
passports duly issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA) and certified by the Department of Labor and Employment
(DOLE) or the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration
(POEA) for overseas employment purposes. They cover all
Filipinos, working in a foreign country under employment
contracts, regardless of their professions, skills or employment
status in a foreign country; and (2) Calendar Year refers to the
period from January 1 to December 31.

(h) Wearing apparel, goods of personal adornment, toilet goods,
portable tools and Instruments, theatrical costumes and similar
effects accompanying travelers, or tourists, or arriving within a
reasonable time before or after their arrival in the Philippines,
which, are necessary and appropriate for the wear and use of such
persons according to the nature of the journey, their comfort and
convenience: Provided, That this exemption shall not apply to goods
intended for other persons or for barter, sale or hire: Provided,
however, That the Bureau may require either a written commitment
or a security in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the ascertained duties, taxes and other charges thereon, conditioned
for the exportation thereof or payment of the corresponding duties,
taxes and other charges within three (3) months from the date of

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

657

acceptance of the goods declaration: Provided, further, That the
Bureau may extend the time for exportation or payment of duties,
taxes and other charges for a term not exceeding three (3) months
from the expiration of the original period.

Personal and household effects and vehicles belonging to foreign
consultants and experts hired by, or rendering service to, the
government, and their staff or personnel and families accompanying
them or arriving within a reasonable time before or after their arrival
in the Philippines, in quantities and of the kind necessary and suitable
to the profession, rank or position of the person importing said
items, for their own use and not for barter, sale or hire: Provided,
That the Bureau may require either a written commitment or a
security in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the
ascertained duties, taxes and other charges thereon, upon the goods
classified under this subsection; conditioned for the exportation
thereof or payment of the corresponding duties, taxes and other
charges within three (3) months after the expiration of their term or
contract: Provided, however, That the Bureau may extend the time
for exportation or payment of duties, taxes and other charges for
a term not exceeding three (3) months from the expiration of the
original period;

(i) Professional instruments and implements, tools of trade,
occupation or employment, wearing apparel, domestic animals,
and personal and household effects belonging to persons coming to
settle in the Philippines or Filipinos or their families and descendants
who are now residents or citizens of other countries, such parties
hereinafter referred to as overseas Filipinos, in quantities and of
the class suitable to the profession, rank or position of the persons
importing said items, for their own use and not for barter or sale,
accompanying such persons, or arriving within a reasonable time:
Provided, That the Bureau may, upon the production of satisfactory
evidence that such persons are actually coming to settle in the
Philippines and that the goods are brought from their former place
of abode, exempt such goods from the payment of duties and taxes:
Provided, further, That vehicles, vessels, aircrafts, machineries and
other similar goods for use in manufacture, shall not fall within this
classification and shall therefore be subject to duties, taxes and
other charges;
(j) Goods used exclusively for public entertainment, and for display
in public expositions, or for exhibition or competition for prizes, and
devices for projecting pictures and parts and appurtenances thereof,
upon identification, examination, and appraisal and the giving of a
security in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the
ascertained duties, taxes and other charges thereon, conditioned
for exportation thereof or payment of the corresponding duties,
taxes and other charges within three (3) months from the date of
acceptance of the goods declaration: Provided, That the Bureau may
extend the time for exportation or payment of duties, taxes and
other charges for a term not exceeding three (3) months from the

I
I

J9JC9B0M

658

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

expiration of the original period; and technical and scientific films
when imported by technical, cultural and scientific institutions, and
not to be exhibited for profit: Provided, further, That if any of the
films is exhibited for profit, the proceeds therefrom shall be subject
to confiscation, in addition to the penalty provide under this Act;
(k) Goods brought by foreign film producers directly and exclusively
used for mailing or recording motion picture films on location in the
Philippines, upon their identification, examination and appraisal and
the giving of a security in an amount equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the ascertained duties, taxes and other charges thereon,
conditioned for exportation thereof or payment of the corresponding
duties, taxes and other charges within three (3) months from the
date of acceptance of the goods declaration, unless extended by
the District Collector for another three (3) months; photographic
and cinematographic films, underdeveloped, exposed outside the
Philippines by resident Filipino citizens or by producing companies
of Philippine registry where the principal actors and artists employed
for the production are Filipinos, upon affidavit by the importer and
identification that such exposed films are the same films previously
exported from the Philippines. As used in this paragraph, the terms
"actors" and "artists" include the persons operating the photographic
camera or other photographic and sound recording apparatus by
which the film is made;

(l) Importations for the official use of foreign embassies, legations
and other agencies of foreign governments: Provided, That those
foreign countries accord like privileges to corresponding agencies
of the Philippines. Goods imported for the personal or family use
of members and attaches of foreign embassies, legations, consular
officers and other representatives of foreign governments: Provided,
however, That such privilege shall be accorded under special
agreements between, the Philippines and the countries which they
represent: Provided, further, That the privilege may be granted only
upon specific instructions of the Secretary of Finance pursuant to an
official request of the DFA on behalf of members or attaches of foreign
embassies, legations, consular officers and other representatives of
foreign governments.
(m) Imported goods donated to or, for the account of the Philippine
government or any duly registered relief organization, not operated
for profit, for free distribution among the needy, upon certification
by the DSWD or the Department of Education (DepED), or the
Department of Health (DOH), as the case may be;

(n) Containers, holders and other similar receptacles of any material
including kraft paper bags for locally manufactured cement for export,
including corrugated boxes for bananas, mangoes, pineapples and
other fresh fruits for export, except other containers made of paper,
paperboard and textile fabrics, which are of such character as to be
readily identifiable and/or reusable for shipment or transportation of
goods shall be delivered to the importer thereof upon identification,

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

659

examination and appraisal and the giving of a security in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the ascertained duties,
taxes and other charges thereon, within six (6) months from the
date of acceptance of the goods declaration;

(o) Supplies which are necessary for the reasonable requirements
of the vessel or aircraft in its voyage or flight outside the Philippines,
including goods transferred from a bonded warehouse in any Customs
District to any vessel or aircraft engaged in foreign trade, for use or
consumption of the passengers or its crew on board such vessel
or aircraft as sea or air stores; or goods purchased abroad for sale
on board a vessel or aircraft as saloon stores or air store supplies:
Provided, That any surplus or excess of such vessel or aircraft
supplies arriving from foreign ports or airports shall be dutiable;

I

i

!

(p) Goods and salvage from, vessels recovered after a period of
two (2) years from the date of filing the marine protest or the time
when the vessel was wrecked or abandoned, or parts of a foreign
vessel or its equipment, wrecked or abandoned in Philippine waters
or elsewhere: Provided, That goods and salvage recovered within the
said period of two (2) years shall be dutiable;

(q) Coffins or urns containing human remains, bones or ashes, used
personal and household effects (not merchandise) of the deceased
person, except vehicles, the FCA value of which does not exceed one
hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000.00), upon identification as
such: Provided, That every three (3) years after the effectivity of this
Act, the value herein stated shall be adjusted to its present value
using the CPI as published by the PSA;
(r) Samples of the kind, in such quantity and of such dimension or
construction as to render them unsaleable or of no commercial value;
models not adapted for practical use; and samples of medicines,
properly marked "sample-sale punishable by law," for the purpose
of introducing new goods In the Philippine market and imported
only once in a quantity sufficient for such purpose by a person duly
registered and identified to be engaged in that trade: Provided, That
importations under this subsection shall be previously authorized
by the Secretary of Finance: Provided, however, That importation
of sample medicines shall have been previously authorized by the
Secretary of Health, and that such samples are new medicines not
available In the Philippines; Provided, further, That samples not
previously authorized or properly marked in accordance with this
section shall be levied the corresponding tariff duty.
Commercial samples, except those that are not readily and easily
identifiable as in the case of precious and semi-precious stones, cut
or uncut, and jewelry set with precious or semi-precious stones, the
value of any single importation of which does not exceed FCA value
of fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) upon the giving of a security in
an amount equal to the ascertained duties, taxes and other charges
thereon, conditioned for the exportation of said samples within three
^3) months from the date of the acceptance of the goods declaration

4

■

J9JC9B0M

660

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

or in default thereof, the payment of the corresponding duties, taxes
and other charges: Provided, That if the FCA value of any single
consignment of such commercial samples exceeds fifty thousand
pesos (P50,000.00), the importer thereof may select any portion
of the same not exceeding the FCA value of fifty thousand pesos
(P50,000.00) for entry under the provision of this subsection, and
the excess of the consignment may be entered in bond, or for
consumption, as the importer may elect: Provided, further, That
every three (3) years after the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance shall adjust the amount herein stated to its present value
using the CPI as published by the PSA.

(s) Animals, except race horses, and plants for scientific,
experimental propagation or breeding, and for other botanical,
zoological and national defense purposes: Provided, That no live trees,
shoots, plants, moss and bulbs, tubers and seeds for propagation
purposes may be imported under, this section, except by order of
the government or other duly authorized institutions: Provided,
however, That the free entry of animals for breeding purposes shall
be restricted to animals of recognized breed, duly registered in the
record or registry established for that breed, and certified as such by
the Bureau of Animal Industry (BAI):
Provided, further, That the certification of such record, and pedigree
of such animal duly authenticated by the proper custodian of such
record or registry, shall be submitted to the District Collector,
together with the affidavit of the owner or importer that such animal
is the animal described in said certificate of record and pedigree:
Provided, finally, That the animals and plants are certified by the
NEDA as necessary for economic development;
philosophical,
scientific,
(t) Economic, technical, vocational,
historical and cultural books or publications, and religious books like
Bibles, missals, prayer books, the Koran, Ahadith and other religious
books of similar nature and extracts therefrom, hymnal and hymns
for religious uses: Provided, That those which may have already been
imported but are yet to be released by the Bureau at the effectivity of
this Act may still enjoy the privilege herein provided upon certification
by the DepEd that such imported books and/or publications are for
economic, technical, vocational, scientific, philosophical, historical
or cultural purposes or that the same are educational, scientific
or cultural materials covered by the International Agreement on
Importation of Educational Scientific and Cultural Materials (IAESCM)
signed by the President of the Philippines on August 2, 1952, or other
agreements binding upon the Philippines. Educational, scientific
and cultural materials covered by international agreements or
commitments binding upon the Philippine government so certified by
the DepEd.
(u) Philippine goods previously exported from the Philippines and
returned without having been advanced in value or improved in
condition by any process of manufacturing or other means, and
upon which no drawback or bounty has been allowed, including

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

661

instruments and implements, tools of trade, machinery and
equipment, used abroad by Filipino citizens in the pursuit of their
business, occupation or profession; and foreign goods previously
imported when returned after having been exported and loaned
for use temporarily abroad solely for exhibition, testing and
experimentation, for scientific or educational purposes; and
foreign containers previously imported which have been used in
packing exported Philippine goods and returned empty if imported
by or for the account of the person or institution who exported
them from the Philippines and not for sale, barter or hire subject
to identification: Provided, That Philippine goods falling under this
sub-section upon which drawback or bounty have been, allowed
shall, upon reimportation thereof, be subject to a duty under this
subsection equal to the amount of such drawback or bounty;
(v) Aircraft, equipment and machinery, spare parts, commissary and
catering supplies, aviation gas, fuel and oil, whether crude or refined
except when directly or indirectly used for domestic operations,
and such other goods or supplies imported by and for the use of
scheduled airlines operating under congressional franchise: Provided,
That such goods or supplies are not locally available in reasonable
quantity, qualify and price and are necessary or incidental to the
proper operation of the scheduled airline importing the same;

(w) Machineries, equipment, tools for production, plans to convert
mineral ores into saleable form, spare parts, supplies, materials,
chemicals, and transportation and
explosives,
accessories,
communications facilities imported by and for the use of new mines
and old mines which resume operations, when certified to as such
by the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR), upon the recommendation of the Director of
Mines and Geosciences Bureau, for a period ending five (5) years
from the first date of actual commercial production of saleable
mineral products: Provided, That such goods are not locally available
in reasonable quantity, quality and price and are necessary or
Incidental in the proper operation of the mine; and aircrafts imported
by agro-industrial companies to be used by them in their agriculture
and industrial operations or activities, spare parts and accessories
thereof, when certified to as such by the Secretary of the Department
of Agriculture (DA) or the Secretary of the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), as the case may be;
(x) Spare parts of vessels or aircraft of foreign registry engaged
in foreign trade when brought into the Philippines exclusively
as replacements or for the emergency repair thereof, upon proof
satisfactory to the District Collector that such spare parts shall be
utilized to secure the safety, seaworthiness or airworthiness of the
vessel or aircraft, to enable it to continue its voyage or flight;

(y) Goods exported from the Philippines for repair, processing or
reconditioning without having been substantially advanced in value,
and subsequently reimported in its original form and in the same
state: Provided, That in case the reimported goods advanced in

J9JC9B0M

662

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

value, whether or not in their original state, the value added shall
be subject to the applicable duty rate of the tariff heading of the
reimported goods; and
(z) Trailer chassis when imported by shipping companies for their
exclusive use in handling containerized cargo, upon posting a
security in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the
ascertained duties, taxes and other charges due thereon, to cover
a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the entry,
which period, for meritorious reasons, may be extended by the
Commissioner from year to year, subject to the following conditions:

(1) That they shall be properly identified and registered with the
Land Transportation Office (LTO);
(2) That they shall be subject to customs supervision fee to be
fixed by the District Collector and subject to the approval of the
Commissioner;
(3) That they shall be deposited in the customs territory when not
in use; and

(4) That upon the expiration of the period prescribed above, duties
and taxes shall be paid unless otherwise reexported.

(aa)Any officer or employee of the DFA, including any attache, civil
or military or member of the staff assigned to a Philippine diplomatic
mission abroad by the Department or any similar officer or employee
of other departments assigned to any Philippine consular office
abroad, or any AFP military personnel accorded assimilated diplomatic
rank or on duty abroad who is returning from a regular assignment
abroad, for reassignment to the home office, or who dies, resigns,
or is retired from the service, after the approval of this Act, shall be
exempt from the payment of all duties and taxes on personal and
household effects, including one (1) motor car which must have been
ordered or purchased prior to the receipt by the mission or consulate
of the order of recall, and which must be registered in the name of
the officer or employee: Provided, That this exemption shall apply
only to the value of the motor car and to the aggregate assessed
value of the personal and household effects, the latter not to exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the total amount received by the officer or
employee in salary and allowances during the latest assignment
abroad, but not to exceed four (4) years: Provided, however, That
this exemption shall not be availed of more than once every four
(4) years: Provided, further, That the officer or employee concerned
must have served abroad for not less than two (2) years.
The provisions of general and special laws, to the contrary
notwithstanding, including those granting franchises, there shall
be no exemption whatsoever from the payment of duties except
as provided for in this Act; those granted to government agencies,
instrumentalities or government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs) with existing contracts, commitments, agreements, or
obligations with foreign countries requiring such exemption; those

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

663

granted to international institutions, associations or organizations
entitled to exemption pursuant to agreements or special laws;
and those that may be granted by the President upon prior
recommendation of the NEDA in the interest of national economic
development.

Conditionally-free importations are exempt from payment
of import duties provided they comply with formalities and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Customs.

•

If the article imported for free was used, sold, bartered
or hired for purposes other than that which they were
intended for without prior payment of the duty, tax, or
other charges which would have been due and payable
at time of entry, then the article will be forfeited for
the Government, and the importation shall constitute a
fraudulent practice against customs revenue.

The President may suspend, disallow or completely withdraw, in
whole or in part, any of the conditionally-free importation.
Note the rules for returning residents:

o

Returning residents are Filipinos who stayed in a foreign
country for more than six months.
■

o

They have tax and duty exemptions, as long as the
stuff they bring back aren't in commercial quantities,
not intended for sale, and do not exceed the amounts
enumerated in Section 800(f).

OFWs have it better. They can bring back home appliances
and other durables tax free.

Note also the rules for everyone's favorite bringer of good
tidings—the Balikbayan box!

o

Filipinos are allowed to bring in or send Balikbayan boxes taxand duty-free!

o

The Balikbayan boxes should only contain personal and
household effects that should not be in commercial quantities
and not intended for sale. The Free Carrier At value should
also not exceed P150,000.

Import and export permits
Sec. 116. Free Importation and Exportation. - Unless otherwise
provided by law or regulation, all goods may be freely imported into

and exported from the Philippines without need for import and export
permits, clearances or licenses.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

664

Sec. 117. Regulated Importation and Exportation. - Goods
which are subject to regulation shall be imported or exported only
after securing the necessary goods declaration or export declaration,
clearances, licenses, and any other requirements, prior to importation
or exportation. In case of importation, submission of requirements
after arrival of the goods but prior to release from customs custody
shall be allowed but only in cases provided for by governing laws or
regulations.

In terms of the need for permits, all goods may be freely imported
into and exported from the Philippines.
O

Except those which are subject to regulation.

Goods Declaration
Definition
Sec. 102 (y). Goods Declaration refers to a statement made in the
manner prescribed by the Bureau and other appropriate agencies, by
which the persons concerned indicate the procedure to be observed
in the application for the entry or admission of imported goods and
the particulars of which the customs administration shall require.

Formal entry distinguished from informal entry

Sec. 402. Goods Declaration for Consumption. - All goods
declaration for consumption shall be cleared through a formal entry
process except for the following goods which shall be cleared through
an informal entry process:

(a) Goods of a commercial nature with Free on Board (FOB) or Free
Carrier At (FCA) value of less than fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00).
Every three (3) years after the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance shall adjust this amount as provided herein to its present
value, using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as published by the
PSA; and
(b) Personal and household effects or goods, not in commercial
quantity, imported in a passenger's baggage or mail.
The Commissioner may adjust the value of goods of commercial
nature that shall be cleared through an informal entry process
without prejudice to the periodic adjustment period in subparagraph
(a) of this section.
All importations entered through a formal entry process shall be
covered by a letter of credit or any verifiable commercial document
evidencing payment or in cases where there is no sale for export,
by any commercial document indicating the commercial value of the
goods.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

665

All goods declared for consumption should be cleared through a
formal entry process.

o

EXCEPT the following goods which can be cleared through an
informal entry process:

■

Goods of commercial nature with a value of less than
P50,000;

■

Personal and household effects or goods, not in
commercial quantity, imported in a passenger's baggage
or mail

Filing of Goods Declaration
Sec. 106. Declarant. - A declarant may be a consignee or a person
who has the right to dispose of the goods. The declarant shall lodge
a goods declaration with the Bureau and may be:
(a) The importer, being the holder of the bill of lading; or

(b) The exporter, being the owner of the goods to be shipped out; or
(c) A customs broker acting under the authority of the importer or
from a holder of the bill; or
(d) A person duly empowered to act as agent or attorney-in-fact for
each holder.
In case the consignee or the person who has the right to dispose of
the goods is a juridical person, it may authorize a responsible officer
of the company to sign the goods declaration as declarant on its
behalf.

The following may file the goods declaration:
o

The importer, as the holder of the bill of lading;

o

The exporter, as the owner of the goods to be shipped out;

o

A customs broker acting under the authority of the importer
or the holder of the bill;

o

A person duly empowered to act as agent or attorney-in-fact
for each holder.

Sec. 407. Goods Declaration and Period of Filing. - As far as
practicable, the format of the goods declaration shall conform with
international standards. The data required in the goods declaration
shall be limited to such particulars that are deemed necessary for
the assessment and collection of duties and taxes, the compilation of
statistics and compliance with this Act. The Bureau shall require the
electronic lodgement of the goods declaration.

I
I'

I’

I
!

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

666

The Bureau shall only require supporting documents necessary for
customs control to ensure that all requirements of the law have been
complied with. Translation of supporting documents shall not be
required except when necessary.
Goods declaration must be lodged within fifteen (15) days from the
date of discharge of the last package from the vessel or aircraft. The
period to file the goods declaration may, upon request, be extended
on valid grounds for another fifteen (15) days: Provided, That the
request is made before the expiration of the original period within
which to file the goods declaration: Provided, however, That the
period of the lodgement of the goods declaration maybe adjusted by
the Commissioner.
Sec. 408. Lodgement and Amendment of Goods Declaration.
- The Bureau shall permit the electronic lodgement of the goods
declaration at any designated customs office. The Bureau shall, for
valid reason and under terms and conditions provided by regulation,
permit the declarant to amend the goods declaration that has
already been lodged: Provided, That the request to amend the
goods declaration, together with the intended amendments, must
be received prior to final assessment or examination of the goods.

Sec. 409. Advance Lodgement and Clearance. - The Bureau may
provide for the lodgement and clearance of goods declaration and
supporting documents prior to the arrival of the goods under such
terms and conditions as may be provided by rules and regulations to
be promulgated under this Act.
•

The goods declaration must be lodged within 15 days from the
date of discharge of the last package from the vessel or aircraft.
O

•

It may be extended for another 15 days, but the request
must be made before the expiration of the original period.

Note that lodgement and clearance prior to the arrival of the
goods may be allowed by the Bureau. This is called advance
lodgement and clearance.

Provisional Goods Declaration

Sec. 403. Provisional Goods Declaration. - Where the declarant
does not have all the information or supporting documents required
to complete the goods declaration, the lodging of a provisional
goods declaration may be allowed: Provided, That it substantially
contains the necessary information required by the Bureau and the
declarant undertakes to complete the information or submit the
supporting documents within forty-five (45) days from the filing of
the provisional goods declaration, which period may be extended by
the Bureau for another forty-five (45) days for valid reasons.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

667

If the Bureau accepts a provisional goods declaration, the duty
treatment of the goods shall not be different from that of goods with
complete declaration.
Goods under a provisional goods declaration may be released upon
posting of any required security equivalent to the amount ascertained
to be the applicable duties and taxes.

A provisional goods declaration can be filed if the declarant does
not have all the information required to complete the goods
declaration, under two conditions:

o

It must substantially contain information required by the
Bureau, and

o

The declarant undertakes to complete the information within
45 days from the filing of the provisional goods declaration.

Assessment and Payment of Duties and Taxes, Interest, and
Surcharge
Sec. 424. Duty of Customs Officer Tasked to Assess Imported
Goods. - For purposes of assessing duties and taxes on imported
goods, the customs officer shall classify, value, and determine the
duties and taxes to be paid. The customs officer shall prepare and
submit an assessment report as established under this Act.

Sec. 425. Tentative Assessment of Goods Subject to Dispute
Settlement. - Assessment shall be deemed tentative if the duties
and taxes initially assessed are disputed by the importer. The
assessment shall be completed upon final readjustment based on
the tariff ruling in case of classification dispute, or the final resolution
of the protest case involving valuation, rules of origin, and other
customs Issues.

The District Collector may allow the release of the imported goods
under tentative assessment upon the posting of sufficient security to
cover the applicable duties and taxes equivalent to the amount that
is disputed.

Sec. 426. Tentative Assessment of Provisional Goods Declaration. - Assessment of a provisional goods declaration shall be
deemed tentative and such assessment shall be completed upon
final readjustment and submission by the declarant of the additional
information or documentation required to complete the declaration
within the period provided in Section 403 of this Act.
Sec. 427. Readjustment of Appraisal, Classification or Return.
- Such appraisal, classification or return, as finally passed upon and
approved or modified by the District Collector, shall not be altered or
modified in any manner, except:

11 ■ III

668

I

I i

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(1) Within one (1) year after payment of the duties, upon statement
of error in conformity with Section 912 of this Act, as approved by
the District Collector;

I

(2) Within fifteen (15) days after such payment, upon request for
reappraisal or reclassification addressed to the Commissioner by the
District Collector, if the appraisal or classification is deemed to be
low;
(3) Upon request for reappraisal and/or reclassification, in the
form of a timely protest addressed to the District Collector by the
interested party if the latter should be dissatisfied with the appraisal
or return; or

1 . ’

(4) Upon demand by the Commissioner after the completion of
compliance audit in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Sec. 428. Assessment of Duty on Less Than Entered Value.
- Duty shall not be assessed in any case upon an amount less than
the entered value, unless by direction of the Commissioner in cases
when the importer certifies at the time of entry that the entered
value is higher than the dutiable value and that the goods are so
entered In order to meet increases made by the appraiser in similar
cases then pending re-appraisement; and the lower assessment
shall be allowed only when the importer's contention is sustained by
a final decision, and shall appear that such action of the importer was
taken in good faith after due diligence and inquiry.

I

Sec. 429. Final Assessment. - Assessment shall be deemed final
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of assessment by the
importer or consignee.

1

J9JC9B0M

Sec. 430. Period of Limitation. - In the absence of fraud and when
the goods have been finally assessed and released, the assessment
shall be conclusive upon all parties three (3) years from the date of
final payment of duties and taxes, or upon completion of the post
clearance audit.
Sec. 431. Release of Goods after Payment of Duties and Taxes.
- Goods declared shall be released when duties and taxes and other
lawful charges have been paid or secured and all the pertinent laws,
rules and regulations have been complied with.

When the Bureau requires laboratory analysis of samples, detailed
technical documents or expert advice, it may release the goods
before the results of such examination are known after posting of
sufficient security by the declarant.

•

Note that there are tentative assessments in the following cases:
o

When the duties and taxes initially assessed are disputed;
and

o

In provisional goods declarations.

J9JC9B0M

>
TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

669

■

In both cases, the goods can be released upon posting
of proper security.

■

These become final upon final readjustment.

Assessments are deemed final 15 days after receipt of the notice
of assessment by the importer or consignee.

Generally, the goods are released when:
o

The duties, taxes, and other lawful charges have been paid or
secured; and

o

All the pertinent laws, rules, and regulations have been
complied with.

Relief Consignment

Sec. 120. Relief Consignment. - Goods such as food, medicine,
equipment and materials for shelter, donated or leased to government
institutions and accredited private entities for free distribution to or
use of victims of calamities shall be treated and entered as relief
consignment.
Upon declaration of a state of calamity, clearance of relief consignment
shall be a matter of priority and subject to a simplified customs
procedure. The Bureau shall provide for:

(a) Lodging of a simplified goods declaration or of a provisional or
incomplete goods declaration subject to completion of the declaration
within a specified period;

(b) Lodging, registering and checking of the goods declaration and
supporting documents prior to the arrival of the goods, and their
release upon arrival;

(c) Clearance beyond the designated hours of business or away
from customs offices and waiver of any corresponding charges; and
(d) Examination and/or sampling of goods only in exceptional
circumstances.

The Department of Finance (DOF) and the Department of Social
Welfare and Development (DSWD) shall jointly issue the rules and
regulations for the implementation of this provision.
Sec. 121. Duty and Tax Treatment. - Relief consignment, as
defined In Section 120, imported during a state of calamity and
Intended for a specific calamity area for the use of the calamity
victims therein, shall be exempt from duties and taxes.

Relief consignment refers to goods donated or leased to the
government and accredited private entities for free distribution
to or use of victims of calamities.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

670

To be exempt from duties and taxes, the relief consignment
should be:
O

Imported during a state of calamity;

O

Intended for a specific calamity area; and

O

For the use of the calamity victims therein.

Misdedaration, Misclassification, and Undervaluation in Goods
Declaration

Sec. 1400. Misdedaration, Misclassification, Undervaluation,
in Goods Declaration. - Misdedaration as to quantity, quality,
description, weight, or measurement of the goods, or misclassification
through insufficient or wrong description of the goods or use of
wrong tariff heading resulting to a discrepancy in duty and tax to
be paid between what is legally determined upon assessment and
what is declared, shall be subject to a surcharge equivalent to two
hundred fifty percent (250%) of the duty and tax due. No surcharge
shall be imposed when the discrepancy in duty is less than ten
percent (10%), or when the declared tariff heading is rejected in
a formal customs dispute settlement process involving difficult or
highly technical question of tariff classification, or when the tariff
classification declaration relied on an official government ruling.
There Is undervaluation when: (a) the declared value fails to
disclose in full the price actually paid or payable or any dutiable
adjustment to the price actually paid or payable; or (b) when an
Incorrect valuation method is used or the valuation rules are not
properly observed, resulting in a discrepancy in duty and tax to be
paid between what is legally determined as the correct value against
the declared value. When the undervaluation is established without
the need to go through the formal dispute settlement process
provided for in this Act, a surcharge shall be imposed equivalent
to two hundred fifty percent (250%) of the duty and tax due. No
surcharge shall be imposed when the discrepancy in duty is less than
ten percent (10%); or the declared value is rejected as a result of
an official ruling or decision under the customs dispute settlement
process involving difficult or highly technical question relating to the
application of customs valuation rules.
A discrepancy in duty and tax to be paid between what is legally
determined and what is declared amounting to more than thirty
percent (30%) shall constitute a prima facie evidence of fraud.
When the misdedaration, misclassification or undervaluation is
intentional or fraudulent, such as when a false or altered document
is submitted or when false statements or information are knowingly
made, a surcharge shall be imposed equivalent to five hundred
percent (500%) of the duty and tax due and that the goods shall
be subject to seizure regardless of the amount of the discrepancy
without prejudice to the application of fines or penalties provided
under Section 1401 of this Act against the importer and other person
or persons who willfully participated in the fraudulent act.

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

671

Misdeclaration occurs when there is a difference in the quantity,
quality, description, weight, or measurement of the goods stated
in the goods declaration and the goods itself.
I

Misclassification occurs when the description of the goods is
wrong or insufficient, or when the wrong tariff heading is used.

Undervaluation occurs when:
o

the declared value fails to disclose in full the price actually
paid;

o

an incorrect valuation method is used or the valuation rules
are improperly observed.

I

I

I

When the misdeclaration, misclassification, and undervaluation
leads to a discrepancy in duty and tax to be paid, a surcharge
may be imposed.
o

A discrepancy of more than 30% is prima facie evidence of
fraud.

o

No surcharge shall be imposed if:

t

I

J9JC9B0M

■

the discrepancy is less than 10%;

■

the declared value (for undervaluation) or tariff classification declaration (for misdeclaration/misclassification) is
rejected as a result of an official ruling;

■

the declared value (for undervaluation) or declared tariff
heading (for misdeclaration/misclassification) is rejected
in a formal customs dispute settlement process involving
difficult or highly technical question on application.

When the misdeclaration, misclassification, and undervaluation is
Intentional or fraudulent, a surcharge of 500% shall be imposed
and the goods shall be seized.
Mr. Z made an Importation which he declared at the Bureau of Customs
(BOC) as "Used Truck Replacement Parts." Upon investigation, the
container vans contained 15 units of Porsche and Ferrari cars.

■

Characterize Mr. Z's action. (2013 Bar Exam)
Suggested answer: Mr. Z committed misdeclaration as the declaration
and the actual contents of the container vans are obviously different.
Thus, these will be subject to forfeiture. (Bombay Department Store
v. Commissioner of Customs, G.R. No. L-20489, June 22, 1965)

1
I

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

672

D. Unlawful Importation or Exportation

Smuggling
Sec. 102 (nn) Smuggling refers to the fraudulent act of importing
any goods into the Philippines, or the act of assisting in receiving,
concealing, buying, selling, disposing or transporting such goods,
with full knowledge that the same has been fraudulently imported,
or the fraudulent exportation of goods. Goods referred to under this
definition shall be known as smuggled goods;

Technical Smuggling

Sec. 102 (pp) Technical Smuggling refers to the act of importing
goods into the country by means of fraudulent, falsified or erroneous
declaration of the goods to its nature, kind, quality, quantity or weight,
for the purpose of reducing or avoiding payment of prescribed taxes,
duties and other charges;
Outright Smuggling

Sec. 102 (ff) Outright Smuggling refers to an act of Importing
goods into the country without complete customs prescribed
importation documents, or without being cleared by customs or
other regulatory government agencies, for the purpose of evading
payment of prescribed taxes, duties and other government charges;
Sec. 1401. Unlawful Importation or Exportation. — Any person
who shall fraudulently import or export or bring into or outside of
the Philippines any goods, or assist In so doing, contrary to law,
or shall receive, conceal, buy, sell, or in any manner facilitate the
transportation, concealment, or sale of such goods after importation,
or shall commit technical smuggling as defined In this Act shall be
penalized by:
[Penalties excluded]

When, upon trial for violation of this section, the defendant Is shown
to have had possession of the goods in question, possession shall
be deemed sufficient evidence to authorize conviction unless the
defendant shall explain the possession to the satisfaction of the
court: Provided, That each act of unlawful importation or exportation
shall be deemed as a separate offense: Provided, however, That
payment of the tax due after apprehension shall not constitute a
valid defense in any prosecution, under this section: Provided,
further, That outright smuggling shall also be punishable under this
section: Provided, finally, That the rights and privileges provided in
this Act for the importers, consignees, exporters, service providers,
third parties and other third parties who committed this offense shall
be revoked.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

673

Smuggling refers to the fraudulent act of importing goods to the
Philippines. It includes:
o

The act of assisting in receiving, concealing, buying, selling,
disposing, or transporting such goods, with full knowledge
that the same has been fraudulently imported;

o

The fraudulent exportation of goods;

o

Importing goods by means of fraudulent, falsified, or
erroneous declaration of the goods, for the purpose of
reducing or avoiding payment of taxes and duties (technical
smuggling); and

o

Importing goods without complete importation documents,
or without being cleared by customs or the government, for
the purposes of reducing or avoiding payment of taxes and
duties (outright smuggling).

Other fraudulent practices
Sec. 1402. Failure or Refusal of Party to Give Evidence or
Submit Documents for Assessment. - When the owner, importer
or consignee of any imported goods, or the agent of either, fails or
refuses, upon lawful demand in writing by any customs officer to
appear, lawfully depose, or submit to examination or to answer any
material question or refuses to produce records, accounts or invoices
in possession pertaining to the value, classification or disposition of
the goods in question and deemed material in assessing the same,
the District Collector shall assess a surcharge of twenty percent
(20%) on the dutiable value of the goods which is the subject of the
importation.
Sec. 1403. Other Fraudulent Practices Against Customs
Revenue. - Any person who makes or attempts to make any entry
of imported or exported goods by means of any false or fraudulent
statement, document or practice or knowingly and willfully files any
false or fraudulent claim for payment of drawback or refund of duties
shall, for each act, be punished in accordance with the penalties
prescribed in Section 1401 of this Act.

Sec. 1404. Failure to Declare Baggage. - Whenever dutiable
goods are not declared by any person arriving within the Philippines,
such goods shall be seized and the person may obtain release of
such goods, if not imported contrary to any law, upon payment of a
surcharge equivalent to thirty percent (30%) of the landed cost of
such goods, in addition to all duties, taxes and other charges due.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the filing of criminal action
against the offender.
Sec. 1405. Vessel, Seacraft, or Aircraft Departing Before
Undergoing Customs Formalities. - Any vessel, seacraft, or

J9JC9B0M

674

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

aircraft arriving within the limits of a Customs District from a foreign
port which departs before undergoing customs formalities, without
being compelled to do so by stress of weather, pursuit or duress of
enemies, or other necessity, shall be liable for a fine of not less than
one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three
hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).

Sec. 1406. Obstruction to Boarding Officer. - If the master or
pilot-in-command or any member of the complement of any vessel
or aircraft arriving at the Philippine port obstructs or hinders any
officer from lawfully going on board such vessel or aircraft for the
purpose of enforcing this Act, or intentionally causes any officer to
be so obstructed or hindered, the vessel or aircraft shall be liable to
a fine of not less than one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
but not more than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).
Sec. 1407. Unlawful Boarding or Leaving of Vessel or Aircraft.
- If, upon arrival at the Philippine port, any master of a vessel or
pilot-in-command of an aircraft engaged in a foreign trade permits
any person to board or leave the vessel or aircraft without the
permission of the customs officer-in-charge, the owner or operator
of such vessel or aircraft shall be liable for a fine of not less than
one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three
hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).
Sec. 1408. Unloading of Cargo Before Arrival at Port of Entry.
- If, upon the arrival within the limits of any Customs District of the
Philippines of any vessel or aircraft engaged in foreign trade, the
master or pilot-in-command thereof permits any part of the cargo to
be unloaded before arrival at the port of entry, and without authority
from a proper customs officer, the owner, operator, or agent of such
vessel or aircraft shall he liable for a fine of not less five hundred
thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than two million
pesos (P2,000,000.00): Provided, That no fine shall accrue upon
satisfactory proof to the proper District Collector that the unloading
was rendered necessary by stress of weather, accident or other
necessity: Provided, however, That the fine imposed herein shall be
without prejudice to the application of fines or penalties provided
under Section 1401 of this Act.
Sec. 1409. Unloading of Cargo at Improper Time or Place
After Arrival. - The owner or operator of any vessel or aircraft
from which cargo is discharged upon arrival in the Philippines at a
time or place other than that designated by the District Collector,
shall be fined not less one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
but not more than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00):
Provided, That no fine shall accrue upon satisfactory proof to the
proper District Collector that the unloading was rendered necessary
by stress of weather, accident or other necessity.

Sec. 1410. Failure to Exhibit or Deposit Documents. - When
the master of a vessel or pilot-in-command of an aircraft engaged
in foreign trade fails to submit to the District Collector at the time of

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

675

entry of the vessel or aircraft the register or other documents in lieu
thereof, together with the clearance and other documents granted by
the customs officers to the vessel or aircraft at the last foreign port
of departure, or fails to exhibit any certificate or other documents
required to be then exhibited, the owner or operator of such vessel
or aircraft shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three hundred
thousand pesos (P300,000.00).

Sec. 1411. Bringing of Unmanifested Arms, Explosives or War
Equipment. - The owner, operator, or agent of a vessel or aircraft
arriving at a port in the Philippines bearing cargo consisting of
firearms, gunpowder, cartridges, dynamite or any other explosives,
munitions or equipment of war not contained in the manifest of the
vessel or aircraft, or which are concealed on board, shall be liable for
a fine of not less than five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00)
but not more than one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00).

Sec. 1412. Failure to Supply Advance and Requisite Manifests.
- Failure to transmit the electronic manifest within the required time
as may be prescribed by the Bureau, prior to arrival of the carrying
vessel or aircraft at the port of entry shall make the owner, operator,
or agent of the vessel or aircraft liable for a fine of not less than
one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three
hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).
If the transit time from port of origin to port of entry is at least
seventy-two (72) hours, the shipping or forwarding agent of the
carrier or the vessel who fails to submit the manifest at least twentyfour (24) hours before entry shall likewise be liable for a fine of not
less than one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more
than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).

Sec. 1413. Disappearance of Manifested Goods. - When any
package or goods mentioned in the manifest meant to be unloaded
at the port of destination is not unloaded upon the arrival of the
vessel or aircraft, its agent shall be liable for a fine of not less than
one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three
hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00) unless the disappearance of
the package or the goods in question was not due to the negligence
of the master of the vessel or pilot-in-command of an aircraft, and is
explained to the satisfaction of the District Collector.
The owner, operator, or agent of a vessel or aircraft shall be liable for
the payment of the same fine when a package or goods listed in the
manifest does not tally materially in character or otherwise with the
description thereof in the manifest.

Sec. 1414. Discrepancy Between Actual and Declared Weight
of Manifested Goods. - If the gross weight of goods or package
described in the manifest or bill of lading exceeds the declared
weight by more than ten percent (10%), and such discrepancy was
due to the negligence of the master or pilot-in-command, the owner,
employee, operator or agent of the importing vessel or aircraft shall

J9JC9B0M

676

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

be liable for a fine of not more than twenty percent (20%) of the
value of the package or goods in respect to which the deficiency
exists.
Sec. 1415. Discrepancy With the Master's or PHot's-inCommand Report. - When a vessel or aircraft arriving from a
foreign port is compelled by necessity to unload in another port
other than the port of entry and permission is granted by the District
Collector for the unloading of the vessel or aircraft or the delivery of
any part of the cargo and it shall be found that there is discrepancy
between the cargo unloaded and the report of the master or the pilotin-command and such discrepancy is not satisfactorily explained, the
owner, operator or agent of the vessel or aircraft shall be liable for a
fine of not less than one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but
not more than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).
Sec. 1416. Failure to Report Fraud. - A master, pilot-in-command
or other officer, owner or agent of any vessel or aircraft trading with
or within the Philippines who has knowledge of the commission of
fraud that shall result In the loss or diminution of customs revenue
but fails to report all information relative thereto to the Distract
Collector shall be penalized with imprisonment of not less than six
(6) months and one (1) day but not more than one (1) year and
shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) but not more than three hundred thousand pesos
(P300,000.00). If the offender is a foreigner, the offender shall be
deported after serving the sentence. If the offender is a public officer
or employee, the offender shall suffer additional penalty of perpetual
disqualification to hold public office, to vote and to participate in
any election. All the benefits due from service in the government,
including the separation and retirement benefits, shall be forfeited.

Sec. 1417. False Statement of Vessel's or Aircraft's
Destination. - When the master or pilot-in-command of a vessel
or aircraft loaded with goods shall make a false statement as to the
next destination of such vessel or aircraft when that information is
required by a customs officer, the owner or operator of such vessel
or aircraft shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three hundred
thousand pesos (P300,000.00). The arrival of a vessel or aircraft at
a different port other than the one it had been originally authorized
and cleared for without having been impelled to do so by necessity,
shall be prima facie proof that the original statement of the actual
destination of the vessel or aircraft was false.
Sec. 1418. Affixing Seals. - Any person who, without authority,
affixes or attaches a customs seal, fastening, or any mark, or fastening
purporting to be a customs seal, to any vessel, aircraft, vehicle,
warehouse, or package, shall be penalized with imprisonment of not
less than six (6) months and one (1) day but not more than one
(1) year, and shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three hundred
thousand pesos (P300,000.00). If the offender is a foreigner, the

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

677

offender shall be deported after serving the sentence. If the offender
is a public officer or employee, the offender shall suffer an additional
penalty of perpetual disqualification to hold public office and
disqualification from exercising the right to vote and to participate
in any election.
Sec. 1419. Breaking of Seal Placed by Customs Officers. - If
any seal placed by a customs officer upon any vessel or aircraft or
compartment thereof, or upon any box, trunk or other package of
goods on board is broken, the owner, operator, or agent of the vessel
or aircraft shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than three hundred
thousand pesos (P300,000.00) for each broken or destroyed seal.

Sec. 1420. Breaking of Lock or Fastening Placed by Customs
Officers. - If any lock or other fastening device placed by a customs
officer upon any hatch door, or other means of communication in
the hold of a vessel or aircraft, or other part thereof for the security
of the same during the night time, is unlawfully opened, broken or
removed, or if any of the goods contained in the hold or in the other
compartments so secured is clandestinely abstracted and landed, the
owner, operator, or agent of the vessel or aircraft shall be liable for a
fine of not less than one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but
not more than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00).
Sec. 1421. Removal, Breakage, and Alteration of Marks. - Any
person who, without authority, willfully removes, breaks, injures,
defaces or alters any customs seal or other fastening or mark placed
upon any vessel, vehicle, on land, sea or air, warehouse or package
containing merchandise or baggage in bond or In customs custody,
shall be punished with the penalty prescribed in Section 1420 hereof.
Sec. 1422. Unauthorized Withdrawal of Imported Goods from
Bonded Warehouse. - Any person who causes the unauthorized
withdrawal of imported goods stored from a CBW shall be liable
for payment of a surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of duties, taxes,
customs fees, and charges, found to be due and unpaid. The amount
of surcharge shall be added to the duties, taxes and charges due on
the goods withdrawn. If the delinquency lasts for more than one (1)
year, the surcharge shall be increased by twenty-five percent (25%)
of the unpaid duties and taxes annually. Provided, That where the
withdrawal is attended with fraud, such as when a fake or altered
withdrawal permit is submitted, the warehouse operator shall be held
liable under the pertinent provisions of this Act, without prejudice to
the suspension or revocation of the warehousing privileges granted
by the Bureau pursuant to this Act.
Sec. 1423. Removing or Repacking Goods in Warehouse. - Any
person who fraudulently conceals, removes, or repacks merchandise
in any warehouse or fraudulently alters, defaces, or obliterates
any mark or numbers placed upon packages deposited in such
warehouse, or shall aid or abet any such acts, shall be punished with
the penalties prescribed in Section 1418 hereof.

ma i ■

678

’I

i '

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

Merchandise so concealed, removed, or repacked, or packages upon
which marks, numbers or the values thereof have been so altered,
defaced, or obliterated shall be forfeited in favor of the government.

Sec. 1424. Removing Goods from Customs Custody. - Any
person who enters any warehouse, or any vehicle loaded with or
containing merchandise with intent to unlawfully remove therefrom
any merchandise or baggage in such vessel, vehicle or warehouse or
otherwise in customs custody or control, or any person who receives
or transports any merchandise or baggage unlawfully removed from
any such vessel, vehicle or warehouse, or shall aid or abet such
removal, shall suffer the penalties provided in Section 1401 hereof.

Sec. 1425. Failure to Pay Duties, Taxes and Other Charges.
- For failure to pay the duties, taxes and other charges of an
assessment within fifteen (15) days from the date of final assessment,
a surcharge of ten percent (10%) of the total assessed amount or
balance thereon shall be added and collected, which surcharge shall
be increased to twenty-five percent (25%) if the delinquency lasts
for more than one (1) year.
!

J9JC9B0M

Sec. 1426. Breach of Security. - Upon breach of security required
to be filed under this Act, the District Collector, subject to the
approval of the Commissioner, may accept in satisfaction thereof
a smaller stun than that mentioned in the penalty clause of the
security, but in no case less than the amount necessary to indemnify
the government for the damage occasioned by such breach.
Sec. 1427. Failure to Keep Importation Records and Full
Access to Customs Officers. - Any person who fails to keep all the
records of importations or books of accounts, business and computer
systems and all customs commercial data in the manner prescribed
under this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than
three (3) years and one (1) day but not more than six (6) years
and/or a fine of one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00). This penalty
shall likewise be imposed against importers and brokers who deny
an authorized customs officer full and free access to such records,
books of accounts, business and computer systems, and all customs
commercial data including payment records, without prejudice to
the imposition of the administrative sanctions by the Bureau against
contumacious importers, Including the authority to hold delivery or
release of their imported goods.
Sec. 1428. Concealment or Destruction of Evidence of Fraud.
- Any person who willfully conceals or destroys any invoice, book,
or document relating to any goods liable to duty after an inspection
thereof has been demanded by the District Collector or at any time
conceals or destroys any such invoice, book, or document for the
purpose of suppressing any evidence of fraud therein contained, shall
be penalized with imprisonment of not less than three (3) years and
one (1) day but not more than six (6) years and shall be liable for a
fine of not less than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00)
but not more than one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00).

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

679

Sec. 1429. Other Offenses. - The owner or operator of a vessel,
aircraft or train shall be liable for a fine for the following acts:

(a) For anchoring at any dock, pier, wharf, quay, or bulkhead
other than a port of entry, a fine of not less than five hundred
thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than one million pesos
(Pl,000,000.00) for overseas vessels;

(b) For dumping of garbage or slops over the sides of the vessel
within three (3) miles from the nearest coastline, a fine of not less
than one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00) but not more than ten million
pesos (P10,000,000.00);
(c) For dumping or causing to spread crude oil, kerosene, or gasoline
in the bay or at the piers within three (3) miles from the nearest
coastline, a fine of not less than one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00)
but not more than ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00) for each
offense;

(d) For loading gasoline or any other petroleum products at a place
other than that designated, by the regulations, a fine of not less than
five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than one
million pesos (Pl,000,000.00) for each offense;
(e) For causing the emission and spread of harmful gas, fumes and
chemicals, a fine of not less than one million pesos (Pl,000,000.00)
but not more than ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00) for each
offense; and
(f) For transporting hazardous waste, radioactive waste and other
toxic substances as provided under the Basel Convention and
Republic Act No. 6969, otherwise known as the "Toxic Substances
and Hazardous and Nuclear Wastes Control Act of 1990," the penalty
shall be forfeiture of the vessel in favor of the government.
The fines imposed herein shall be without prejudice to the application
of fines or penalties provided under special laws and regulations.

Sec. 1430. Violations of this Act and Rules and Regulations
in General. - Any person who violates any other provision of this
Act or the rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall be
penalized with imprisonment of not less than thirty (30) days and
one (1) day but not more than one (1) year, or be liable for a fine
of not less than one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not
more than three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00), or both.
If the offender is a foreigner, the offender shall be deported after
serving the sentence. If the offender is a public officer or employee,
the offender shall be disqualified from holding public office, from
exercising the right to vote and to participate in any public election
for ten (10) years.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

680

E.

Remedies

Remedies of the government
Administrative
Sec. 214. Persons Exercising Police Authority. - For the effective
implementation of this Act, the following persons are authorized to
effect search, seizure, and arrest:

(a) Officials of the Bureau, District Collectors, Deputy District
Collectors, police officers, agents, inspectors and guards of the
Bureau;

(b) Upon authorization of the Commissioner, officers and members
of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and national law
enforcement agencies; and
(c) Officials of the BIR on all cases falling within the regular
performance of their duties, when payment of internal revenue taxes
is involved.
All officers authorized by the Commissioner to exercise police
authority shall at all times coordinate with the Commissioner.
Goods seized by deputized officers pursuant to this section shall be
physically turned-over immediately to the Bureau, unless provided
under existing laws, rules and regulations.

For this purpose, mission orders shall clearly indicate the specific
name carrying out the mission and the tasks to be carried out.

Subject to the approval of the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner
shall define the scope, areas covered, procedures and conditions
governing the exercise of such police authority including custody and
responsibility for the seized goods. The rules and regulations to this
effect shall be furnished to the concerned government agencies and
personnel for guidance and compliance.

All seizures pursuant to this section must be effected in accordance
with the provisions on the conduct of seizure proceedings provided
for in Chapters 3 and 4 of Title XI of this Act.
Sec. 215. Place Where Authority May be Exercised. - All persons
exercising police authority as described in the preceding section
shall, only exercise powers within customs premises as provided
for in Section 303 of this Act, and within the limits of the authority
granted by the Commissioner.

Port and airport authorities in all ports of entry shall provide
authorized customs officers with unhampered access to all premises
within their administrative jurisdiction.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

681

Search

Sec. 219. Authority to Enter Properties. - Any person exercising
police authority may, at any time, enter, pass through, and search
any land, enclosure, warehouse, store, building or structure not
principally used as a dwelling house.
When a security personnel or any other employee lives in the
warehouse, store, or any building, structure or enclosure that is used
for storage of goods, it shall not be considered as a dwelling house
for purposes of this Act.
Sec. 220. Authority to Search Dwelling House. - A dwelling
house may be entered and searched only upon warrant Issued by a
Judge of a competent court, the sworn application thereon showing
probable cause and particularly describing the place to be searched
and the goods to be seized.
Sec. 221. Authority to Search Vessels or Aircrafts and Persons
or Goods Conveyed Therein. - Any person exercising police
authority under this Act may board, inspect, search arid examine a
vessel or aircraft and any container, trunk, package, box or envelope
found on board, and physically search and examine any person
thereon. In case of any probable violation of this Act, the person
exercising police authority may seize the goods, vessel, aircraft, or
any part thereof.

Such power to search includes removal of any false bottom, partition,
bulkhead, or any other obstruction for the purpose of uncovering any
concealed dutiable or forfeitable goods.
The proceeding herein authorized shall not give rise to any claim for
damage caused to the goods, vessel or aircraft, unless there is gross
negligence or abuse of authority in the exercise thereof.

Sec. 222. Authority to Search Vehicles, Other Carriers, Persons
and Animals. - Upon reasonable cause, any person exercising
police authority may open and examine any box, trunk, envelope, or
other container for purposes of determining the presence of dutiable
or prohibited goods. This authority includes the search of receptacles
used for the transport of human remains and dead animals. Such
authority likewise Includes the power to stop, search, and examine
any vehicle or carrier, person or animal suspected of holding or
conveying dutiable or prohibited goods.

Sec. 223. Authority to Search Persons Arriving From Foreign
Countries. - Upon reasonable cause, travelers arriving from foreign
countries may be subjected to search and detention by the customs
officers. The dignity of the person under search and detention shall
be respected at all times. Female Inspectors may be employed for
the examination and search of persons of their own sex.

Sec. 224. Power to Inspect and Visit. - The Commissioner or any
customs officer who is authorized in writing by the Commissioner,
may demand evidence of payment of duties and taxes on imported

J9JC9B0M

682

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

goods openly for sale or kept in storage. In the event that the
interested party fails to produce such evidence within fifteen
(15) days, the goods may be seized and subjected to forfeiture
proceedings: Provided, That during the proceedings, the interested
party shall be given the opportunity to prove or show the source of
the goods and the payment of duties and taxes thereon: Provided,
further, That when the warrant of seizure has been issued but
subsequent documents presented evidencing proper payment are
found to be authentic and in order, the District Collector shall, within
fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the motion to quash or recall the
warrant, cause the immediate release of the goods seized, subject to
clearance by the Commissioner: Provided, finally, That the release
thereof shall not be contrary to law.
Note that searches of dwelling houses require a search warrant
issued by a judge.

Seizure and Forfeiture

Sec. 216. Exercise of Power of Seizure. - Any person exercising
police authority under this Act has the power and duty to seize any
vessel, aircraft, cargo, goods, animal or any other movable property
when the same is subject to forfeiture or when they are subject of a
fine imposed under this Act.

Sec. 1113. Property Subject to Seizure and Forfeiture. Property that shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture include:
(a) Any vehicle, vessel or aircraft, Including cargo, which shall be
used unlawfully in the importation or exportation of goods or in
conveying or transporting smuggled goods in commercial quantities
into or from any Philippine port or place. The mere carrying or
holding on board of smuggled goods in commercial quantities shall
subject such vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or any other craft to forfeiture:
Provided, That the vehicle, vessel, aircraft or any other craft is not
used as a common carrier which has been chartered or leased for
purposes of conveying or transporting persons or cargo;

(b) Any vessel engaging in the coastwise trade which shall have on
board goods of foreign growth, produce, or manufacture In excess
of the amount necessary for sea stores, without such goods having
been properly entered or legally imported;
(c) Any vessel or aircraft into which shall be transferred cargo
unloaded contrary to law prior to the arrival of the importing vessel
or aircraft at the port of destination;

(d) Any part of the cargo, stores, or supplies of a vessel or aircraft
arriving from a foreign port which is unloaded before arrival at the
vessel's or aircraft's port of destination and without authority from
the customs officer; but such cargo, ship, or aircraft stores and

I

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

683

supplies shall not be forfeited If such unloading was due to accident,
stress of weather, or other necessity and is subsequently approved
by the District Collector;

(e) Goods which are fraudulently concealed in or removed contrary
to law from any public or private warehouse, container yard, or
container freight station under customs supervision;

(f) Goods, the importation or exportation of which are effected or
attempted contrary to law, or any goods of prohibited importation
or exportation, and all other goods which, in the opinion of the
District Collector, have been used, are or were entered to be used as
instruments in the importation or the exportation of the former;

(g) Unmanifested goods found on any vessel or aircraft if manifest
therefor is required;

(h) Sea stores or aircraft stores adjudged by the District Collector
to be excessive, when the duties and taxes assessed by the District
Collector thereon are not paid or secured forthwith upon assessment
of the same;
(i) Any package of imported goods which is found upon examination
to contain goods not specified in the invoice or goods declaration
including all other packages purportedly containing imported goods
similar to those declared in the invoice or goods declaration to be the
contents of the misdeclared package;
(j) Boxes, cases, trunks, envelopes, and other containers of
whatever character used as receptacle or as device to conceal goods
which are subject to forfeiture under this Act or which are so designed
as to conceal the character of such goods;
(k) Any conveyance actually used for the transport of goods
subject to forfeiture under this Act, with its equipage or trappings,
and any vehicle similarly used, together with its equipment and
appurtenances. The mere conveyance of smuggled goods by such
transport vehicle shall be sufficient cause for the outright seizure
and confiscation of such transport vehicle but the forfeiture shall
not be effected if It is established that the owner of the means of
conveyance used as aforesaid, is engaged as common carrier and
not chartered or leased, or that the agent in charge thereof at the
time, has no knowledge of the unlawful act; and

(l)

Goods sought to be imported or exported:

(1) Without going through a customs office, whether the act was
consummated, frustrated, or attempted;

(2) Found in the baggage of a person arriving from abroad and
undeclared by such person;
(3) Through a false declaration or affidavit executed by the owner,
importer, exporter, or consignee concerning the importation of such
goods;

i n

684

i

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

(4) On the strength of a false invoice or other document executed
by the owner, importer, exporter, or consignee concerning the
importation or exportation of such goods; or

(5) Through any other practice or device contrary to law by means of
which such goods entered through a customs office to the prejudice
of the government.

Sec. 1114. Properties not Subject to Forfeiture in, the Absence
of Prima Facie Evidence. - The forfeiture of the vehicle, vessel,
or aircraft shall not be effected if it is established that the owner
thereof or the agent in charge of the means of conveyance used
as aforesaid has no knowledge of or participation in the unlawful
act: Provided, That a prima facie presumption shall exist against the
vehicle, vessel, or aircraft under any of the following circumstances:
(a) If the conveyance has been used for smuggling before;
(b) If the owner is not In the business for which the conveyance Is
generally used; and

(c) If the owner is not financially in a position to own such
conveyance.
Sec. 1115. Conditions Affecting Forfeiture of Goods. - The
forfeiture shall be effected only when and while the goods are in
the custody or within the jurisdiction of customs officers, or in the
possession or custody of or subject to the control of the importer,
exporter, original owner, consignee, agent of another person effecting
the importation, entry or exportation in question, or in the possession
or custody of or subject to the control of persons who shall receive,
conceal, buy, sell, or transport the same, or aid in any of such acts,
with knowledge that the goods were imported, or were the subject of
an attempt at importation or exportation contrary to law.
Sec. 1116. Seizure or Release of Goods. - The District Collector
shall issue an order of release or a warrant of seizure within five
(5) days, or two (2) days in case of perishable goods, upon the
recommendation of the alerting officer or any other customs officer.
The District Collector shall immediately make a report of such seizure
or release to the Commissioner.
Sec. 1117. Warrant of Seizure or Order of Release. - The
District Collector shall have the authority to Issue a warrant of
seizure of the goods upon determination of the existence of probable
cause and in case of nonexistence thereof, the issuance of order of
release. In case the District Collector issued an order of release, the
District Collector shall immediately transmit all the records to the
Commissioner who shall automatically review within forty-eight (48)
hours, or within twenty-four (24) hours in case of perishable goods.
When no decision is made by the Commissioner within the prescribed
period, the imported goods shall be deemed released.
The lifting of the alert order shall be issued by the District Collector
only upon the affirmation of the decision of the District Collector by

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

685

the Commissioner, or after the lapse of the period of review by the
Commissioner, whichever is earlier.
Sec. 1118. Sale of Perishable Goods During Forfeiture
Proceedings. - Upon motion of the importer of the perishable goods,
the goods may be sold at a public auction during the pendency of the
forfeiture proceedings. The proceeds of the auction shall be held in
escrow until the final resolution of the proceedings.
Sec. 1119. Service of Warrant of Seizure. - The District Collector
shall cause the service of warrant of seizure to the owner or importer
of the goods or the authorized representative thereof. The owner
or importer shall be given an opportunity to be heard during the
forfeiture proceedings.
For the purpose of serving the warrant, the importer, consignee,
or person holding the bill of lading or airway bill shall be deemed
the "owner" of the goods. For the same purpose, "authorized
representative" shall include any agent of the owner and if the owner
or the agent is unknown, any person having possession of the goods
at the time of the seizure.

Service of warrant to an unknown owner shall be effected by posting
the warrant for fifteen (15) days in a public place at the concerned
district, and by electronic or printed publication.
Sec. 1120. Description, Classification and Valuation of Seized
Goods. - The District Collector shall cause the preparation of a list
and particular description, classification, and valuation of the goods
seized and valuation of identical or similar goods.
Sec. 1121. Proceedings in Case of Property Belonging to
Unknown Parties. - If, within fifteen (15) days after service of
warrant, no owner or agent can be found or appears before the
District Collector, the seized goods shall be forfeited Ipso facto in
favor of the government to be disposed of in accordance with this
Act.
Sec. 1122. Seizure of Vessel or Aircraft for Delinquency
of Owner or Officer. - When the owner, agent, master, pilot
In command or other responsible officer of any vessel or aircraft
becomes liable for any violation of this Act, the vessel or aircraft
may be seized and be subjected to forfeiture proceedings for the
settlement of any fine or penalty for which such person is liable. In
determining whether or not to seize a vessel or aircraft, the Bureau
shall take Into account the amount of fine or penalty In relation to
the commercial impact that may be caused to international trade by
the seizure or detention as well as the value of the vessel or aircraft.

Sec. 1123. Burden of Proof In Forfeiture Proceedings. - In all
proceedings for the forfeiture of any vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or goods
under this Act, the burden of proof shall be borne by the claimant.

Sec. 1124. Settlement of Pending Seizure Case by Payment of
Fine or Redemption of Forfeited Goods. - Subject to the approval

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

686

of the Commissioner, the District Collector may allow the settlement
by payment of fine or the redemption of forfeited goods, during the
course of the forfeiture proceeding. However, the Commissioner
may accept the settlement by redemption of any forfeiture case on
appeal. No settlement by payment of fine shall be allowed when
there is fraud or when the discrepancy in duties and taxes to be paid
between what is determined and what is declared amounts to more
than thirty percent (30%).
In case of settlement by payment of fine, the owner, importer,
exporter, or consignee or agent shall offer to pay a fine equivalent
to thirty percent (30%) of the landed cost of the seized goods. In
case of settlement by redemption, the owner, importer, exporter, or
consignee or agent shall offer to pay the redeemed value equivalent
to one hundred percent (100%) of the landed cost.
Upon payment of the fine or payment of the redeemed value,
the goods shall be released and all liabilities which may attach to
the goods shall be discharged without prejudice to the filing of
administrative or criminal case.
Settlement of any seizure case by payment of the fine or redemption
of forfeited goods shall not be allowed when there is fraud, or where
the importation is prohibited or the release of the goods is contrary
Decision in Forfeiture Cases. - In forfeiture cases,
Collector shall issue an order for hearing within fifteen
(15) days, or five (5) days in case of perishable goods, from Issuance
warrant. The District Collector shall render a decision within
7?™ J30), dayS upon terminat<on of the hearing, or within ten
(10) days in case of perishable goods. The decision shall include a
declaration of forfeiture, the imposition of a fine or such other action
as may be proper.

®ec-

Appeal in forfeiture cases

Sec. 1126. Appeal to the Commissioner. - In forfeiture cases,
the person aggrieved by the decision of a District Collector may,
within fifteen (15) days or five (5) days in case of perishable goods,
from receipt of the decision, file a written notice of appeal, together
with the required appeal fee to the District Collector, furnishing a
copy to the Commissioner. The District Collector shall immediately
transmit all the records of the proceedings to the Commissioner, who
shall review and decide on the appeal within thirty (30) days from
receipt of the records, or fifteen (15) days in the case of perishable
goods: Provided, That if within thirty (30) days, no decision is
rendered, the decision of the District Collector under appeal shall
be deemed affirmed. An appeal filed beyond the period herein
prescribed shall be dismissed.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

687

Appeals to protest cases shall be governed by Section 114 of this
Act.
The decision of the Commissioner may be served through the
recognized modes of service under existing law.
Sec. 1127. Automatic Review in Forfeiture Cases. - The
Commissioner shall automatically review any decision by the District
Collector adverse to the government. The entire records of the
case shall be elevated within five (5) days from the promulgation
of the decision. The Commissioner shall decide on the automatic
review within thirty (30) days, or within ten (10) days in the case
of perishable goods, from receipt of the records. When no decision
is rendered within the prescribed period or when a decision adverse
to the government is rendered by the Commissioner involving goods
with FOB or FCA value often million pesos (PIO,000,000.00) or more,
the records of the decision of the Commissioner, or of the District
Collector under review, as the case may be, shall be automatically
elevated within five (5) days for review by the Secretary of Finance.
The decision issued by the Secretary of Finance, whether or not a
decision was rendered by the Commissioner within thirty (30) days,
or within ten (10) days in the case of perishable goods, from receipt
of the records, shall be final upon the Bureau.
Sec. 1128. Automatic Review by the Secretary of Finance
in Other Cases. - In cases not involving protest or forfeiture, the
Commissioner shall automatically review any decision by the District
Collector that is adverse to the government. The records of the case
shall be elevated to the Commissioner within five (5) days from the
promulgation of the decision. The Commissioner shall decide on the
automatic review within thirty (30) days from receipt of the records,
or within ten (10) days in the case of perishable goods. When no
decision is rendered within the prescribed period or when any decision
rendered by the Commissioner is adverse to the government, the
records of the ease under review shall be automatically elevated
within five (5) days for the review of the Secretary of Finance.
The decision Issued by the Secretary of Finance, whether or not a
decision was rendered by the Commissioner within thirty (30) days
from receipt of the records, or within ten (10) days in the case of
perishable goods, shall be final upon the Bureau.

Procedure in seizure and forfeiture cases:

I

o

An officer reports to the District Collector

o

Within five days from the report, the District Collector may
issue either a warrant of seizure or order of release;
■

•

In either case, he must make a report to the Commissioner
of Customs

But if it's an order of release, he must also transmit all the records
to the Commissioner for automatic review

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

688

O

The Commissioner has 48 hours to decide (24 if perishable
goods)

O

If no decision within the time period, the goods can be
released

o

If it's a warrant of seizure, the District Collector shall cause it
to be served to the importer, who will have a chance to have
his say on the matter in front of the District Collector

■

The importer has the burden of proof though

■

He can also settle if he wants to, but no settlement is
allowed if there is fraud or the discrepancy is more than
30%

o

The District Collector shall render a decision within 30 days
upon termination of the hearing (10 days if perishable goods)

o

The person aggrieved may appeal to the Commissioner within
15 days (five if perishable goods)
■

The Commissioner has 30 days to decide (15 if perishable
goods)

Automatic review in forfeiture cases
•

If the decision of the Collector in forfeiture cases is adverse to
the government, it will result into an automatic review by the
Commissioner

o

The Commissioner has 30 days to decide automatic review
cases (10 if perishable goods)
■

If no decision is rendered or when the Commissioner's
decision is still adverse to the government and the value
of the goods is PIO,000,000 or more, it'll go up to the
Secretary of Finance on automatic review.

Once the administrative remedies are exhausted, then the case
may be elevated to the CTA division via petition for review within
30 days
Arrest
Sec. 218. Authority to Require Assistance and Information. Any person exercising police authority may demand the assistance of
and request information from the Philippine National Police (PNP), the
AFP and other national law enforcement agencies, when necessary,

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

689

to effect any search, seizure or arrest. It shall be the duty of any
police officer and other national law enforcers to give such lawful
assistance.

Sec. 1209. Arrest of Vessel or Aircraft Departing Before Entry
Made. - When a vessel or aircraft arriving within the limits of a
Customs District from a foreign port departs or attempts to depart
before entry shall have been made, not being thereunto compelled by
stress of weather, duress of enemies, or other necessity, the District
Collector of the port may cause the arrest and bring back such vessel
or aircraft to the most convenient port with the assistance of other
concerned agencies.

Authority of the Commissioner to Make Compromise

Sec. 1131. Authority of the Commissioner to Make Compromise. - Subject to the approval of the Secretary of Finance, the
Commissioner may compromise any administrative case arising
under this Act involving the imposition of fines and surcharges,
including those arising from the conduct of a post clearance audit,
unless otherwise specified by law.
Cases involving forfeiture proceedings shall however not be subject
to any compromise.

Note that cases
compromised.

involving

forfeiture

proceedings

cannot be

Taxpayer remedies
Protest

Sec. 1106. Protest. - When a ruling or decision of the District
Collector or customs officer involving goods with valuation, rules
of origin, and other customs issues is made, except the fixing of
fines in seizure cases, the party adversely affected may appeal by
way of protest against such ruling or decision by presenting to the
Commissioner at the time when payment of the amount claimed to be
due the government is made, or within fifteen (15) days thereafter,
a written protest setting forth the objection to the ruling or decision
in question and the reasons therefore.

Subject to the approval of the Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner
shall provide such rules and regulations as to the requirement
for payment or nonpayment of the disputed amount and in case
of nonpayment, the release of the importation under protest upon
posting of sufficient security.

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

690

Sec. 1107. Protest Exclusive Remedy in Protestable Case. In all cases subject to protest, the interested party who desires to
have the action of the District Collector reviewed, shall file a protest
as provided in Section 1106 of this Act, otherwise the action of the
District Collector shall be final and conclusive.

Sec. 1108. Form and Scope of Protest. - A protest shall be filed
in accordance with the prescribed rules and regulations promulgated
under this section. It shall specify the particular decision or ruling
of the District Collector for which protest is being made, and shall
indicate the particular ground or grounds upon which the protesting
party bases the claim for relief. The scope of a protest shall be
limited to the particular goods subject of a goods declaration, but
any number of issues may be raised in a protest with reference to
the goods declaration constituting the subject matter of the protest.
Sec. 1109. Samples to be Furnished by Protesting Parties. - If
the nature of the goods permit, importers filing protests involving
questions of fact must, upon demand, present to the Commissioner
samples of the goods which are the subject matter of the protest.
The samples of the goods shall be verified by the customs officer who
made the classification, against which the protests are filed.
Sec. 1110. Decision in Protest. - When a protest is filed in proper
form, the Commissioner shall render a decision within thirty (30)
days from receipt of the protest. In case the protest is sustained, In
whole or in part, the appropriate order shall be made, and the entry
reassessed, if necessary.

Procedure of protest cases
O

Collector makes a ruling on the valuation, rules of origin, and
other customs issues

■

EXCEPT the fixing of fines in seizure cases

O

Importer files a written protest with the Commissioner at the
time of payment or within 15 days after

O

Commissioner has 30 days to decide the protest

O

In case of adverse decision by the Commissioner, importer
files a petition for review before the CTA Division within 30
days

Abandonment

Sec. 1129. Abandonment, Kinds and Effects of. - Imported goods
are deemed abandoned under any of the following circumstances:
(a) When the owner, Importer, or consignee of the imported goods
expressly signifies in writing to the District Collector the intention to
abandon the same; or

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

691

(b) When the owner, importer, consignee, or interested party after
due notice, fails to file the goods declaration within the prescribed
period in Section 407 of this Act: Provided, That the term goods
declaration shall include provisional or incomplete goods declaration
deemed valid by the Bureau as provided in Section 403 of this Act.
For this purpose, it is the duty of the District Collector to post a list of
all packages discharged and their consignees, whether electronically
or physically in the District Office, or send a notice to the consignee
within five (5) days from the date of discharge; or

(c) Having filed such goods declaration, the owner, importer,
consignee or interested party after due notice, fails to pay the
assessed duties, taxes and other charges thereon, or, if the regulated
goods failed to comply with Section 117 of this Act, within fifteen
(15) days from the date of final assessment: Provided, That if such
regulated goods are subject of an alert order and the assessed
duties, taxes and other charges thereof are not paid within fifteen
(15) days from notification by the Bureau of the resolution of the
alert order, the same shall also be deemed abandoned; or

(d) Having paid the assessed duties, taxes and other charges, the
owner, importer or consignee or interested party after due notice,
fails to claim the goods within thirty (30) days from payment. For
this purpose, the arrastre or warehouse operator shall report the
unclaimed goods to the District Collector for disposition pursuant to
the provisions of this Act; or
(e) When the owner or importer fails to claim goods in customs
bonded warehouses within the prescribed period.
The due notice requirement under this section may be provided by
the Bureau through electronic notice or personal service: Provided,
That for non-regular importers, notification shall be by registered
mail or personal service. For this purpose, the accreditation of
importers, exporters, and other third parties shall include provision
for mandatory receipt of electronic notices.

Sec. 1130. Treatment and Disposition of Abandoned Goods. Expressly abandoned goods under paragraph (a) of Section 1129 of
this Act shall ipso facto be deemed the property of the government
and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
If the Bureau has not disposed of the abandoned goods, the owner
or importer of goods impliedly abandoned may, at any time within
thirty (30) days after the lapse of the prescribed period to file the
declaration, reclaim the goods provided that all legal requirements
have been complied with and the corresponding duties, taxes and
other charges, without prejudice to charges and fees due to the port
or terminal operator, as well as expenses incurred have been paid
before the release of the goods from customs custody.

When the Bureau sells goods which have been impliedly abandoned,
although no offense has been discovered, the proceeds of the
sale, after deduction of any duty and tax and all other charges and

J9JC9B0M

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

692

expenses incurred as provided in Section 1143 of this Act, shall be
turned over to those persons entitled to receive them or, when this
is not possible, held at their disposal for a specified period. After the
lapse of the specified period, the balance shall be transferred to the
forfeiture fund as provided in Section 1151 of this Act.
Abatement and Refund

Sec. 903. Refund of Duties and Taxes. - Refund shall be granted
where it is established that duties and taxes have been overcharged
as a result of an error in the assessment or goods declaration.
Where permission is given by the Bureau for goods originally declared
for a customs procedure with payment of duties and taxes to be
placed under another customs procedure, a refund shall be made of
any duties and taxes charged in excess of the amount due under the
new procedure, subject to such regulation issued for the purpose.

A refund shall not be granted if the amount of duties and taxes
involved is less than five thousand pesos (P5,000.00): Provided, That
the Secretary of Finance, in consultation with the Commissioner, may
adjust the minimum amount specified in this Act, taking into account
the CPI as published by the PSA.
Sec. 904. Abatement of Duties and Taxes. - When goods have
not yet been released for consumption or have been placed under
another customs procedure, provided that no other offense or
violation has been committed, the declarant shall neither be required
to pay the duties and taxes nor be entitled to refund thereof in any
of the following cases:
(a) When, at the request of the declarant, the goods are abandoned,
or as determined by the Bureau, the goods are destroyed or rendered
commercially valueless while under customs control. Any cost herein
incurred shall be borne by the declarant;

(b) When goods are destroyed or irrecoverably lost by accident or
force majeure, the remaining waste or scrap after destruction, if
taken into consumption, shall be subject to the duties and taxes
that would be applicable on such waste or scrap if imported in same
state; and
(c)

When there are shortages due to the nature of the goods.

Sec. 905. Abatement for Damage Incurred During Voyage. —
Except as otherwise provided, no abatement of duties shall be made
on account of damage incurred or deterioration suffered during the
voyage of importation; and duties will be assessed on the actual
quantity imported as determined by the customs officers concerned.

Sec. 906. Abatement or Refund of Duty on Missing Package.
- When any package appearing on the manifest or bill of lading or
airway bill is missing, an abatement or refund of the duty shall be

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)

693

made if it is certified by the importer or consignee, under pain of
penalty for falsification or perjury, and upon production of proof
satisfactory to the Collector concerned, that the package in question
has not been unlawfully imported into the Philippines.
Sec. 907. Abatement or Refund for Deficiency in Contents of
Packages. - If, upon opening of any package, a deficiency in the
quantity of the goods is found to exist based upon the invoice, such
deficiency shall be certified, under pain of penalty for falsification or
perjury, by the customs officers concerned and upon the production
of proof showing that the shortage occurred before the arrival of the
goods in the Philippines. Upon sufficient proof thereof, the proper
abatement or refund of the duty shall be made.
Sec. 908. Abatement or Refund of Duties on Goods Lost or
Destroyed After Arrival. - The Bureau may abate or refund the
amount of duties accruing or paid on any goods that have been
lost due to injury, theft, destruction through fire or through any
other causes, upon satisfactory proof of the same, under any of the
following circumstances:

(a) While 'within the territory of any port of entry, prior to unloading'
under the Bureau's supervision;
(b) While remaining in customs custody after unloading;
(c) While in transit from the port of entry to any port in the
Philippines; and

(d) While released under sufficient security for export except in case
of loss by theft.
Sec. 909. Abatement and Refund of Defective Goods. - Under
conditions to be set by the Commissioner, and with the approval
of the Secretary of Finance, an abatement and refund shall be
granted on Imported or exported goods which are found defective
or otherwise not in accordance with, the agreed specifications at the
time of importation or exportation and are returned either to the
supplier or to another person designated by the supplier, subject to
the following conditions:

(a) The goods have not been worked, repaired, or used in the
country of importation, and are reexported within, a reasonable
time; and
(b) The goods have not been worked, repaired, or used in the
country to which, they were exported, and are reimported within a
reasonable time.

Use of the goods shall, however, not hinder the refund if such use
was indispensable to discover the defects or other circumstances
which caused the reexportation or reimportation of the goods.

As an alternative to reexportation or reimportation, the goods may
be expressly abandoned or destroyed or rendered commercially

J9JC9B0M

694

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

valueless under customs control as the Bureau may decide. In such,
case, the importer shall not be entitled to an abatement or a refund
if it does not defray the costs of such abandonment, destruction, or
rendition.
Sec. 910. Abatement of Duty on Dead or Injured Animals. Where it is certified, under pain of penalty for falsification or perjury,
and upon production of proof satisfactory to the Bureau that an
animal subject of importation dies or suffers injury before arrival,
or while in customs custody, the duty due thereon shall be abated
provided that its carcass on board or in customs custody is removed
in the manner required by the Bureau and at the expense of the
importer.
Sec. 911. Investigation Required in Case of Abatements and
Refunds. - The Customs Officer concerned shall, in all cases of
abatement or refund of duties, submit an examination report as to
any fact discovered which indicates any discrepancy and cause the
corresponding adjustment on the goods declaration.
Sec. 912. Refund Arising from Correction of Errors. - Manifest
clerical errors made on an invoice or entry, errors in return of
weight, measure and gauge, when duly certified under penalties of
falsification or perjury by the surveyor or examining officer when
there are such officers at the port, and errors in the distribution of
charges on invoices not Involving any question of law and certified
under penalties of falsification or perjury by the examining customs
officer, may be corrected in the computation of duties, if such errors
are discovered before the payments of duties, or if discovered within
one (1) year after release from customs custody of imported goods
upon written request and notice of error from the importer, or upon
statement of error certified by the District Collector.

For the purpose of correcting errors specified in the next preceding
paragraph, the Bureau is authorized to make refunds within the
statutory time limit.

Sec. 913. Claims for Refund. - All claims and application for
refund of duties and taxes shall be made in writing and filed with
the Bureau within twelve (12) months from the date of payment of
duties and taxes.

If, as a result of the refund of duties, a corresponding refund of
internal revenue taxes on the same importation becomes due, the
Bureau shall cause the refund of internal revenue taxes in favor of
the importer after issuance of a certification from the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue, when applicable.
The importer may file an appeal of a denial of a claim for refund or
abatement, whether it is a full or partial denial, with the Commissioner
within thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of the denial. The
Commissioner shall render a decision within thirty (30) days from the
receipt of all the necessary documents supporting the application.

J9JC9B0M

TARIFF AND CUSTOMS CODE OF 1978,
As Amended by the CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION AND TARIFF ACT
(R.A. 10863 or the CMTA)
Within thirty (30) days from receipt of the decision
Commissioner, the case may also be appealed to the CTA.

695

of the

Notwithstanding the provisions in the preceding paragraphs, the
filing of claims for refund of national internal revenue taxes shall
be governed by the provisions provided under the NIRC of 1997, as
amended.

Claims for refund must be made in writing and filed with the
Bureau within 12 months from date of payment of duties and
taxes
Advance Classification Ruling

Sec. 1100. Classification Ruling. — An importer or exporter
may file a written application for an advance ruling on the tariff
classification of goods with the Commission. The Commission shall
render a ruling within thirty (30) days from, receipt of a properly
documented application.

When a declared tariff classification of goods, not subject of a
pending application for advance ruling, is in dispute, the importer,
exporter, or the Bureau shall submit the matter to the Commission
for a ruling, without prejudice to the application of Section 1106 of
this Act on "protest": Provided, That such rulings of the Commission
on commodity classification shall be binding upon the Bureau, unless
the Secretary of Finance shall rule otherwise.
Sec. 1101. Valuation Ruling. - An importer or exporter may file
a written application for an advance valuation ruling on the proper
application of a specific method on customs valuation of specific
goods as prescribed in Title VII, Chapter 1 of this Act.

The application for a valuation ruling shall be filed with the
Commissioner who shall issue a ruling within thirty (30) days from
submission of the application form and supporting documents as
may be required by rules and regulations.
When the valuation method of goods not subject of an application for
advance valuation ruling or the declared customs value is in dispute,
the matter shall be resolved in accordance with Section 1106 of this
Act on "protest."

Sec. 1102. Ruling on the Rules of Origin. - An importer or
exporter may file a written application for a ruling on whether the
goods qualify as originating under the rules of origin of the applicable
preferential trade agreement. The application for an advance ruling
on origin shall be filed with the Commissioner who shall act on the
application within thirty (30) days from receipt of the application and
supporting documents as may be required by rules and regulations.

I

I
I

TAX MADE LESS TAXING:
A REVIEWER WITH CODALS AND CASES

696

When the declared origin of the goods, not subject of a request for
advance ruling on origin, is in dispute, the matter shall be resolved
in accordance with Section 1106 of this Act on "protest."
Sec. 1103. Conditions for Application and Effect of Advance
Ruling. - An application for an advance ruling shall cover only one
(1) product or item. The application for advance ruling shall be filed
at least ninety (90) days before the importation or exportation of the
product or item, as the case may be.
Sec. 1104. Administrative and Judicial Appeals. - An aggrieved
party may, within thirty (30) days from receipt of an adverse ruling
or decision, appeal the same to the CTA without prejudice to the
authority of the Secretary of Finance to review decisions adverse to
the government in accordance with Sections 1127 and 1128 of this
Act, as the case may be.

I

J9JC9B0M

•

One of the new features of the CMTA is the opportunity for the
importer to get an advance ruling, which allows the importer to
get a ruling before the importation or exportation of goods.

o

The importer must be filed within 90 days before the
importation or exportation of the product or item.
■

0

And it must cover only one product or item.

The ruling can cover either the valuation of the goods or on
the rules of origin.

J9JC9B0M

About the Author
Ignatius Michael "Mickey" Ingles is a student-athlete-turnedlawyer.

He splits his time between working as an associate in the
Law Firm of Ingles Laurel & Calderon and teaching as a full-time
professor at the Ateneo Law School, where he teaches Constitutional
Law, Tax Law, Emerging Issues in Sports Law, and Robots, Artificial
Intelligence, and the Law.
Mickey has also written various articles on sports law, the law of
religion, the law of robots, and the constitutional aspects of student
social media use, which have been published in the Philippines,
Europe, and the United States. He is the founder and editor-in-chief
of Batas Sportiva, the first and only law blog dedicated to Philippine
sports law, writes about sports law for Rappier and Spin.ph, and sits
in the LawInSport editorial board. He is also the author of Laws for
Sports and the Sporty, a handy guidebook on Philippine sports law.
He graduated salutatorian from the Ateneo Law School in
2012, where he was also given the St. Thomas More Award for
Most Distinguished Graduate. He ranked first in the 2012 Philippine
Bar Exams. He obtained his LL.M, from the Georgetown University
Law Center (Hoya Saxa!) in 2016. He is a licensed attorney in the
Philippines and the State of New York.

When not busy lawyering, Mickey can be found in the soccer
field, struggling (against father time and fitness and fatness) to
relive his glory days as a student-athlete. He was the starting right
winger of the Ateneo Men's Football team that won a record three
straight University Athletics Association of the Philippines (UAAP)
championships from 2004-2006. He was the team captain from
2005-2006 and was named 2006 UAAP Athlete-Scholar of the Year.
Aside from his obvious love for futbol (FC Barcelona for life) and
football (Go, Pats!), he is also an avid basketball fan. He ranks MJ
over Lebron—which isn't really a debate. And he still hurts to think
that Tom Brady now plays for the Buccaneers.
He is a BTS ARMY member from Ravenclaw (and proud!), but
will still consider you his friend even if you're from Hufflepuff... if
you buy him a PS5 or connect him with lU/Lee Ji-eun. If you're into
fiction, Mickey also wrote the exciting young adult novel, Alinam:
Diego Domingo and the Mandato Ruiz, which you can find in any of
your favorite bookstores.
You can follow his ramblings on Twitter,
Facebook: @MickevInalesLaw.

Instagram,

and

