COMMENTS AND JURISPRUDENCE
ON SUCCESSION
TITLE IV

SUCCESSION
Chapter I

GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 774. Succession is a mode of acquisition by virtue of
which the property, rights and obligations to the extent of the value
of the inheritance, of a person are transmitted through his death to
another or others either by will or by operation of law.1
Concept of Succession. — In general, succession may
be understood in either of two senses. In its broadest juridical
sense, it signifies the substitution or subrogation of a person in
the transmissible rights and obligations of another. Under this
definition, it embraces not only succession mortis causa, but even
succession inter vivos. In its strict juridical sense, it signifies the
substitution or subrogation of a person in the transmissible rights
and obligations of a deceased person. Under this definition, it is
limited to succession mortis causa.2 It is in this sense that it is
understood in the New Civil Code. Consequently, Art. 774 defines it
as a mode of acquisition by virtue of which the property, rights and
obligations to the extent of the value of the inheritance, of a person
New provision.
5 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 209, “Succession” is derived from the phrase “sub cedere”
which means “to substitute” or “to subrogate.”
1
2

1

ART. 774

SUCCESSION

are transmitted through his death to another or others either by
his will or by operation of law. This definition, as can be seen, is in
conformity with the general provision of Art. 712 which enumerates
the different modes of acquiring ownership and other real rights.
Basis of Succession. — What is the basis or foundation of the
right of succession? There are, of course, certain extreme individualists and socialists, who deny the very existence of succession, because they believe that death extinguishes all rights, since it would
be illogical to fix the birth of a right from the moment when the will
which is supposed to create the right has ceased to exist. Consequently, according to them, the inheritance falls into the possession
of the nearest of kin or of the State.3 On the other hand, those who
accept the idea of succession cannot agree with regard to the basis or
foundation of succession. According to Manresa, the different theories advanced by them may be classified as follows:
Theories which base the right of succession on the right of
private property: — If man has the right to own private property, he
has the power to dispose of such property freely, imposing such licit
terms and conditions as he might deem convenient. Consequently,
he may distribute them by means of a testament, since a testament
is nothing more than an instrument of alienation conditioned
upon his death. This is the basis of testamentary succession; the
same principle serves to explain intestate succession. The will of
the decedent is the causal element of succession. When it is not
expressly manifested, the law, taking his place, supplies it; those
who are called to inherit are those who would have been called by
the decedent had he been able to execute a testament.
(1) Theories which base the right of succession on the right
of the family: — If the family is recognized as the heart and soul
of society, the idea of succession must, therefore, revolve around
it. Hence, the basis of succession rests upon family co-ownership.
Consequently, intestate succession is considered, under this theory,
as the normal kind of succession, while testamentary succession is
the abnormal or exceptional kind.
(3) Eclectic theories: — These theories try to harmonize the
two principles — individual and social. According to the exponents
3

5 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 317.

2

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 774

of these theories, the raison d’etre of the right of succession is the
harmonious combination of two institutions — private ownership
and the family.4 This is so because succession is, after all, but a
mode of perpetuating the right to own private property. Consequently,
whether we look at it from the viewpoint of private ownership or the
viewpoint of the family, the basis or foundation of succession is the
recognized necessity of perpetuating man’s patrimony beyond the
limits of human existence. This necessity, in turn, is based on the
necessity of giving greater stability to the family and to the social
economy.5
It was, probably, this realization of the fundamental relationship between succession and the social order which was the basis
and justification of the Code Commission in effecting some of the
changes of our law of succession. Thus, according to the Commission:
“The economic, social and political conflicts raging throughout the world today have created a new concept of legal order.
Economists as well as jurists and political leaders are in search
of the solution of the problems of maximum satisfaction of human wants, and society is realizing more and more that human
happiness may be attained by tempering the concept of extreme
individualism with State guidance.
“The social legislations now prevalent in the United States
of America, Mexico, New Zealand, Australia and England to
mention but a few are typical expressions of this new concept of
legal order. This is the same spirit of our own Constitution.
“The purification of the system of private ownership of its
abuses, the closing of those channels upon which wealth has
flowed in torrents from generation to generation of a particular
family, the emancipation of innocent persons from the bondage
of undue conservation which has denied them the right to share
in the estate of their parents, the elimination of distant relatives
who may succeed to property to the accumulation of which they
have not contributed anything, the staying of the dead hand to
prevent it from meddling in the affairs of the living — these are
among the means which may be advisable for the stability of the
social order.

4
5

Ibid., pp. 318-320.
4 Castan, 6th Ed., p. 148

3

ARTS. 775-776

SUCCESSION

“A powerful factor for the attainment of this stability of
the social order is the socialization of ownership, not in the
sense of socialism’ but in the sense of effectively adapting
property to the needs of society, which constitutes one of the
underlying principles of the Title of Succession of the proposed
Civil Code.’’6

Art. 775. In this Title, “decedent,” is the general term applied
to the person whose property is transmitted through succession,
whether or not he left a will. If he left a will, he is also called the
testator.7
Subjective Elements of Succession. — The subjective
elements of succession consist of the decedent and those who are
called to succeed such decedent either by will or by operation of
law, such as the heirs, devisees or legatees. According to the above
article, the person whose property is transmitted through succession,
whether or not he left a will, is called the decedent. If he left a will, he
is also called the testator. On the other hand, those who are called to
the inheritance are known as heirs, devisees or legatees. An heir is a
person called to the whole or to an aliquot portion of the inheritance
either by will or by operation of law; a devisee is a person to whom
a gift of real property is given by virtue of a will; while a legatee is
a person to whom a gift of personal property is given by virtue of a
will.8

Art. 776. The inheritance includes all the property, rights and
obligations of a person which are not extinguished by his death.9
Objective Element of Succession. — The objective element
of succession is what is known as the inheritance. According to the
above article, the inheritance includes all the property, rights and
obligations of a person which are not extinguished by his death.
There are, however, other definitions which are based on this codal

Report of the Code Commission, pp. 109-110.
New provision.
8
Art. 782, Civil Code.
9
Art. 659, Spanish Civil Code.
6
7

4

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 776

definition. Thus, according to Manresa, it may be defined as the
universality of all the property, rights and obligations constituting
the patrimony of the decedent which are not extinguished by his
death.10 According to Castan, on the other hand, it may be defined
as the entirety of the patrimonial properties and relations which
constitute the objective elements of succession.11
Idem; Inheritance distinguished from succession. — It is
clear that inheritance and succession, as both terms are understood
in the present Civil Code, constitute two different concepts, although
related to each other. The first refers to the universality of all the
property, rights and obligations constituting the patrimony of the
decedent which are not extinguished by his death; the second, on
the other hand, is the legal mode by which such property, rights
and obligations are transmitted.12 In other words, the first is the
objective element of the second.
Idem; Restricted concept of inheritance. — It must be
noted, however, that under our legal system, the concept of inheritance
is much more restricted than that found in the Spanish Civil Code.
Unfortunately, this is not even indicated by the provision of Art. 776
of the New Civil Code — a provision which is an exact copy of Art.
659 of the Spanish Code. It is, however, undeniable that under our
law, no succession shall be declared unless and until a liquidation
of the assets and debts left by the decedent shall have been made
and all his creditors fully paid. Until a final liquidation is made and
all debts are paid, the right of the heirs to inherit remains inchoate.
It partakes of the nature of a mere hope and nothing more. This is
so because under our rules of procedure, liquidation is necessary in
order to determine whether or not the decedent has left any liquid
assets which may be transmitted to his heirs.13 Thus, in Limjoco vs.
Intestate Estate of Pedro Fragante,14 the Supreme Court declared:
“Under the regime of the Spanish Civil Code and before the
enactment of the Code of Civil Procedure, the heirs of a deceased
person were considered in contemplation of law as the continuation of his personality by virtue of the provision of Article 661
5 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 321.
4 Castan, 6th Ed., p. 155.
12
5 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 320-321.
13
Centenera vs. Sotto, 78 Phil. 432.
14
80 Phil. 776.
10
11

5

ART. 776

SUCCESSION

of the first Code (suppressed in the New Civil Code) that the
heirs succeed to all the rights and obligations of the decedent by
the mere fact of his death. It was so held by this Court in Barrio
vs. Dolor, 42 Phil. 44, 46. However, after the enactment of the
Code of Civil Procedure, Article 661 of the Spanish Civil Code
was abrogated, as held in Suiliong & Co. vs. Chio-Taysan, 12
Phil. 13, 22. In that case as well as in many others decided by
this Court after the innovations introduced by Act No. 190 (now
reproduced in the New Rules of Court), it has been the constant
doctrine that it is the estate or the mass of property, rights and
assets left by the decedent, instead of the heirs directly, that becomes vested and charged with his rights and obligations which
survive after his demise.
“The heirs were formerly considered as the continuation
of the decedent’s personality simply by legal fiction. The reason
was one in the nature of a legal exigency derived from the principle that the heirs succeeded to the rights and obligations of the
decedent. Under the present legal system, such rights and obligations as survived after death have to be exercised and fulfilled
only by the estate of the deceased. And if the same legal fiction
were not indulged, there would be no juridical basis for the estate, represented by the executor or administrator, to exercise
those rights and to fulfill those obligations of the deceased. The
reason and purpose for indulging the fiction is identical and the
same in both cases. This is why among the artificial persons
recognized by law figures ‘a collection of property to which the
law attributes the capacity of having rights and duties, as for
instance, the estate of a deceased person.’’’

Therefore, it is no longer the heirs who are responsible for the
payment of the debts or obligations of the decedent, but the estate
itself; and if the estate should not be sufficient to pay for such debts or
obligations, the heirs cannot be made to pay for the unpaid balance.
In other words, such debts or obligations do not become the debts or
obligations of the heirs after the death of the decedent; they remain
as debts or obligations of the decedent, to the payment of which his
property may be subjected wherever it be found.15 Consequently, the
inheritance may be more accurately defined as the universality of all
the property and transmissible rights and obligations constituting
15
Pavia vs. De la Rosa, 8 Phil. 70; Suillong vs. Chio-Taysan, 12 Phil. 13; Montelibano
vs. Cruz, (CA), 35 Off. Gaz. 1083; Tranez vs. Vail, (CA), 37 Off. Gaz. 1253; Ledesma vs.
McLuchlin, 66 Phil. 547.

6

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 777

the patrimony of the decedent which are not extinguished by his
death and which are available for distribution among those who are
called to succeed after settlement or liquidation.
Art. 777. The rights to the succession are transmitted from
the moment of the death of the decedent.16
Causal Element of Succession. — From the very definition
of succession as enunciated in Art. 774, it is evident that it is the
expressed will of the decedent as manifested in his last will and
testament or his presumed will as provided by law which is the
efficient cause of the transmission of successional rights, while the
fact of his death is the condition. It must be observed, however, that
the fact of death with respect to succession is more than a condition;
it is the very reason of succession itself — as a matter of fact, it is the
very reason for the manifestation of the will of the decedent. Hence,
we can very well say that the death of the decedent is not only the
condition, but also the final cause of the transmission of successional
rights.
Idem; Transmission of successional rights. — Art. 777
enunciates the principle that the rights to the succession are transmitted from the moment of the death of the decedent. This principle is complemented by the provisions of Arts. 1042 and 533 of the
Code.
Some commentators of the Spanish Civil Code have criticized the phraseology of Art. 657 (now Art. 777) as inexact. These
commentators contend that it would have been better if the article
had stated that the succession of a person is opened (se abre) at the
moment of his death.17 Manresa, however, answers this criticism by
saying that succession is a mode of acquisition by means of which the
property of the decedent passes to the heir by virtue of the death of
the former. There is, therefore, a true transmission from one person
to the other, and in order to give precise expression to the idea, the
Code says that successional rights are transmitted (se transmiten),
instead of saying that succession is opened (se abre), such expression

16
17

Art. 667, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
3 Navarro Amandi, p. 82; Gomez, p. 94.

7

ART. 777

SUCCESSION

having a distinct meaning of its own, since it refers to the effects,
while the other refers to the cause.18
Whether we say that the rights to the succession are transmitted or the succession of a person is opened, there is no question that
the moment of death is the decisive moment when the heirs acquire
a definite right to the inheritance whether such right is pure, conditional or with a term. It is of little importance if a long or short
period may have elapsed from the death of the decedent when the
heirs or legatee enters into the possession of the inheritance or legacy, because the acquisition shall always retroact to the moment
of said death in accordance with the provision of Art. 1042 which
should be considered as the complement of the present article. And
it could not be otherwise because successional rights, whether generated by the will of the decedent or by law, can have no effectiveness except through the death of the said decedent. Until then, there
may be a change in the will of the testator, or in the dispositions
provided by law with regard to the persons called in the different
orders of succession, or even when there are no such alterations,
there may be changes in the circumstances of those who are favored
so that they are deprived altogether of their rights, either because
they have committed some cause of disinheritance or some act of
incapacity. Therefore, since the effectiveness of successional rights
depends upon the death of the decedent, and since such death is the
very reason of succession, the moment of such event has been fixed
as the moment for the transmission.19
Consequently, after the death of the decedent, anyone of
the heirs may enter into a contract with respect to his share in
the inheritance even before partition has been effected. This is so
because his right with respect thereto is already in the nature of a
vested right in accordance with the principle declared in Art. 777
of the Civil Code, to the effect that the rights to the succession are
transmitted at the moment of the death of the decedent.20 Hence,
he may sell his undivided share in the inheritance21 or even donate

5 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 310-311.
Ibid., pp. 309-310.
20
Uson vs. Del Rosario, 92 Phil. 530. To the same effect; Baun vs. Heirs of Baun, 53 Phil.
654. Cuison vs. Villanueva, 90 Phil. 850; Enriquez vs. Abadia, 50 Off. Gaz. 4185.
21
Ibarle vs. Po, 49 Off. 956. To the same effect: Barreto vs. Tuazon, 59 Phil. 845; Jakosalem vs. Rafols, 73 Phil. 628.
18
19

8

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 777

it.22 Conversely, before the death of the decedent, no heir may enter
into a contract with respect to his future share in the inheritance.
This is so because, before the death of the decedent, the heirs have
only a mere hope or expectancy, absolutely inchoate in character, to
their share in the inheritance. Hence, any contract entered into with
respect to future inheritance would have no object whatsoever, and
as a consequence, would be inexistent from the beginning.23 This
is confirmed by Art. 1347 of the Code itself which declares that no
person can enter into a contract with respect to future inheritance
except in cases expressly authorized by law.24
Lorenzo vs. Posadas
64 Phil. 353
This is an appeal from a decision of the lower court dismissing an action commenced by plaintiff in his capacity as
trustee of the estate of Thomas Hanley, deceased, against the
defendant Collector of Internal Revenue, for the refund of an
inheritance tax on the estate of the deceased paid by plaintiff
under protest and for collection of interest thereon. It appears
that on May 7, 1922, Thomas Hanley died, leaving a will and
some personal and real properties. The will which was duly admitted to probate, provides among other things, that all properties of the testator shall pass to his nephew, Matthew Hanley.
However, it also provides that all real estate shall be placed under the management of the executors for a period of ten years,
after the expiration of which the properties shall be given to the
said Matthew Hanley. The plaintiff contends that the inheritance tax should be based upon the value of the estate at the
expiration of the period of ten years after which according to the
testator’s will, the property could be and was to be delivered to
the instituted heir, and not upon the value thereof at the time
of the death of the testator. Invoking the provision of Art. 657
(now Art. 777) of the Civil Code, the Supreme Court, speaking
through Justice Laurel, held:

Osorio vs. Osorio, 41 Phil. 531.
For illustrative cases, see Tinsay vs. Yusay, 47 Phil. 639; Arroyo vs. Gerona, 58
Phil. 226; Tordilla vs. Tordilla, 60 Phil. 162; Reyes vs. Reyes, (CA), 45 Off. Gaz. 1836;
Rivero vs. Serrano, 48 Off. Gaz. 642.
24
The exceptions referred to are those found in Art. 130, with respect to donations propter nuptias by the future spouses to each other of future property, and in Art. 1080, with
respect to partitions inter vivos made by a person of his estate among his heirs.
22
23

9

ART. 777

SUCCESSION

“Whatever may be the time when actual transmission of
the inheritance takes place, succession takes place in any event
at the moment of the decedent’s death. Thomas Hanley having
died on May 27, 1922, the inheritance tax accrued as of that
date.
“If death is the generating source from which the power of
the state to impose inheritance taxes takes its being and if, upon
the death of the decedent, succession takes place and the right
of the state to tax vests instantly, the tax should be measured
by the value of the estate as it stood at the time of the decedent’s
death, regardless of any subsequent contingency affecting value
or any subsequent increase or decrease in value.
“Consequently, we hold that a transmission by inheritance
is taxable at the time of the predecessor’s death, notwithstanding the postponement of the actual possession or enjoyment of
the estate by the beneficiary, and the tax is measured by the
value of the property transmitted at the time regardless of its
appreciation or depreciation.”
Uson vs. Del Rosario
92 Phil. 530
The records show that Faustian Nebreda died in 1945 long
before the effectivity of the New Civil Code, survived by his widow, Maria Uson, plaintiff in this case, and four illegitimate children, defendants. The litigation involves several parcels of land
which belonged to the decedent at the time of his death. Plaintiff
contends that she is entitled to all of the said property on the
ground that at the time of the death of the decedent, she was the
only heir entitled to succeed. The defendants, on the other hand,
contend that, while it is true that they are not entitled to inherit
from the decedent under the old Civil Code, yet under the new
Civil Code, which went into effect in 1950, they are entitled to
inherit concurrently with the surviving spouse. Therefore, applying the principle stated in Art. 2253 in relation to Art. 2264,
this right to succeed, which is declared for the first time in the
new Civil Code, shall be given retroactive effect even though the
act or event which gives rise thereto may have occurred under
the prior legislation. The Supreme Court held:
“The right of ownership of Maria Uson over the lands in
question became vested in 1945 upon the death of her late husband and this is so because of the imperative provision of the
law which commands that the rights to the succession are transmitted from the moment of death (Art. 657, old Civil Code —

10

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 777

now Art. 777, new Civil Code). The new right recognized by the
new Civil Code in favor of the illegitimate children of the deceased cannot, therefore, be asserted to the impairment of the
vested right of Maria Uson over the lands in dispute.’’

Idem; Rule in case of presumptive death. — It must be
noted that the principle enunciated in Art. 777 is applicable not only
to actual death, but even to presumptive death. This is clear from
the provisions of Arts. 390 and 391 of the Code. Thus, according
to these articles, in order that an absentee is presumed dead for
the purpose of opening his succession, it is necessary that he must
have been absent for at least ten years, it being unknown whether
or not he still lives.25 This rule, however, is subject to the following
exceptions: first, if the absentee disappeared after the age of seventyfive years, in which case an absence of five years shall be sufficient
in order that his succession may be opened;26 and second, if the
absentee disappeared under any one of the three circumstances
enumerated in Art. 391, in which case an absence of four years shall
be sufficient.27
When or at what precise moment will there be a transmission
of successional rights in case of presumptive death? As applied to
the case of normal or ordinary presumption of death, will it be at
the beginning of the ten-year period or at the end or expiration of
such period, and as applied to the case of abnormal or extraordinary
presumption of death, will it be at the beginning of the four-year
period or at the end or expiration of such period? A distinction must
be made between the fact of death and the moment of death. These
presumptions which are enunciated in the Civil Code only tell us
when the absentee is presumed to be dead; they do not tell us when
such absentee died.28 Hence, as a general rule, the time when the
absentee died must be proved in accordance with the ordinary
rules of evidence. If this is not possible, then he is deemed to have
Art. 390, Civil Code.
Ibid.
27
Art. 391. The following shall be presumed dead for all purposes, including the division of the estate among the heirs: (1) A person on board a vessel lost during a sea voyage, or
an aeroplane which is missing, who has not been heard of for four year since the loss of the
vessel or aeroplane; (2) A person in the armed forces who has taken part in war, and has been
missing for four years; and (3) A person who has been in danger of death under other circumstances and his existence has not been known for four years.
28
See Judge Advocate General vs. Gonzales, (CA), 48 Off. Gaz. 5329.
25
26

11

ART. 777

SUCCESSION

died at the time of the that expiration of the period designated by
law. There is, however, an exception to this rule, and that is when
the absentee disappeared under any one of the extraordinary
circumstances enumerated in Art. 391 of the Code. Because the
absentee disappeared under danger of death, in such case, he is
deemed to have died at or about the time when he disappeared.29
Idem; Effect of judicial settlement. — From what had been
stated, it is clear that since the moment of the death of the decedent
is the determining factor when the heirs acquire a definite right
to the inheritance, whether such right is pure or contingent, it is
immaterial whether a short or long period of time lapses between
the moment of the death of the decedent and the heir’s entry into the
possession of his inheritance. Once the heir accepts his inheritance
and takes possession thereof, his right thereto is deemed to retroact
to the moment of the decedent’s death.30 Consequently, the fact
that the hereditary estate is placed under administration will not
affect the application of the rule stated in Art. 777.31 As a matter
of fact, it has even been held that the fact that the law provides for
the appointment of a legal administrator for the liquidation of the
decedent’s estate and the partition of his haeriditas jacens among
his heirs, does not deprive such heirs of the right to intervene in
the administration of the estate for the protection of their interests.
Notwithstanding the appointment of a judicial administrator,
it is well settled that the heirs have a right to intervene when
they believe that the administrator’s acts are prejudicial to their
interests.32 There is of course no question that under our legal
system, the formal declaration or recognition of the right of the

29
This exception has been impliedly recognized by the Court of Appeals in the case of
Judge Advocate General vs. Gonzales, supra, when it held that a soldier who was declared
as missing in action on May 7, 1942, must have died on or before such date.
30
Arts. 1042, 533, Civil Code.
31
See also Quison vs. Salud, 12 Phil. 109; Ilustre vs. Alaras Frondosa, 17 Phil. 321;
Malahacan vs. Ignacio, 19 Phil. 434; Beltran vs. Dorian, 32 Phil. 66; Bondad vs. Bondad, 34
Phil. 232; Baldemor vs. Malanyaon, 34 Phil. 367; Velasco vs. Vizmanois, 45 Phil. 675; Fule vs.
Fule, 46 Phil. 317; Dais vs. CFI of Capiz, 51 Phil. 396; Vda. de Bonnevie vs. Vda. de Pardo,
59 Phil. 486; Garcia vs. David, 67 Phil. 279; De Vera vs. Galauran, 67 Phil. 213; Lao vs. Dee,
90 Phil. 868 (unrep.); Vda. de Rodriguez vs. Tan, 92 Phil. 273; Morales vs. Yanez, 52 Off.
Gaz. 1945; Marabiles vs. Quito, 100 Phil. 64.
32
Dais vs. CFI of Capiz, 51 Phil. 396. To the same effect: Adrian vs. Obleada, 58
Phil. 302; Marabiles vs. Quito, 100 Phil. 64

12

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 777

heirs requires judicial confirmation in the proper testate or intestate
proceedings. Nevertheless, such right has always been protected from
encroachments made or attempted before the judicial declaration.33
Hence, even before there has been a judicial declaration of heirship,
it is well established that an heir has a right to assert a cause of
action as an heir, although he has not been judicially declared to
be so. This is logical because of the principle that the property of a
deceased person, both real and personal, becomes the property of his
heir by the mere fact of death of his predecessor in interest.34
It must be noted, however, that just because the heirs acquire
ownership over their inheritance from the very moment of the death
of the decedent, they can then compel the administrator to deliver
to them the respective portions to which they are entitled either by
will or by operation of law. While it is very true that they acquire
ownership thereof from the moment of the death of their predecessor, yet upon the appointment of a judicial administrator, the latter, by virtue of his appointment, acquires a right to the possession
of the estate, subject to the orders of the court, unless he consents
to the heirs continuing in possession thereof.35 As a matter of fact,
Sec. 3, Rule 87 of the New Rules of Court bars the filing of an action
by an heir to recover the possession of property belonging to the
estate until there is an order of the court which has jurisdiction of
the testate or intestate proceedings assigning said property to such
heir. Under our law, an executor or administrator, who assumes the
trust, takes possession of the property left by the decedent for the
purpose of liquidating all debts. While the debts are undetermined
and unpaid, no residue may be settled for distribution among the
heirs. Consequently, before distribution is made or before any residue is known, the heirs have no cause of action against the executor
or administrator for the possession of property left by the decedent.36
Nevertheless, this will not affect the principle that the rights to the
succession are transmitted at the moment of the death of the decedent. Once the administration proceedings is terminated and the
heirs will finally accept their respective portions in the inheritance,
Morales vs. Yanez, 52 Off. Gaz. 1945.
Marabiles vs. Quito, 100 Phil. 64. To the same effect: Vda. de Bonnevie vs. Vda. de
Pardo, 59 Phil. 186; Cuevas vs. Abesamis, 71 Phil. 147.
35
Arayata vs. Joya, 51 Phil. 634.
36
Lao vs. Dee, 90 Phil. 868 (unrep.).
33
34

13

ARTS. 778-780

SUCCESSION

the possession thereof is deemed transmitted to them without any
interruption and from the moment of the death of the decedent.37
Art. 778. Succession may be:
(1)

Testamentary;

(2)

Legal or intestate; or

(3)

Mixed.38

Art. 779. Testamentary succession is that which results from
the designation of an heir, made in a will executed in the form
prescribed by law.39
Art. 780. Mixed succession is that effected partly by will and
partly by operation of law.40
Kinds of Succession. — According to Art. 778, succession
may be testamentary, legal or intestate, or mixed. This classification
is based on the manner of effecting the succession. Explaining this
classification, the Supreme Court once stated:
“There are three ways in which succession may be effected: by the will of man, by the law, or by both at the same time.
In the first case, the succession is called testamentary, because
it is based on a last will and testament, which is the orderly
manifestation of the testator’s will; in the second, it is called
legal, because it takes effect by operation of law; and the third is
called mixed, because it partakes of the character of both testamentary and legal succession.’’41

There is, however, another class of succession deducible from
the provision of Art. 130 of the Civil Code which is contractual in
character and which is applicable only to donations of future property
by reason of marriage made by one of the future spouses to the other.
Consequently, we can very well add contractual succession in its
Art. 533, Civil Code.
New provision.
39
New provision.
40
New provision.
41
Macrohon vs. Saavedra, 51 Phil. 267.
37
38

14

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 780

restricted form, although relatively insignificant, as the fourth class
of succession under the Civil Code.
Idem; Testamentary succession. — Testamentary succession
is that which results from the designation of an heir, made in a will
executed in the form prescribed by law.42 Under the Spanish Civil
Code, testamentary succession was merely defined as that conferred
by the will of man.43 The definition which is now found in Art. 779 of
the New Civil Code is therefore new. It must be noted, however, that
the designation of an heir is not essential for the validity of a will.44
What is essential is that the succession must be effected through the
testator’s will executed in the form prescribed by law.
Idem; Intestate succession. — The Civil Code fails to give
a definition of legal or intestate succession, although in Art. 960 it
enumerates the different cases or instances (which are by no means
exclusive) when legal or intestate succession shall take place. We
can, however, define it as that which is effected by operation of law
in default of a will. If the decedent has not made any will, or even
where he has made one, if it has not been made in accordance with
the formalities prescribed by law, his presumed will as provided by
law shall govern the distribution of his hereditary estate after his
death. Consequently, the most fundamental distinction between
testamentary and intestate succession consists in the fact that, while
in the first, it is the expressed will of the testator manifested in his
last will and testament which is the supreme law in the succession,
in the second, it is his presumed will as provided by the law itself
which governs.
Idem; Mixed succession. — Originally, before the Spanish
Civil Code was drafted in 1889, Spanish laws adhered to the rule of
indivisibility of succession. Under this doctrine, based on the Roman
law maxim – memo pro parte testatus pro parte intestatus decedere
potest – succession cannot partake of the nature of both testamentary
and intestate succession; in other words, it cannot be partly testate
and partly intestate.45 Under the Spanish Civil Code, this rule was
repealed and this repeal is confirmed by the present Civil Code,

Art. 779, Civil Code.
Art. 658, Spanish Civil Code.
44
Art. 841, Civil Code.
45
Macrohon vs. Saavedra, 51 Phil. 267.
42
43

15

ART. 780

SUCCESSION

which states that succession may be mixed in the sense that it may
be effected partly by will and partly by operation of law.46
Thus, under our law, if the testator makes a will which does
not dispose all of his property, the result is what is known as mixed
succession. The succession partakes of the nature of both testamentary and legal succession. Hence, in the distribution of the hereditary estate of the testator after his death, testamentary succession
shall take place with respect to that part of his property which he
has disposed of in his will, while legal succession shall take place
with respect to that part which he has not disposed of.47
Idem; Contractual succession. — According to Art. 1347 of
the Civil Code, no contract may be entered into regarding future inheritance except in cases expressly authorized by law. This precept
or principle is based on the fact that the object of a contract should
exist at the moment of its celebration or, at least, it can exist in the
future.48 Under Art. 130 of the Code, however, the future spouses
may give or donate to each other in their marriage settlements their
future property to take effect upon the death of the donor and to
the extent laid down by the provisions of the Civil Code relating to
testamentary succession. It is evident that this is one of the exceptions referred to in Art. 1347.49 As a consequence of the limitation
that the donation shall only be to the extent laid down by the provisions of the Civil Code relating to testamentary succession, it is
imperative that the rule that the donor cannot give by way of donation more than he can dispose of by will shall have to be complied
with.50 Furthermore, since a donation by reason of marriage is a
true contract and since it shall take effect only after the death of the
donor, it is evident that it is in reality a contractual disposition mortis causa. In other words, we have here an example of what is known
as contractual succession.51 How does it differ from testamentary
succession? The answer is simple. In testamentary succession, it is
essential that the testamentary dispositions must be contained in a

Art. 780, Civil Code.
Arts. 841, 960, Civil Code.
48
2 Castan, 6th Ed., p. 616.
49
See Art. 1080, Civil Code, for other exception.
50
Art. 752, Civil Code.
51
6 Sanchez Roman 107.
46
47

16

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 781

will executed in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law,
while in this kind of succession, the donation or disposition does not
have to be contained in a will. It is, however, essential that it must
be executed in accordance with the form prescribed for donations by
reason of marriage; in other words, it must comply with the Statute
of Frauds.52
Art. 781. The inheritance of a person includes not only the
property and the transmissible rights and obligations existing at
the time of his death, but also those which have accrued thereto
since the opening of the succession.53
Extent of Inheritance. — According to Art. 781 in conjunction
with Art. 776, the inheritance of a person includes: first, all of his
property which are existing at the time of his death; second, all of
his transmissible rights and obligations which are existing at the
time of his death; and third, all of the property and rights which
may have accrued to the hereditary estate since the opening of the
succession.
Idem; Property in existence at decedent’s death. — In the
first place, the inheritance includes all of the decedent’s properties
in existence at the time of his death. It must be noted, however,
that this can only refer to those properties which are available
for distribution among the persons called to the inheritance after
settlement or liquidation.54
Does the body or mortal remains of the decedent form a part
of the inheritance? The view maintained by American authorities is
that it cannot be considered as a part of the inheritance inasmuch
as it is not property.55 It must be noted, however, that under Rep.
Act No. 349, as amended by Rep. Act No. 1056, a person may validly
grant to a licensed physician, surgeon, known scientist, or any
medical or scientific institution, authority to detach at any time
after the grantor’s death, any organ of his body, and to utilize the

Art. 127, Civil Code.
New provision.
54
See comments under Art. 776, Civil Code.
55
Alexander on Wills, Vol. I, pp. 316-317. For rules regarding funeral arrangements
— See Arts. 305, et seq., Civil Code, and Vda. de Carillo vs. Carillo, 67 Phil. 92.
52
53

17

ART. 781

SUCCESSION

same for medical, surgical or scientific purposes.56 The grant or
authorization must: (1) be in writing; (2) specify the person to whom
or the institution to which the grant is given; (3) specify the organ to
be detached; (4) specify the use or uses of the organ to be employed;
and (5) be signed by the grantor and two disinterested witnesses.57
If all of these requirements have been complied with, after the death
of the grantor, the grant or authorization shall be binding upon the
executor or administrator, successors of the deceased and members
of his family.58
Idem; Transmissible rights and obligations. — In the second place, the inheritance of a person includes all of his transmissible rights and obligations to which the persons called to such inheritance succeed after the settlement of liquidation of his estate. Since
enumeration of all of the different rights and obligations which are
either transmissible or intransmissible is almost impossible within
the limited scope of this work, the following rules might as well serve
as guides for the determination of the transmissible or intransmissible character of a right or obligation.59
(1) In the first place, rights relative to persons and family or
purely personal rights are, by their very nature, intransmissible in
character. Consequently, they are not included in the inheritance.
(2) In the second place, rights relative to property or patrimonial rights are generally transmissible in character. Consequently,
they may be included in the inheritance. Excepted from this rule are
those which are expressly made intransmissible by operation of law
such as personal and legal usufructs and personal easements.
(3) In the third place, rights arising from obligations or rights
of obligations, whether contractual or otherwise, are generally
transmissible in character. Consequently, they may be included
in the inheritance. Excepted from this rule are those arising from
contracts which by their very nature are intransmissible, those
which are expressly made intransmissible by agreement of the
parties, and those which are expressly made intransmissible by
operation of law.
Sec. 1, Rep. Act No. 349, as amended.
Sec. 2, Rep. Act No. 349, as amended.
58
Sec. 3, Rep. Act No. 349, as amended.
59
6 Sanchez 54-57.
56
57

18

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 781

Some of the rights and obligations which are intransmissible,
either because they are purely personal in character or they are
made so by operation of law, are the following: (1) rights and
obligations between husband and wife; (2) property relations
between husband and wife; (3) action for legal separation; (4)
action to compel acknowledgment of a natural child; (5) action to
obtain judicial declaration of illegitimate filiation of an illegitimate
child who is not natural; (6) parental authority or patria potestas;
(7) rights of a guardian; (8) right to receive and the obligation to
give support; (9) right to hold a public office as well as the right to
exercise a profession or vocation; (10) right of usufruct; (11) right
of personal easement; (12) rights and obligations arising from a
contract of partnership; (13) rights and obligations arising from a
contract of agency; and (14) criminal responsibility. Thus, where a
natural child dies survived by his mother, it has been held that the
right of action for the acknowledgment of the child is, in principle
and without exception, extinguished by his death, and cannot be
transmitted as a portion of the inheritance of such child.60 Similarly,
where a merchant dies leaving a mercantile business to his widow
and children, it has been held that such fact alone does not make
such widow and children merchants.61
Conde vs. Abaya
13 Phil. 249
The records show that Casiano Abaya died intestate, survived by his brother, Roman Abaya, and by two unacknowledged
natural children, who died during their minority after the death
of Casiano Abaya, but before the institution of this action. In the
intestate proceedings for the settlement of the estate of Casiano
Abaya, Roman Abaya, who had been appointed administrator
of the estate, filed a petition whereby he moved that he be declared, after due process of law, as the sole heir of the decedent.
Paula Conde, mother and heir of the two natural children, opposed the petition, contending that the right of the two natural children whom she had by the decedent, and consequently,
her rights as heir of such natural children, was superior to that
of Roman Abaya. The Supreme Court, speaking through Chief
Justice Arellano, held:
60
61

Conde vs. Abaya, 13 Phil. 249.
Hu Niu vs. Coll. of Customs, 26 Phil. 423.

19

ART. 781

SUCCESSION

“The power to transmit the right of such action by the
natural child to his heirs cannot be sustained under the law.
Although the Civil Code considerably improved the conditions
of recognized natural children, granting them rights and actions
that they did not possess under the former laws, they were not,
however, placed upon the same plane as legitimate ones. The difference that operates these two classes of children is still great,
as proven by so many articles dealing with the rights of the family and with succession in relation to the members thereof. It
may be laid down as a legal maxim, that whatever the Code does
not grant to the legitimate children must still less be understood
as granted to recognized natural children or in connection with
their rights. There is not a single exception in its provisions.
“The right of action pertaining to the child to claim his
legitimacy is in all respects superior to that of the child who
claims acknowledgment as a natural child. And it is evident
that the right of action to claim his legitimacy is not one of those
rights which the legitimate child may transmit by inheritance to
his heirs; it forms no part of the component rights of his inheritance. If it were so, there would have been no necessity to establish its transmissibility to heirs as an exception in the terms and
conditions of Article 118 (now Art. 268) of the Code. So that, in
order that it may constitute a portion of the child’s inheritance
it is necessary that the conditions and the terms contained in
Article 118 (now Art. 268) shall be present, since without them,
the right that the child held during his lifetime, being personal
and exclusive in principle and, therefore, as a general rule not
susceptible of transmission, would and should have been extinguished by his death. Therefore, where no express provision like
that of Article 118 (now Art. 268) exists, the right of action for
the acknowledgment of a natural child is, in principle and without exception, extinguished by his death, and cannot be transmitted as a portion of the inheritance of the deceased child.”

Idem; Id.— Monetary obligations. — Because of the doctrine
that it is the estate or the mass of property, rights and assets left
by the decedent, instead of the heirs directly, that becomes vested
and charged with his rights and obligations which survive after his
death,62 it is but logical that when the law speaks of transmissible
rights and obligations as being included in the inheritance, it can

62
Suiliong & Co. vs. Chio-Taysan, 12 Phil. 13: Centenera vs. Sotto, 78 Phil. 432:
Limjoco vs. Intestate Estate of Pedro Fragante, 80 Phil. 776.

20

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 781

only refer to those rights and obligations to which the persons called
to inherit either by will or by operation of law succeed after the settlement or liquidation of the estate. It must be noted, however, that
under the New Rules of Court, only monetary obligations or claims
for money must be filed within the time limited by the rules against
the estate of the decedent; otherwise, they are barred forever.63 It is
only these claims which must be liquidated in the testate or intestate proceedings. After liquidation, the court which has jurisdiction
over the proceedings, on application of the executor or administrator, or a person interested in the estate, and after hearing upon notice shall assign the residue of the estate to the persons entitled to
the same, naming them and the proportions, or parts, to which each
is entitled.64 Hence, under our system of procedure for the settlement of the estates of deceased persons, monetary obligations of the
decedent can only be charged against his estate and not against his
heirs.65 This may be illustrated by the following problem:
Problem — D was indebted to C for P500. When he died,
he had no property, but he was survived by X, his son, who was
making good in a certain business. As D had no property, C
brought an action against X for the payment of the P500 plus
legal interest thereon on the ground that not only the property
but also the rights and obligations of a person are transmitted
to his heirs upon his death either by will or by operation of law.
Is C entitled to the remedy sought for?
Answer — C is not entitled to the remedy. While it is true
that the inheritance of a person includes not only his property
but also his rights and obligations which are existing at the time
of his death, yet his monetary obligations are excluded by operation of law. This is so because under our system of procedure for
the settlement of the estate of deceased persons, such monetary
obligations of the decedent can only be charged against his estate and not against his heirs.

It must be noted that the claims or obligations which can be
charged against the estate of the decedent after his death are those

Sec. 5, Rule 88, New Rules of Court.
Sec. 1, Rule 91, New Rules of Court; Prieto vs. Valdez, (CA), G.R. No. 126347-R,
March 5, 1955.
65
Pavia vs. De la Rosa, 8 Phil. 70; Tranez vs. Vail,(CA), 37 Off. Gaz. 1253: Ledesma vs.
McLuchlin, 66 Phil. 547; Litonjua vs. Montilla, 90 Phil. 757.
63
64

21

ART. 781

SUCCESSION

monetary obligations contracted by the decedent himself during
his lifetime and not those contracted by his heirs. Consequently, a
creditor of one of the heirs has no standing or legal personality to
intervene in the testate or intestate proceedings for the settlement
of the estate of the decedent by filing a motion praying that the
participation of such heir in the inheritance should be sold in order to
pay for the obligation. This is so because the creditor is not a creditor
of the decedent but of the heir, and, therefore, is entitled to proceed
against the participation of such heir only after the settlement or
liquidation of the estate of the decedent.66
It is, therefore, clear from the provisions of the Rules of Court
and from the decided cases that monetary obligations cannot be
included in the inheritance. Other obligations, however, may be
included. Most of these obligations which may form a part of the
inheritance are those arising by operation of law from patrimonial
rights which are adjudicated to the heirs after liquidation of the
estate, such as those connected with ownership, possession or real
easements, as well as those arising from contracts the object of which
is the delivery of a thing other than money. Such obligations are
chargeable against the heirs, but only to the extent of the value of the
property which they may have received from the decedent.67 Thus,
where the decedent, during his lifetime, had assigned his interest in
a certain parcel of land to a certain creditor, but such assignment
is not registered, and, subsequently, such land is adjudicated to his
heirs, it would not be correct to say that the assignee should have
filed her claim in the intestate proceedings for the settlement of
the estate of the decedent, since the transaction is not a monetary
obligation. The transaction being binding between the parties, the
same can still be invoked against them or against their privies. This
means that the assignee can still press her claim against the heirs of
the decedent. Such heirs cannot escape the legal consequence of the
transaction because they have inherited the property subject to the
liability affecting their common ancestor.68

Litonjua vs. Montilla, 90 Phil. 757. To the same effect: Ledesma vs. McLuchlin,
66 Phil. 547.
67
Guinto vs. Medina, (CA), 50 Off. Gaz. 199. See Arts. 1311, 1429, Civil Code.
68
Vda. de Carillo vs. Salak, 91 Phil. 265. To the same effect: Guinto vs. Medina, (CA),
50 Off. Gaz. 199.
66

22

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 782

Idem; Accretions. — The inheritance of a person, according
to Art. 781, also includes any property or right which may have
accrued thereto since the opening of the succession. Some critics of
the New Civil Code have criticized this provision on the ground that
it is inaccurate and superfluous. According to them, since the rights
to the succession are transmitted from the time of the death of the
decedent,69 and, as a consequence, the heirs become the owners in
common of the hereditary estate from that time up to the time when
a partition of the estate is made among such heirs,70 therefore, any
property or right which may have accrued thereto since the opening
of the succession shall also belong in common to the heirs, not
because it is included in the inheritance, but because of the principle
of accession.71 Defenders of the New Civil Code, on the other hand,
maintain that since such property or right which may have accrued
to the hereditary estate since the opening of the succession is subject
to the payment of the debts of the decedent,72 in the same way as
any existing property or transmissible right originating from such
decedent, and since what will actually be distributed to the persons
who are called to the inheritance either by will or by operation of
law will be the net remainder or residue of the estate, therefore,
we must include in the inheritance all property and transmissible
rights which may have accrued thereto since the opening of the
succession.
Art. 782. An heir is a person called to the succession either
by the provision of a will or by operation of law.
Devisees and legatees are persons to whom gifts of real and
personal property are respectively given by virtue of a will.73
Heirs, Devisees and Legatees in General. — According to
the Code Commission, the concept of heir, devisee and legatee, as
enunciated in the above article, is taken from the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Suiliong Co vs. Chio-Taysan,74 but

Art. 777, Civil Code.
Art. 1078, Civil Code.
71
Art. 440, Civil Code.
72
Art. 1078, Civil Code.
73
New provision.
74
12 Phil. 12.
69
70

23

ART. 782

SUCCESSION

slightly modified so that the word “heir” includes not only a relative
who succeeds an intestate, but also any person who takes property
by virtue of a will.
These definitions, however, have been severely criticized by
some of our most eminent civilists. Thus, according to Mr. Justice
J.B.L. Reyes:
“The distinction between heir and legatee is not drawn
with precision, and yet the distinction is all important, for Arts.
854 (preterition) and 918 (disinheritance) provide cases where
the institution of heir is void, but the legacies and devices remain valid. The Code omits to state the fundamental difference:
that heirs are instituted to the whole or to an aliquot portion
thereof, i.e., the whole or a fraction of the whole; while a legatee
or devisee is given individual items of property. As noted by Ferrera (Rev. Der. Priv. 1923) the quality of heir does not depend
on the appellation given by the testator; it does not arise ex voluntate, sed ex re.
“Art. 782 makes it impossible to differentiate the voluntary heirs instituted by will from the legatees. In limiting legatees and devisees to persons to whom gifts of property are given,
it would logically follow that the quality of legatee or devisee
results from a donation mortis causa. This is not a differential
criterion, since donations mortis causa must have the formalities of wills. Furthermore, under this article, there would be
no justification of a separate regulation of legacies, as is done
in Sec. 7, Chi. 2, of the Project, since all testamentary legatees
would be heirs under Art. 782.
“Art. 660 of the Code of 1889 should be revived in lieu of
the present Art. 782.”75

Idem; Concept of heirs. — As noted above, the definition of
an heir as a person called to the succession either by the provision of
a will or by operation of law, has been criticized on the ground that
it does not properly differentiate voluntary heirs from devisees or
legatees. Under Art. 660 of the Spanish Civil Code, the distinction
between the two concepts was precise and clearcut.76 Yet, there is

Reyes, Observations on the New Civil Code, Lawyer’s Journal, Nov. 30, 1950.
Art. 660 of the Spanish Civil Code provides that “an heir is one who succeeds by
universal title,” while “a legatee is one who succeeds by particular title.”
75
76

24

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 782

no question that under the present Code, as deduced from certain
provisions, the distinction still remains.77 In other words, an heir
still succeeds to the whole or to an aliquot portion of the inheritance
either by virtue of a will or by operation of law, while a devisee or
legatee still succeeds to individual items of property by virtue of a
will. Thus, in a bill which passed the House of Representatives in
1952, but which was shelved in the Senate, the following definition
of an heir was proposed. “An heir is a person called to the whole or
an aliquot portion of the inheritance either by the provision of a will
or by operation of law.”78 It is evident that this amendment would
have corrected the defect of the definition of an heir embodied in
Art. 782.
Idem; Id. — Kinds of heirs. — There are two classes of heirs
in testamentary succession. They are voluntary and compulsory
heirs. A voluntary heir is an heir called to succeed to the whole or an
aliquot part of the disposable free portion of the hereditary estate by
virtue of the will of the testator, while a compulsory heir is an heir
called by law to succeed to a portion of the testator’s estate known as
the legitime.79 This classification of heirs in testamentary succession
into voluntary and compulsory is based on the fact that, under our
law of succession, if the testator is survived by certain relatives for
whom the law as a matter of policy has reserved a portion of his
hereditary estate, such estate, is, as a general rule, divided into
two parts. One part is known as the disposable free portion over
which the testator has absolute testamentary control and which,
consequently, may be disposed of by will in favor of any person not
disqualified by law to succeed, while the other part is known as the
legal portion or legitime over which the testator has no testamentary
control because the law has already reserved it for certain heirs who
are, therefore, called compulsory heirs, and which, consequently,
cannot be disposed of by will in favor of any other person.
In legal or intestate succession, all heirs are called legal or
intestate heirs. In order to distinguish such heirs from compulsory
heirs who are also called to succeed by operation of law, a legal or
intestate heir is ordinarily defined as an heir called to succeed by
operation of law when legal or intestate succession takes place.
See Arts. 854, 918, Civil Code.
House Bill No. 1956.
79
See Arts. 886, 887, Civil Code.
77
78

25

ART. 782

SUCCESSION

Intestate or legal heirs are classified into two groups, namely: those
who inherit by their own right, and those who inherit by the right of
representation. An intestate heir can only inherit either by his own
right, as in the order of intestate succession provided for in Arts. 978
to 1014 of the Civil Code, or by right of representation provided for
in Arts. 981 of the same law.80
Idem; Concept of devisees and legatees. — According to
the second paragraph of Art. 782, devisees and legatees are persons
to whom gifts of real and personal property are respectively given by
virtue of a will. From this and other related provisions of the Civil
Code, the following considerations must, therefore, be noted:
(1) Devises and legacies are possible only in testamentary
succession. This is evident from the provision of the second paragraph
of Art. 782.
(2) A devisee or legatee always succeeds to individual items
of property by means of a particular or special title. This is so in
spite of the fact that the original definition of a legatee (or devisee)
as a person who succeeds by particular title has not been retained in
the New Civil Code. To hold otherwise would destroy altogether the
distinction between institution of heirs and devises or legacies — a
distinction which is still preserved in the New Civil Code by virtue
of the provisions of Art. 854 regarding the effects of preterition and
of Art. 918 regarding the effects of imperfect disinheritance. This
distinction was stated by the Supreme Court in a certain case as follows:
“With reference to Article 813 (now Art. 854), it must be
observed that the institution of heirs is therein dealt with as a
thing separate and distinct from legacies. And they are separate
and distinct not only because they are distinctly and separately
treated in said article, but because they are in themselves different. Institution of heirs is a bequest by universal title of property that is undetermined. Legacy refers to specific property bequeathed by a particular or special title.”81

80
Intestate Estate of Petra V. Rosales, et al. vs. Rosales, G.R. No. L-40789, February 27, 1987.
81
Neri vs. Akutin, 72 Phil. 322.

26

GENERAL PROVISIONS

ART. 782

Thus, if the testator makes a will devising a certain parcel of land
to A and bequeathing his automobile to B, A is a devisee, while B is
a legatee.
(3) The devise or legacy which is given to a devisee or legatee
by means of a will is, as a general rule, a charge against the free
portion of the testator’s property. This rule can be clearly deduced
from the provisions of Arts. 914 and 925 of the Civil Code. It must
be noted, however, that this rule is of practical importance only in
case the testator is survived by compulsory heirs who, under our
system of compulsory succession, are entitled to a legitime. In such
case, the testator’s hereditary estate is divided, as a general rule,
into the legitime or legal portion and the disposable free portion.
Since it is a rule that the testator has no testamentary control over
the legitime, it follows that devises and legacies can only be charged
against the disposable free portion. If the testator is not survived by
compulsory heirs, his entire property is considered as free property,
in which case, the devises and legacies can be charged against the
entire property.
Hence, we can define devisees and legatees more accurately as
persons to whom gifts of individual items of real and personal property, chargeable, as a general rule, against the disposable portion of
the testator’s hereditary estate, are respectively given by virtue of
a will.
Idem; Id. — Distinguished from heirs. — From what
has been stated, it is evident that devisees or legatees may be
distinguished from heirs in the following ways:
(1) Devisees or legatees are always called to succeed to individual items of property, while heirs are always called to succeed
to an indeterminate or aliquot portion of the decedent’s hereditary
estate. In other words, the first succeed by particular title (titulo
particular), while the second succeed by universal title (titulo universal).
(2) Devisees or legatees are always called to succeed by means
of a will, while heirs are called to succeed either by means of a will,
(voluntary) or by operation of law (compulsory and legal).
It must be noted, however, that the only distinction between
devisees and legatees, on one hand, and voluntary heirs on the other
hand, is, while the first are always called to succeed to individual
27

ART. 782

SUCCESSION

items of property, as when the testator bequeaths an automobile or
devises a parcel of land or a house to a certain person, the second
are always called to succeed to an indeterminate or aliquot portion
of the testator’s hereditary estate, as when the testator institutes a
friend to succeed to one-half or one-fourth of the free portion of his
estate. In the terse language of the Spanish Civil Code, a devisee or
legatee succeeds by particular title, while a voluntary heir succeeds
by universal title. On the other hand, they are similar in the sense
that both are called to succeed by means of a will and also in the
sense that the shares of both are chargeable against the disposable
free portion of the testator’s estate. As it is, the two are sometimes
considered synonymous.82
Idem; Id.; Id. — Importance of distinction. — Although,
apparently, the distinction between voluntary heirs and devisees or
legatees has been somewhat eroded by the definitions enunciated in
Art. 782 of the Civil Code, nevertheless, the distinction is still very
important in the following instances:
(1) In case of preterition or pretermission in the testator’s
will of one, some, or all of the compulsory heirs in the direct line:
According to Art. 854 of the Civil Code, the effect is to annul entirely
the institution of heirs, but legacies and devises shall be valid insofar
as they are not inofficious.
(2) In case of imperfect or defective disinheritance: According
to Art. 918 of the Code, the effect is to annul the institution of heirs
to the extent that the legitime of the disinherited heir is prejudiced,
but legacies and devises shall be valid insofar as they are not
inofficious.
(3) In case properties are acquired by the testator after
the execution of the will: According to Art. 793 of the Code, such
properties are not, as a rule, included among the properties disposed
of unless it should expressly appear in the will itself that such was
the testator’s intention. It is evident that this rule is applicable only
to legacies and devises and not to institution of heirs.

82

See comments under Art. 856, Civil Code.

28

Chapter II

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Section 1. — Wills
Subsection 1. — Wills in General
Art. 783. A will is an act whereby a person is permitted, with
the formalities prescribed by law, to control to a certain degree the
disposition of his estate, to take effect after his death.1
Concept of Wills. — The above article gives the definition of
a will. There are, however, other well-known definitions. Thus, according to Page, a will is a disposition, made by a competent testator
in the form prescribed by law, of property over which he has legal
power of disposition, which disposition is of such nature as to take
effect after his death.2 According to Jarman, it is an instrument by
which a person makes a disposition of his property to take effect
after his death, and which is, in its own nature, ambulatory and
revocable during his life.3 According to Bigelow, it is (1) a written
instrument (2) duly executed and attested, by which (3) a competent
person makes (4) a voluntary disposition (5) of property (6) in favor of another competent person (7) to take effect after the maker’s
death, (8) meantime being revocable. The divisions marked by numerals point out the elements of a will.4
Problem – What is meant by a will?
Answer – A will is an act whereby a person is permitted,
with the formalities prescribed by law, to control to a certain

Art. 667, Spanish Civil Code.
Page on Wills, Vol. I, p. 4.
3
Jarman on Wills, p. 18.
4
Bigelow on Wills, p. 35.
1
2

29

ART. 784

SUCCESSION

degree the disposition of his estate, to take effect after his death.
(Art. 783, NCC.)
Decades ago, Justice Moreland, in his dissenting opinion
in Santos vs. Manarang, 27 Phil. 209, wrote:
A will is the testator speaking after death. Its provisions
have substantially the same force and effect in the probate court
as if the testator stood before the court in full life making the
declarations by word of mouth as they appear in the will. That
was the special purpose of the law in the creation of the instrument known as the last will and testament. Men wished to
speak after they were dead and the law, by the creation of that
instrument, permitted them to do so x x x. All doubts must be
resolved in favor of the testator having meant just what he said
(Alonso Q. Ancheta vs. Candelaria Guersey-Dalaygon, G.R. No.
139868, June 8, 2006).

Characteristics of Wills. — From the codal definition found
in Art. 783 and from related provisions of the Civil Code. It is evident
that a will should have the following characteristics:
1.
It is a strictly personal act;
2.
It is an individual and unilateral act;
3.
It is a free and voluntary act;
4.
It is a formal and solemn act;
5.
It is a disposition of property;
6.
It is an act mortis causa; and
7.
It is ambulatory and revocable during the testator’s
lifetime.5
Art. 784. The making of a will is a strictly personal act;
it cannot be left in whole or in part to the discretion of a third
person, or accomplished through the instrumentality of an agent
or attorney.6
Personal Character of Wills. — The first and most peculiar
characteristic of a will is that it is a strictly personal act. Conse-

5
6

6 Sanchez Roman 204; 4 Castan, (6th Ed.), p. 262.
Art. 670, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

30

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Wills in General

ARTS. 785-787

quently, the making of a will cannot be delegated or left in whole or
in part to the discretion of a third person, or accomplished through
the instrumentality of an agent or attorney.7 It must be observed,
however, that the mere act of drafting or writing of the will does not
fall within the purview of the prohibition. Thus, it has been held
that who does the mechanical work of writing the will is a matter of
indifference. The fact, therefore, that the will was typewritten in the
office of a lawyer is of no consequence.8
Art. 785. The duration or efficacy of the designation of heirs,
devisees or legatees, or the determination of the portions which
they are to take, when referred to by name, cannot be left to the
discretion of a third person.9
Delegation of Testamentary Acts. — Art. 785 is an
extension of Art. 784. There are three acts inseparably or intimately
connected with the making of a will, acts which are testamentary in
character, and which, therefore, cannot be left in whole or in part to
the discretion of a third person. They are: first, the duration of the
designation of heirs, devisees or legatees; second, the efficacy of the
designation; and third, the determination of the portions which they
are to take when referred to by name.
Art. 786. The testator may entrust to a third person the
distribution of specific property or sums of money that he may
leave in general to specified classes or causes, and also the
designation of the persons, institutions or establishments to which
such property or sums of money are to be given or applied.10
Art. 787. The testator may not make a testamentary disposition
in such manner that another person has to determine whether or
not it is to be operative.11
Delegation of Non-Testamentary Acts. — It must be noted
that while Art. 785 enumerates in absolute terms the different
things which the testator cannot do, Art. 786 enumerates by way
Art. 784, Civil Code.
Castañeda vs. Alemany, 3 Phil. 426.
9
Art. 670, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
10
Art. 671, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
11
New provision.
7
8

31

ARTS. 788-789

SUCCESSION

of exception the different things which he may do.12 Although the
making of a will, including all the testamentary acts connected
therewith, cannot be left in whole or in part to the discretion of a
third person, the testator, in order to make the different devises or
legacies more effective, is allowed to entrust to a third person: first,
the power to distribute specific property or sums of money which he
may have left in general to specified classes or causes: and second,
the power to designate the persons, institutions or establishments
to which such property or sums of money are to be given or applied.
Thus, he may bequeath P100,000 to a specified class, such as the
different charitable institutiona of Manila, or to a specified cause,,
such as the cause of labor, entrusting, at the same time, to the
executor of his estate the power to distribute the amount and also
the power to designate the different institutions or organizations to
whom the said amount shall be given. It is evident, therefore, that in
the cases contemplated by the article under discussion, the testator
has already completed the testamentary act of making a will; what
he entrusts to the third person are merely the details thereof in
order to make the devise or legacy more effective.
Art. 787, on the other hand, prohibits the testator from making
a testamentary disposition which would allow another person to
determine whether it is to be operative or not. Although the act
determining whether a testamentary disposition is to be operative
or not is not exactly testamentary in character, it is evident that
the delegation of such act to a third person would be tantamount
to allowing the testator to substitute the will of a third person for
his own, which is precisely what the law intends to prevent when it
states that the making of a will cannot be left in whole or in part to
the discretion of a third person.
Art. 788. If a testamentary disposition admits of different interpretations, in case of doubt, that interpretation by which the
disposition is to be operative shall be preferred.13
Art. 789. When there is an imperfect description, or when no
person or property exactly answers the description, mistakes and
omissions must be corrected, if the error appears from the context
of the will or from extrinsic evidence, excluding the oral declarations
12
13

5 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 423.
New provision.

32

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Wills in General

ARTS. 790-794

of the testator as to his Intention; and when an uncertainty
arises upon the face of the will, as to the application of any of
its provisions, the testator’s intention is to be ascertained from
the words of the will, taking into consideration the circumstances
under which it was made, excluding such oral declarations.14
Art. 790. The words of a will are to be taken in their ordinary and
grammatical sense, unless a clear intention to use them in another
sense can be gathered, and that other can be ascertained.
Technical words in a will are to be taken in their technical
sense, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intention,
or unless it satisfactorily appears that the will was drawn solely
by the testator, and that he was unacquainted with such technical
sense.15
Art. 791. The words of a will are to receive an interpretation
which will give to every expression some effect, rather than one
which will render any of the expressions inoperative; and of two
modes of interpreting a will, that is to be preferred which will
prevent intestacy.16
Art. 792. The invalidity of one of several dispositions contained
in a will does not result in the invalidity of the other dispositions,
unless it is to be presumed that the testator would not have made
such other dispositions if the first invalid disposition had not been
made.17
Art. 793. Property acquired after the making of a will shall
only pass thereby, as if the testator had possessed it at the time
of making the will, should it expressly appear by the will that such
was his intention.18
Art. 794. Every devise or legacy shall convey all the interest
which the testator could devise or bequeath in the property
disposed of, unless it clearly appears from the will that he intended
to convey a less interest.19

New provision.
New provision.
16
New provision.
17
New provision.
18
New provision.
19
New provision.
14
15

33

ART. 794

SUCCESSION

Construction of Wills. — The above articles enunciate the
different rules for the construction or interpretation of wills.
Recognition of the fundamental axiom that ascertainment
and effectuation of the intention of the testator is controlling in the
construction of wills is found in American and Philippine decisions.
American courts have stated this principle in various forms, among
which may be cited, by way of example, such statements as the
following: “The chief object and purpose in construing a will is to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the testator; the cardinal
rule of testamentary construction is to ascertain the intention of the
testator and give it effect; the construction of any will must be for
the purpose of determining the dominant intent of the testator; if
the testator’s intent can be clearly perceived or ascertained, it must
prevail; a will is to be so interpreted as to carry out the intention of the
testator; a will must be construed so as to give full force and effect to
the purpose of the testator; in construing a will, the courts must give
effect to the intention expressed by the testator and carry out the
object desired by him in disposing of his property; the whole effort, in
the construction of a will, is to ascertain and give the fullest possible
effect to the intention of the testator; the court will place itself in
the position of the testator, ascertain his intent from the provisions
of the will, and enforce it; the intention of the testator is the basic
and fundamental rule in the construction of wills; the intent of the
testator will control or govern the construction of a will; the purpose
of construing a will is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of
the testator; the testator’s intent is the all-important consideration
in the construction of wills.” Thus, in American decisions, the
testatorial intention, or its ascertainment and effectuation, has
frequently been described as the “polar star,” “polestar,” “guiding
star” or “Golden Rule” of testamentary construction. The rule that
the testatorial intention governs in the construction of a will has
been held to apply to every clause and part of the instrument. And
a testator’s intention, it has been said, is necessarily his intention
when the will was executed.20
Idem; Dispositions susceptible of different interpretations. — Under Art. 788, if a testamentary disposition admits of
different interpretations, in case of doubt, that interpretation by

20

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 1133, p. 762.

34

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Wills in General

ART. 794

which the disposition is to be operative shall be preferred. Under
this rule, that construction is to be adopted which will sustain and
uphold the will in all its parts, if it can be done consistently with the
established rules of law. If the language used is reasonably susceptible of two different interpretations, one which will defeat, and the
other sustain, the provisions, the doubt is to be resolved in favor of
the construction which will give effect to the will, rather than the
one which will defeat it.21
Idem; Mistakes and omissions. — The rules stated in Art.
789 which supplement the Parole Evidence Rule enunciated in Sec.
9, Rule 130 of the New Rules of Court, refer to a will where there
are mistakes or omissions with regard to persons or property or
where there are uncertainties with regard to the application of its
provisions. There are therefore two distinct cases contemplated in
this article. They are:
(1) When there is an imperfect description or when no
person or property exactly answers the description. In this case, the
mistake or omission must be corrected by ascertaining the testatorial
intention using for this purpose either intrinsic or extrinsic evidence
or both, but excluding the oral declarations of the testator as to his
intention. This rule may be illustrated by the following example:
The testator, who owns two parcels of land in a certain province, has
devised one of them to his nephew, A. During the testate proceedings
for the settlement of his estate after his death, a question arose as to
the identity of the land devised because of the imperfect description
of the property in the will. In such a case, how can the identity of the
property devised be determined? It is clear that under Art. 789 of the
Code, A may avail himself of either intrinsic or extrinsic evidence or
of both in order to ascertain the testatorial intention. He cannot,
however, testify or present witnesses who will testify to the effect
that, during his lifetime, the testator verbally declared or revealed
the identity of the property which he intended to devise, because
it is evident that such testimony would be hearsay and therefore
inadmissible as evidence.
(2) When there is an uncertainty arising upon the face of the
will as to the application of any of its provisions. In this case, the
testatorial intention is to be ascertained from the context of the will
21

Ibid., Sec. 1126, pp. 720-721.

35

ART. 795

SUCCESSION

and the circumstances under which it was made, but again excluding
the oral declarations of the testator as to his intention.
Idem; After-acquired property. — Under Art. 794, property
acquired during the interval between the execution of the will and
the death of the testator are not, as a rule, included among the
properties disposed of, unless it should expressly appear in the will
itself that such was the intention of the testator. Thus, if the testator
made a will in 1965 disposing of his properties in the form of gifts
or bequests of specific or determinate real or personal properties,
and subsequently, during the period from 1965 to the time of his
death in 1978 he is able to acquire other properties, according to Art.
793, the will shall only pass those properties which he had at the
time of its execution in 1965, but not those which he had acquired
subsequent thereto.
It is clear, however, in spite of the silence of the law, that the
rule can be applied only to devises and legacies and not to institution
of heirs. This can be inferred from the provisions of Arts. 776 and
781 regarding the extent of the inheritance. As a matter of fact,
according to the latter article, the inheritance of a person includes
not only the property and the transmissible rights and obligations
existing at the time of his death, but also those which may have
accrued thereto since the opening of the succession. Consequently,
if, for instance, the testator had executed a will in 1960 instituting
his three children, A, B and C, as his universal heirs in such a way
that A shall be entitled to 1/2, B to 1/4, and C the remainder, and
he died only in 1978, leaving considerable properties, most of which
were acquired during the period between 1960 and 1978. It is evident
that the division of the estate as dictated in the will shall be applied
not only to those properties existing at the time of the execution of
the will in 1960, but even to those that were acquired subsequent
thereto.
Art. 795. The validity of a will as to its form depends upon the
observance of the law in force at the time it is made.22
Law Governing Form of Wills. — According to the above
article, the validity of a will as to its form depends upon the
observance of the law in force at the time it is made. Consequently,
22

New Provision.

36

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Wills in General

ART. 795

if a law different from the law in force at the time of the execution of
the will goes into effect before or after the death of the testator, such
a law shall not affect the validity of the will, provided that -such will
was duly executed in accordance with the formalities prescribed by
the law in force at the time it was made.
The rule stated in this article is but an expression of the view,
which is upheld by the weight of authority, that the formal validity
of a will is to be judged not by the law in force at the time of the
testator’s death, or at the time the supposed will is presented in
court for probate, or when the petition is decided by the court, but
at the time the instrument was executed. One reason in support of
the rule is that although the will operates only after the death of the
testator, in reality, his wishes regarding the disposition of his estate
among his heirs, devisees and legatees are given solemn expression
at the time the will is executed and thus becomes a completed act.23
Idem; Effect of changes after testator’s death. — Upon the
death of the testator, successional rights arising from the will are
vested in the persons called to the inheritance either as heirs or as
devisees or legatees. In other words, the title of such heirs, devisees
or legatees becomes a vested right, protected under the due process
clause of the Constitution against any subsequent change in the law
which would have the effect of invalidating the will. Consequently,
to allow retroactivity of effect to any statutory change enacted after
the death of the testator so as to invalidate a will which was perfectly
valid at the time of its execution since it has complied with all of the
formalities prescribed by the law then in force would certainly be
equivalent to a deprivation of property rights without due process
of law.24 Thus, in Bona vs. Briones,25 a case decided long before the
enactment of the New Civil Code, it was held that although his will
did not comply with the additional formalities prescribed by a law
enacted after the death of the testator, yet it can still be admitted to
probate since it had complied with all of the formalities prescribed
by the law in force at the time of its execution.26
23
Enriquez vs. Abadia, 50 Off. Gaz. 4185. To the same effect: In re Will of Riosa, 39
Phil. 23.
24
Enriquez vs. Abadia, 50 Off. Gaz. 4185.
25
38 Phil. 276.
26
The will in this case was executed in 1911 in accordance with Sec. 618 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, which was the law then in force. The testator died in 1913. In 1916, Act
No. 2645, amending Sec. 618 of the Code of Civil Procedure, was enacted.

37

ART. 795

SUCCESSION

By parity of reasoning, when the testator executes a will which
is invalid for failure to comply with the formalities prescribed by
law at the time of its execution, then upon his death he should be
regarded and declared as having died intestate, and his heirs will
then inherit in accordance with the rules of intestate succesion, and
no subsequent law with more liberal requirements or which dispenses
with such requirements as to execution should be allowed to validate
a defective will and thereby divest the heirs of their vested rights in
the estate by intestate succession.27 Thus, in the case of Enriquez vs.
Abadia,28 a case decided under the New Civil Code, where the will
which was presented for probate was a holographic will executed in
1923 when holographic wills were not yet recognized by law, it was
held that although such wills are now recognized under Art. 810 of
the New Civil Code, nevertheless, under Art. 795 of the same Code,
it is evident that the will cannot be admitted to probate.29
In synthesis, we can therefore say that a will perfectly valid at
the time of its execution cannot be invalidated by a law enacted after
the death of the testator; neither can a will totally void at the time of
its execution be validated by such subsequent legislation.30
Idem; Effect of changes before testator’s death. — As a
general rule, any statutory change enacted after the execution of the
will but before the death of the testator cannot have any retroactive
effect upon the formal validity of a will. The only exception which
is recognized is when a retroactive effect is expressly declared
by the statute itself or is necessarily implied from the language
used therein.31 This exception does not violate the constitutional
prohibition regarding deprivation of property without due process of
law because the statute is enacted before the death of the testator,
and as a consequence, no rights are as yet vested in the persons
called to the inheritance either as heirs, devisees or legatees.

Enriquez vs. Abadia, 50 Off. Gaz. 4188.
50 Off. Gaz. 4188.
29
The testator in this case died in 1943, although the will was presented for probate
after the effectivity of the New Civil Code.
30
Thompson on Wills, Sec. 26, pp. 55-56.
31
Art. 4, Civil Code; In re Will of Riosa, 39 Phil. 23.
27
28

38

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ART. 796

Subsection 2. — Testamentary Capacity
and Intent
Nature of Testamentary Capacity. — Testamentary capacity refers to the ability as well as the power to make a will. Although
there is authority for the view that the right to make a will is an
inherent or natural right, according to most authorities, it is purely
a creature of statute, and, as such, is subject to legislative regulation and control. Aptly stated, the dead hand rules succession only
by sufferance.1
It must be observed that although the Civil Code speaks only
of testamentary capacity, nevertheless, there is a well-recognized
distinction in American law between testamentary capacity and testamentary power. The first concerns the ability of the testator, while
the second involves a privilege under the law.2 Hence, although a
person may have testamentary capacity to make a will, it does not
necessarily follow that he also has testamentary power to do so.
Thus, formerly at common law, convicts and married women had
the capacity and yet were denied the power to make a will. Here, in
the Philippines, the above distinction has been lost altogether. As a
matter of fact, the term “testamentary power” is sometimes understood to refer to the power of the testator to designate the person or
persons who are to succeed him in his property, and transmissible
rights and obligations.
Art. 796. All persons who are not expressly prohibited by law
may make a will.3
Persons with Testamentary Capacity. — According to the
above article, all persons who are not prohibited by law may make
a will. It must be noted, however, that the only persons who are
expressly prohibited from making a will are those who do not possess
the necessary age and mental requirements.4 Other circumstances
such as family relations, civil interdiction, prodigality, insolvency,
alienage, and others of similar nature, which ordinarily modify or
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 52, pp. 74-75.
Hamilton vs. Morgan, 93 Fla. 311, 112 So 80 citing R.C.L.
3
Art. 662, Spanish Civil Code.
4
Arts. 797, 798, Civil Code.
1
2

39

ART. 797

SUCCESSION

limit capacity to act, do not affect or restrict testamentary capacity.
Consequently, in order that a person can make a will, the following
requisites are necessary:
(1)

He must be at least eighteen years of age;5 and

(2)

He must be of a sound mind.6

Idem; When capacity must exist. — Testamentary capacity
must exist at the time of the execution of the will. This is evident
from the provisions of Arts. 798, 800, and 801 of the Code. Thus, in
the probate proceedings for the allowance of the will either during
the lifetime or after the death of the testator, one of the principal
questions which must be presented for determination to the probate
court is whether or not the testator had the necessary testamentary
capacity at the time of the execution of the will.7
Art. 797. Persons of either sex under eighteen years of age
cannot make a will.8
Age Requirement. — According to the above article, in order
that a person can make a will, it is necessary that he must be at
least eighteen years of age. Failure to conform with the requirement
shall invalidate the will.9
When does a person reach the age of eighteen — does he reach
it at the commencement of the day which is popularly known as his
birthday or at the commencement of the day preceding his birthday?
According to the weight of authority in American law, a person is said
to have reached the required age at the commencement of the day
preceding what is popularly known as his birthday.10 Consequently,
some commentators of the Civil Code of the Philippines maintain
that since our law on testamentary capacity is of Anglo-American
origin, the interpretation given in the jurisdiction of origin should be
observed here.11 It is, however, submitted that in view of the explicit
Art. 797, Civil Code.
Art. 798, Civil Code.
7
Castañeda vs. Alemany, 3 Phil. 427; Pimentel vs. Palanca, 5 Phil. 436; Montanano
vs. Suesa, 14 Phil. 676.
8
New provision, Sec. 614, Act No. 190.
9
Art. 839, No. 2, Civil Code.
10
Gardner on Wills, p. 86; Page on Wills, Vol. 1, p. 245.
11
3 Tolentino, Civil Code, (1956 Ed.), p. 42.
5
6

40

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ARTS. 798-800

provision of Art. 13 of the Civil Code which states that when the
law speaks of years, it shall be understood that it consists of three
hundred sixty-five days, and that “in computing a period, the first
day shall be excluded, and the last day included,” a person is said
to have reached the age of eighteen within the meaning of the law
only at the commencement of the day which is popularly known as
his birthday.
Art. 798. In order to make a will it is essential that the testator
be of sound mind at the time of its execution.12
Art. 799. To be of sound mind, it is not necessary that the
testator be in full possession of all his reasoning faculties, or
that his mind be wholly unbroken, unimpaired, or unshattered by
disease, injury or other cause.
It shall be sufficient if the testator was able at the time of
making the will, to know the nature of the estate to be disposed
of, the proper objects of his bounty, and the character of the
testamentary act.13
Art. 800. The law presumes that every person is of sound
mind, in the absence of proof to the contrary.
The burden of proof that the testator was not of sound
mind at the time of making his dispositions is on the person who
opposes the probate of the will; but if the testator, one month,
or less, before making his will publicly known to be insane, the
person who maintains the validity of the will must prove that the
testator made it during a lucid interval.14
Mental Requirement. — According to Art. 798 of the Code,
in order that the testator can make a will it is essential that he must
be of a sound mind at the time of its execution. The definition of a
sound mind is given in the next article, although it must be observed
that the first paragraph enunciates the negative definition, while
the second enunciates the positive definition. Both definitions are
derived from American sources.

New provision.
New provision.
14
New provision.
12
13

41

ART. 800

SUCCESSION

It is evident from both definitions that absolute soundness of
mind and memory is not essential in order that a person can make
a will. In the language of the Code, “to be of sound mind, it is not
necessary that the testator be in full possession of all his reasoning
faculties, or that his mind be wholly unbroken, unimpaired, or
unshattered by disease, injury or other cause. It shall be sufficient
if the testator was able at the time of making the will to know the
nature of the estate to be disposed of, the proper objects of his
bounty, and the character of the testamentary act.”15
Idem; Test of a sound mind. — Testamentary capacity is
determined objectively from the standpoint of the purpose to be accomplished. Consequently, “soundness of mind” means ability of the
testator mentally to understand in a general way the nature and
extent of his property, his relation to those who naturally have a
claim to benefit from the property left by him, and a general understanding of practical effect of the will as executed. The testator,
however, must be able to understand the business in which he is
engaged when he makes his will, and to appreciate the effect of the
disposition made by him of his property. If he knows the nature of
the estate to be disposed of, the proper objects of his bounty, and
understands the character of the testamentary act, he has sufficient
capacity to make a will.16
“The question is not so much, what was the degree of memory
possessed by the testator, as, had he a disposing memory? Was he
able to remember the property he was about to bequeath, the manner of distributing it, and the objects of his bounty? In other words,
were his mind and memory sufficiently sound to know and understand the business in which he was engaged at the time when he
executed his will?’’17
It is, therefore, clear that whenever the testamentary capacity
of the testator is put in issue during the probate proceedings, three
questions are always asked in order to determine whether or not the
testator was of sound mind at the time of the execution of will. They
are: first, whether he knew, at least in a general way, the nature of
the estate to be disposed of; second, whether he knew, at least in a

Art. 798, Civil Code.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 64, pp. 81-82.
17
Campbell vs. Campbell, 130 Ill. 466, quoted in Bagtas vs. Paguio, 22 Phil. 227.
15
16

42

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ART. 800

general way, the proper objects of his bounty; and third, whether he
understood or comprehended the character of the testamentary act.
Idem; Presumption of sound mind. — According to Art.
800 of the Code, “the law presumes that every person is of sound
mind, in the absence of proof to the contrary. The burden of proof
that the testator was not of a sound mind at the time of making his
dispositions is on the person who opposes the probate of the will.”
Consequently, it is only when those seeking to overthrow the will
have clearly established the charge of mental incapacity that the
courts will intervene to set aside a testamentary document.18 Thus,
according to Chief Justice Arellano:
“The Code might have adopted either one of the two systems (with respect to the mental capacity of the testator) — that
of establishing as a general rule the presumption of soundness
of the mental faculties until the contrary be proven, or that of
presuming mental weakness in the absence of proof that the act
was performed while the mental faculties were in their normal
condition. Under the first presumption, a will made should be
declared valid in all cases, in the absence of evidence to the contrary. Under the second it would have to be considered as void
upon the presumption that it was executed by a person demented unless the contrary is shown. The Code has adopted the first
system as being the most rational, by accepting the principle
that mental soundness is always to be presumed with respect
to a person who has not been previously incapacitated until the
contrary is demonstrated and proven by the proper persons; the
correctness of this choice is beyond doubt; in the meantime the
intervention of the notary and the witnesses constitutes a true
guaranty of the capacity of the testator, by reason of their knowledge of the matter. (Manresa, Commentaries, Vol. 5, 344).’’19

Idem; Id. – Inversion of presumption. — If the testator,
one month or less, before making his will, was publicly known to
be insane, the presumption of soundness of mind is inverted.20 In
other words, instead of a presumption of mental capacity, there is a
presumption of mental incapacity. Consequently, the burden of proof
18
Hernaez vs. Hernaez, 1 Phil. 689; In re Will of Butalid, 10 Phil. 27; Bagtas vs.
Paguio, 22 Phil. 227; Torres and Lopez vs. Lopez, 48 Phil. 722.
19
Hernaez vs. Hernaez, 1 Phil. 689.
20
Art. 800, Civil Code.

43

ART. 800

SUCCESSION

is shifted to the proponents of the will. They must prove by proper
evidence that the testator made the will during a lucid interval.
What is meant by a lucid interval? According to Thompson,
it may be described as that period in which an insane person is so
far free from his disease, that the ordinary legal consequences of
insanity do not apply to acts done therein.21 More precisely, it refers
to that period in which an insane person has so far recovered from
his insanity so that he is in a position to be able at the time of making
his will to know the nature of the state to be disposed of, the proper
objects of his bounty, and the character of the testamentary act. In
American law, the rule is that, as distinguished from temporary
mental weakness, insanity of a confirmed or permanent nature,
shown to have afflicted the testator at one time, is presumed to have
continued to the subsequent time of the execution of the will, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, and that once it is established
that the testator had been afflicted with insanity of such type, the
burden rests upon the proponent of the will to produce evidence that
the incapacity did not exist when the will was executed, or to show
that the will was made during a lucid interval.22 Under our law,
the rule is that if the testator, one month, or less, before making
his will was publicly known to be insane, the person who maintains
the validity of the will must prove that the testator made it during
a lucid interval. Hence, if it cannot be established that the testator
was publicly known to be insane within the required period of one
month or less before the making of his will, the presumption of
mental capacity stands, and as a consequence, there will be no need
on the part of the proponents of the will to prove that the testator
made it during a lucid interval.
There is another case or instance when the presumption of
mental capacity is inverted which we might as well consider as
the second exception to the rule that every person is presumed to
possess mental capacity. This occurs when the testator makes a will
at a time when he is still under guardianship. Thus, in Torres and
Lopez de Bueno vs. Lopez,23 the Supreme Court held that where the
testator was under guardianship at the time of the making of his
will, there arises a prima facie presumption of mental incapacity;
Thompson on Wills, Sec. 65, p. 114.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 94, pp. 101-102; Thompson on Wills, Sec. 65, pp. 114-116.
23
48 Phil. 772.
21
22

44

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ART. 800

consequently, the burden of proving soundness of mind in such case
is cast upon the proponents of the will.
Idem; Sufficiency of evidence of mental capacity. —
Whether the burden is cast upon the contestants of the will to prove
mental incapacity of the testator or upon the proponents to prove
mental capacity, the rule is that the evidence which should be presented must cover a wide range in order that all facts may be brought
out which will assist the court in determining the question of mental
capacity. The testimony of the subscribing witnesses as well as that
of those present at the execution of the will, and of the attending
physician concerning the testator’s mental condition is entitled to
great weight where they are truthful and intelligent.24
Sometimes, however, the question of evidence regarding the
testator’s mental condition becomes a ticklish problem when there
is a conflict between the testimony of the subscribing witnesses
or of those present at the execution of the will and the testimony
of the attending physician. According to the weight of authority,
where the testimony of the attending physician is based on mere
professional speculation, such testimony cannot prevail over the
positive statements of credible witnesses whose testimony does not
in itself seem unreasonable.25 However, if the testimony of such
physician is not in the nature of mere professional speculation, as
when it is established that he attended the testator during his last
illness and saw him on the day when the will was supposed to have
been executed, such testimony shall be given more credence.26
Idem; Effect of old age. — The law prescribes no limit in
point of age beyond which a person cannot dispose of his property by
will. On the contrary, it has been justly said that the will of an aged
person should be regarded with great tenderness, where it appears
not to have been procured by fraudulent means, but contains those
very dispositions which the circumstances of his situation and
natural affections dictated. To an aged person as well as to one in

24
Torres and Lopez vs. Lopez, 48 Phil. 772, citing Alexander on Wills, Vol. 1, pp. 433,
484, and Wharton and Stile, Medical Jurisprudence, Vol. 1, p. 100, et seq.; Jungera vs. Borromeo, G.R. No. L-18498, March 30, 1967, 19 SCRA 656.
25
Samson vs. Coralles Tan Quintin, 44 Phil. 573. See also Bagtas Paguio, 22 Phil.
227; Galvez vs. Galvez, 26 Phil. 243; Neyra vs. Neyra, 76 Phil. 296.
26
Gonzales vs. Gonzales, 90 Phil. 444.

45

ART. 800

SUCCESSION

the prime of life, the usual tests as to testamentary capacity will be
applied.27
Hence, mere senility or infirmity of old age does not necessarily
imply that a person lacks testamentary capacity. It is, however,
different in case of senile dementia. Senile dementia has been
defined as that “peculiar decay of the mental faculties whereby the
person afflicted is reduced to second childhood.” Senile dementia,
not senility, is the one which produces testamentary incapacity. “To
constitute senile dementia in such a legal sense as to deprive one
of testamentary capacity, there must be such a failure of mind as
to deprive him of intelligent action.28 But so long as a person “still
possesses that spark of reason and of life, that strength of mind
to form a fixed intention and to summon his enfeebled thoughts
to enforce that intention,” so long will he be considered to possess
what the law terms “testamentary capacity.”29 Thus, in an American
case where it was established by the contestants to the probate of
the will that the testator was suffering from mental decay and loss
of memory due to old age, sickness, debility of body, and extreme
distress, it was held:
“The depth and intensity of mental impressions always
depend upon, and are measured by, the degree of attention given to the perception of facts, which requires observation, or to
the conception of truths, which demands reflection; and hence,
the inability of a person to recollect events occurring recently is
evidence of mental decay, because it manifests a want of power
of concentration of the mind. The aged live in the past, and the
impressions retained in their minds are those that were made
in their younger days, because at that period of their lives they
were able to exercise will power by giving attention. While the inability of a person of advanced years to remember recent events
distinctly undoubtedly indicates a decay of the human faculties,
it does not conclusively establish senile dementia, which is something more than a mere loss of mental power, resulting from old
age, and is not only a feeble condition of the mind, but a derangement thereof. x x x The rule is settled that if a testator at
the time he executes his will understands the business in which
he is engaged, and has a knowledge of his property, and how he

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 70, pp. 86-87.
Crisostomo vs. Maclang, (CA), 45 Off. Gaz. 2106.
29
Torres and Lopez vs. Lopez, 48 Phil. 772.
27
28

46

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ART. 800

wishes to dispose of it among those entitled to his bounty, he
possesses sufficient testamentary capacity, notwithstanding his
old age, sickness, debility of body, or extreme distress.’’30

Idem; Effect of infirmity or disease. — Neither is physical
infirmity or disease inconsistent with testamentary capacity,
although there is no question that evidence of such fact is admissible
on the issue of testamentary capacity. Just as in the case of old
age, the usual tests of testamentary capacity must still have to be
applied.31 Thus, it has been held that the fact that the testator, at
the time of the execution of the will, was suffering from the last
stages of tuberculosis and asthma,32 or from paralysis and loss
of speech,33 or from cholera,34 or from a combination of sleeping
sickness, insomnia, tuberculosis, and diabetes,35 will not affect his
testamentary capacity, so long as it cannot be proved by competent
evidence that, at the time when the will was executed, he was no
longer in a position to know the nature of the estate to be disposed
of, the proper objects of his bounty, and the character of the
testamentary act. The same rule can be applied even if, at the time
when the will was being executed, the testator was so sick that it
was necessary for somebody else to guide his hand in order that he
could sign it,36 or even if a few months before the execution of the
will, the testator, who was 85 years old, had a stroke of cerebral
hemorrhage, with hemiplegia, caused by high blood pressure.37 On
the other hand, it has also been held that the fact that the testator,
at the time of the execution of the will, was already in a comatose
or semi-comatose condition, caused by cerebral hemorrhage,38 or by
apoplexy,39 or by diarrhea and gastro-enteritis with complications

30
Ames’ Will, 1902, 40 Ore., 495, quoted in Torres and Lopez vs. Lopez, 48 Phil. 772.
For illustrative cases on the effect of old age upon testamentary capacity — see Torres
and Lopez vs. Lopez, 48 Phil. 772; Sancho vs. Abella, 58 Phil. 728; Samia vs. Medina, 60
Phil. 391; Montoya vs. Crisostomo, (CA), 44 Off. Gaz. 4382; Crisostomo vs. Maclang,
(CA), 45 Off. Gaz. 2106.
31
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 70, pp. 86-87.
32
Bugnao vs. Ubag, 14 Phil. 163.
33
Bagtas vs. Paguio, 22 Phil. 227.
34
Galvez vs. Galvez, 26 Phil. 243.
35
Neyra vs. Neyra, 76 Phil. 485.
36
Amata vs. Tablizo, 48 Phil. 485.
37
Magsuci vs. Gayona, (CA), 45 Off. Gaz. 157.
38
Abquilan vs. Abquilan, 49 Phil. 450.
39
Lim vs. Chinco, 55 Phil. 891.

47

ART. 800

SUCCESSION

of miocarditis,40 or by cerebral thrombosis,41 so that nothing around
him could cause any impression or reaction, would certainly destroy
his testamentary capacity.
Idem; Effect of insanity. — In its broadest sense, mental
disease or insanity refers to any disorder of the mind resulting
from disease or defect in the brain, whereby mental freedom may
be perverted, weakened or destroyed.42 Sometimes it is used as the
equivalent of mental incapacity. It is, however, evident that there
may be mental incapacity to make a will without actual insanity. At
other times, it is confused with idiocy, imbecility or senile dementia.
Idiocy, however, is used to describe only, those who are congenitally
deficient in intellect, imbecility, those who are mentally deficient as
a result of disease, and senile dementia, those who are incapable of
any intelligent action due to old age.43 Since these are absolute and
permanent forms of mental disease or insanity, it is evident that
persons suffering from them do not possess the necessary mental
capacity to make a will. There are, however, other forms or degrees
of mental disease or weakness which do not necessarily negative
testamentary capacity. Under our law, to be of sound mind, it is not
necessary that the testator be in full possession of all his reasoning
faculties, or that his mind be wholly unbroken, unimpaired, or
unshattered by disease, injury or other cause.44 Hence, mental
aberrations which do not result in such impairment of the faculties
as to render the testator unable to know or understand the nature
of the estate to be disposed of, the proper objects of his bounty, and
the character of the testamentary act will not destroy testamentary
capacity. Between the highest degree of soundness of mind and
memory which unquestionably carries with it full testamentary
capacity, and the degree of mental aberration generally known as
insanity or idiocy, there are numberless degrees of mental capacity
or incapacity, and while on one hand, it has been held that mere
weakness of the mind, or partial imbecility from disease of body,
or from age, does not render a person incapable of making a will,
provided that he has understanding and memory sufficient to enable
him to know what he is about, and how or to whom he is disposing of
Albornoz vs. Albornoz, 71 Phil. 414.
Gonzales vs. Gonzales, 90 Phil. 444.
42
Thompson on Wills, Sec. 63, p. 111.
43
See Page on Wills, Vol. 1, Secs. 136-137, pp. 283-284.
44
Art. 799, Civil Code.
40
41

48

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Testamentary Capacity and Intent

ART. 800

his property, on the other hand, it has been held that testamentary
incapacity does not necessarily require that a person shall be
actually insane or of an unsound mind. Weakness of intellect may
render the testator incapable of making a valid will, provided such
weakness really disqualifies him from knowing or appreciating the
nature, extent or consequences of the act he is engaged in.45
Idem; Effect of mental delusion. — An insane delusion
which will render one incapable of making a will may be defined
as a belief in things which do not exist, and which no rational mind
would believe to exist. The essence of an insane delusion is that it
has no basis in reason, cannot be dispelled by reason and can be
accounted for only as the product of mental disorder.46
To justify the setting aside of a will on the ground that the
testator was possessed of an insane delusion, it must be shown that
the will was the product or offspring of the delusion, or at least,
that it was influenced by the delusion. The validity of a will is not
affected by the fact that the testator was under a delusion unless
the delusion influenced him, at the time he executed the will, in
his determination of the manner in which he should dispose of his
property.47
Idem; Effect of belief in supernatural. — A belief in spiritualism is not in itself sufficient evidence of testamentary incapacity. Those who believe in spiritualism, when testamentary capacity
is in question, must be considered in the same light as those who
share in any other religious belief. Many of the clearest and brightest intellects have firmly believed in the doctrine of spiritualism and
the reality of spiritual manifestations. That the basis for such belief may seem unsubstantial to the great majority of persons does
not characterize it as an insane delusion which incapacitates the
believer to make a will. A testator’s belief that he was saved from
harm on several occasions by a guiding spirit does not establish insane delusions on his part. Indeed, it seems to be the settled law
that testamentary capacity cannot be determined alone by what one
believes, nor by the character of the tales he tells concerning spirits,
spooks, and supernatural things. Even a belief in witchcraft is not
necessarily conclusive evidence of insanity.
Bugnao vs. Ubag, 14 Phil. 163.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 80, pp. 90-91.
47
Ibid., Sec. 81, pp. 91-92.
45
46

49

ART. 801

SUCCESSION

It is, however, possible that belief in spiritualism may establish
lack of testamentary capacity. One may become a monomaniac upon
the subject of spiritualism by dwelling upon it too persistently and
profoundly, so that his will may be invalidated upon the ground of an
insane delusion. A will executed by one under such an extraordinary
belief in spiritualism that he follows blindly and implicitly supposed
directions of spirits in constructing the will is not admissible to
probate.48
Idem; Effect of drunkenness. — The fact that the testator
is under the immediate influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs at
the time he performs the testamentary act does not invalidate his
will on the ground of lack of testamentary capacity, provided he then
comprehends the nature, extent, and disposition of his estate and
his relation to those who have or might have a claim on his bounty;
and clearly, a person addicted to the use of drugs or of liquor, if
lucid and sober when a will is made, does not lack testamentary
capacity merely by reason of the habit. The general rule is that the
admission of a will to probate will not be denied merely on proof that
the testator was addicted to the excessive use of alcoholic liquors or
drugs without showing that, at the time of the making of the will,
he was so much under the influence of the intoxicants or drugs as to
be unable to bring to the business at hand the calm judgment which
the law requires of a testator, or unless the mind of the testator has
been impaired by such habit to the extent that he is not of sound and
disposing mind and memory. Habitual drunkenness does not give
rise to a presumption that the testator was incapacitated at the time
he executed the will. But where the testator has used intoxicating
liquor or drugs excessively to such an extent as to impair his mind,
so that, at the time the will is executed, he does not know the extent
and value of his property, or the names of the persons who are the
natural objects of his bounty, the instrument thus executed will be
denied probate for lack of testamentary capacity.49
Art. 801. Supervening incapacity does not invalidate an effective will, nor is the will of an incapable validated by the supervening of capacity.50

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 86, pp. 95-96.
Ibid., Sec. 75, pp. 88-89.
50
New provision.
48
49

50

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ARTS. 802-803

Art. 802. A married woman may make a will without the
consent of her husband, and without the authority of the court.51
Art. 803. A married woman may dispose by will of aft her
separate property as well as her share of the conjugal partnership
or absolute community property.52
Capacity of Spouse. — The provisions of Arts. 802 and 803
have been criticized on the ground that they are unnecessary. Undoubtedly, this criticism is logical because the provision of Art. 801
is already covered by that of Art. 796, while the provision of Art.
802 is also covered by that of Arts. 140 and 170. However, it must
be noted that with respect to the right of a married woman (or a
married man for that matter) to dispose of her share in the conjugal partnership or absolute community property, although there is
no question regarding the existence of the right, nevertheless, such
right of disposition is subject to the result of the settlement or liquidation of the partnership or of the community. Furthermore, what
can be disposed of would be merely the ideal share of the spouse
making the will and not any specific or determinate property belonging to the partnership or community.

Subsection 3. — Forms of Wills
Classification of Wills. — Under the Civil Code, a will may
be classified as either ordinary (notarial) or holographic depending
upon the formalities or solemnities which are observed by the
testator in its execution.
An ordinary or notarial will is one which is executed in
accordance with the formalities prescribed by Arts. 804 to 808 of
the Civil Code. In other words, it is a written will, executed in a
language or dialect known to the testator, subscribed at the end
thereof by the testator himself or by the testator’s name written
by some other person in his presence and by his express direction,
attested and subscribed by three or more credible witnesses in the
presence of the testator and of one another, all of the pages of which

51
52

New provision.
New provision.

51

ART. 804

SUCCESSION

are signed, except the last, on the left margin by the testator or the
person requested by him to write his name and by the instrumental
witnesses, and numbered correlatively in letters placed on the upper
part of each page, containing an attestation clause executed by the
witnesses, and properly acknowledged before a notary public by the
testator and the said witnesses.1 A holographic will, on the other
hand, is a written will which must be entirely written, dated, and
signed by the hand of the testator himself, without the necessity of
any witness.2
Object of Formalities. — The object of the solemnities surrounding the execution of wills is to close the door against bad faith
and fraud, to avoid substitution of wills and testaments and to guarantee their truth and authenticity. Therefore, the laws on this subject should be interpreted in such a way as to attain these primordial
ends. But on the other hand also, one must not lose sight of the fact
that it is not the object of the law to restrain and curtail the exercise
of the right to make a will. So when an interpretation already given
assures such ends, any other interpretation whatsoever, that adds
nothing but demands more requisites entirely unnecessary, useless
and frustrative of the testator’s will, must be disregarded.3
Art. 804. Every will must be in writing and executed in a
language or dialect known to the testator.4
Common Formalities. — Under Art. 804, there are two
formalities which must be complied with in the execution of wills,
whether ordinary or holographic. They are: (1) the will must be in
writing; and (2) it must be written in a language or dialect known
to the testator.
Idem; Written form of wills. — Every will must be in writing.
Whether the will is ordinary or holographic, this requirement is
mandatory. It must be noted, however, that if the will is holographic,
it is essential that it must be entirely written in the handwriting
of the testator himself. If the will is ordinary, so long as it is in

Arts. 804-805, Civil Code.
Art. 810, Civil Code.
3
Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476; Avera vs. Garcia, 42 Phil. 145; Aldaba vs.
Roque, 43 Phil. 379; Unson vs. Abella, 43 Phil. 494; In re Will of Tan Duico, 45 Phil. 807.
4
Taken from Sec. 618, Act No. 190, as amended by Act No. 2645.
1
2

52

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

writing it does not matter on what material, whether on paper or
parchment, it is written. It may be written by hand or typewritten,
or printed from plates or type. The validity of an instrument as a
will is not affected by the fact that it is written partly in pen and
partly in pencil, or that it was written wholly in lead pencil; such a
will is as valid as if written in ink.5
The law does not specify that the testator himself must
perform the act of writing. However, Art. 810 provides that in the
case of holographic wills, the will must be written entirely in the
handwriting of the testator himself. Consequently, it is only in the
case of ordinary wills that whoever performs the mechanical act of
writing or drafting the will becomes a matter of indifference.6
Idem; Language of wills. — Art. 804 also requires that every
will must be executed in a language or dialect known to the testator.
This requirement is applicable both to ordinary and holographic
wills.
It must be noted that there is no statutory requirement that
the testator’s knowledge or understanding of the language or dialect
in which the will is executed should be expressed either in the body
of the will itself or in the attestation clause. Consequently, it is a
matter that may be established by proof aliunde.7 But where a will
is drawn up in the dialect of a certain locality and it is established
that the testator was living in or was a resident of that locality,
there arises a presumption that the will is drawn up in a language
or dialect known to the testator, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary.8
Art. 805. Every will, other than a holographic will, must be
subscribed at the end thereof by the testator himself or by the
testator’s name written by some other person in his presence, and
by his express direction, and attested and subscribed by three or
more credible witnesses in the presence of the testator and of one
another.

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 221, pp. 187-188.
Castañeda vs. Alemany, 3 Phil. 427.
7
Lopez vs. Liboro, 46 Off. Gaz. 211; Javellana vs. Javellana, 106 Phil. 1073.
8
Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476; Gonzales vs. Laurel, 45 Phil. 750; Acop vs. Piraso, 52 Phil. 660; Reyes vs. Vidal, 91 Phil. 126; Javellana vs. Javellana, supra.
5
6

53

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

The testator or the person requested by him to write his
name and the instrumental witnesses of the will, shall also sign,
as aforesaid, each and every page thereof, except the last, on the
left margin, and all the pages shall be numbered correlatively in
letters placed on the upper part of each page.
The attestation shall state the number of pages used upon
which the will is written, and the fact that the testator signed the
will and every page thereof, or caused some other person to write
his name, under his express direction, in the presence of the
instrumental witnesses, and that the latter witnessed and signed
the will and all the pages thereof in the presence of the testator
and of one another.
If the attestation clause is in a language not known to the
witnesses, it shall be interpreted to them.9
Special Formalities of Ordinary Wills. — From the provisions of Arts. 805 to 806 as well as from that of Art. 804, it is evident
that in the execution of an ordinary will the following formalities
must be complied with:
(1)

The will must be in writing;

(2) The will must be written in a language or dialect known
to the testator;
(3) The will must be subscribed at the end thereof by the
testator himself or by the testator’s name written by some other
person in his presence and by his express direction;
(4) The will must be attested and subscribed by three or
more credible witnesses in the presence of the testator and of one
another;
(5) The testator or the person requested by him to write his
name and the instrumental witnesses of the will, shall also sign
each and every page thereof, except the last, on the left margin;
(6) All the pages of the will shall be numbered correlatively
in letters placed on the upper part of each page;
(7)

9

The will must contain an attestation clause; and

Taken from Sec. 618, Act No. 190, as amended by Act No. 2645.

54

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

(8) The will must be acknowledged before a notary public by
the testator and the witnesses.
In addition to the above formalities, there are also other special
safeguards or solemnities which are prescribed by the Code in case
the testator is deaf, or a deaf-mute, or in case he is blind.10
Subscription by Testator. — According to the first part of
the first paragraph of Art. 805, every will, other than a holographic
will, must be subscribed at the end thereof by the testator or by
the testator’s name written by some other person in his presence,
and by his express direction. It is of course axiomatic in the law of
wills that subscription refers to the manual act of the testator and
also of the instrumental witnesses of affixing their signatures to the
instrument. As applied to the testator, the purpose of the statutory
requirement of a signature is two-fold: it is to identify the testator
and authenticate the documents.11
Idem; Manner of signing. — What constitutes a sufficient
signature to a will depends largely on the custom of the time and
place, the habit of the individual, and the circumstances of each
particular case, but it should be manifest that whatever is used is
actually intended as a signature. Generally speaking, the use of any
signature intended by the testator to authenticate the instrument
renders the will sufficiently signed by the testator.12 It matters not
how imperfect or illegible the testator’s signature may be; it will be
a sufficient signature if he intended it as his signature, and it should
be manifest that whatever he used as his signature was intended for
that purpose. Thus, it is sufficiently signed by writing his initials, or
his first name only, or he may even use an assumed name or a name
different from the one used to designate him as a testator in the
body of the will. The fact that the testator’s signature is imperfect
or illegible does not invalidate the will if his name can be made out
readily and he intended such name to be his signature. The will is
not invalidated by the fact that the testator’s name is abbreviated
or misspelled. If the testator has been in the habit of using a rubber
stamp or engraved die in making his signature, he may properly use
the same in signing his will.13
Arts. 807, 808, Civil Code.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 243, p. 201.
12
Ibid., pp. 201-202.
13
Thompson on Wills, Sec. 108, pp. 171-173.
10
11

55

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

A complete signature is not essential to the validity of a will,
provided the part of the name written was affixed to the instrument
with intent to execute it as a will. Thus, in a case where the validity
of a will which was presented for probate was questioned on the
ground of insufficiency of the testatrix’ signature, the Supreme
Court, speaking through Justice Johnson, held:
“We are of the opinion, and we think the law sustains our
conclusion, that if the testatrix signed any portion of her name
to the will, with the intention to sign the same, that will amount
to a signature. It has been held time and time again that one
who makes a will may sign the same by using a mark, the name
having been written by others. If writing a mark simply upon a
will is sufficient indication of the intention of the person to make
and execute a will, then certainly the writing of a portion or all
of her name ought to be accepted as a clear indication of her
intention to execute the will.”14

Idem; Signature by mark. — In American jurisdictions,
practically all courts agree that any mark or combination of marks
placed on a will by the testator as his signature is a sufficient
compliance with a statute requiring a will to be subscribed by the
testator.15 To a certain extent, this doctrine has been followed in
this jurisdiction. As stated by our Supreme Court, “The construction
put upon the word ‘signed’ by most courts is the original meaning
of a signum or sign, rather than the derivative meaning of a
handwriting.”16 Thus, where the testator signs with his thumbmark17
or affixes a cross against his name, intending such mark or cross to be
his signature,18 it has been held that there is a sufficient compliance
with the statutory requirement. However, if the signature is only a
mere cross, without any proof that it is the usual signature of the
testator or at least one of the ways by which he signed his name, it is
not a sufficient signature, because a mere cross cannot and does not
have the trustworthiness of a thumbmark.19 But if it can be properly
established that it is the testator’s usual signature or at least one of
Yap Tua vs. Yap Ca Kuan, 27 Phil. 579.
Thompson on Wills, Sec. 108, pp. 170-171; 57 Am. Jur., Sec. 250, 203.
16
De Gala vs. Gonzales, 53 Phil. 104.
17
De Gala vs. Gonzales, 53 Phil. 104; Dolor vs. Diancin, 54 Phil. 479; Payad vs.
Tolentino, 62 Phil. 848; Abutan vs. Fernandez, (CA), 44 Off. Gaz. 1849.
18
Abaya vs. Zalamero, 10 Phil. 357; Leano vs. Leano, 30 Phil. 612.
19
Garcia vs. Lacuesta, 90 Phil. 489.
14
15

56

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

the ways by which he had signed his name before, there is no reason
why it is not acceptable as a valid signature.
Idem; Signature by another. — Under our law, the requirement that the testator must subscribe the will at the end thereof
is complied with not only when the testator affixes his signature
thereto, but also when the testator’s name is written by some other
person in his presence, and by his express direction.20 It must be
noted, however, that this fact, among others, should be stated in the
attestation clause.21
In the first place, it must be observed that it is the testator’s
name that must have been written by the third person. Consequently,
if what is written is the third person’s own name and not that of the
testator, the will is not valid, even if it can be established that the
document in question was in fact executed for and as the last will
and testament of the testator.22
In the second place, it must be observed that the law requires
that the testator’s name must have been written in his presence. It
is evident that such a requirement cannot be complied with unless
the testator was conscious of what was going on at the time.
In the third place, the law requires that the third person must
have affixed the testator’s name at his express direction. The requirement of a signature at the direction of the testator means that
the testator shall, by word of mouth or action, clearly indicate to the
proxy a desire to have his name signed to the instrument, although
in the absence of a specific requirement, any manner of signifying
such desire will suffice. The testator’s knowledge that his name was
being signed for him, or his acquiescence in such an act, does not
meet a requirement of this kind. Although an express direction to
sign for the testator may be given by him without using words, a
mere implied assent to the signing by another person is not sufficient
to meet the requirement of an express direction. If the authorization
is predicated upon conduct such as gestures, the conduct must be
as clear and unambiguous as words authorizing the signature. A
request addressed to the signer by a third person is sufficient where

Art. 805, Civil Code.
Ibid.
22
Ex parte Santiago, 4 Phil. 692.
20
21

57

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

it was made in the presence of the testator and with his manifest
approval.23
The law does not require any specific form in which the name
of the testator should be affixed at the end of the will when written
at his request by another person. The only requirement is that the
will shall bear the name of the testator. In several cases, however,
the Supreme Court has suggested that “where the testator does not
know how, or is unable for any reason to sign the will himself, it
shall be signed in the following manner: John Doe, by the testator,Richard Roe, or in this form: By the testator, John Doe, Richard
Roe.”24 Nevertheless, this formula ,which has been suggested by the
Supreme Court, does not necessarily mean that other forms may
not, be used. This, in the case of In re Will of Siason,25 where the will
which was presented for probate ends in this form: “At the request of
Senora Maria Siason, Catalino Geva,” followed by the signatures of
the three witnesses and the attestation clause, the Supreme Court,
answering the contention of the contestant that the signature is
defective as held in previous decisions of the Court, declared:
“The question presented in this case is: Are the words
‘Señora Maria Siason’ her name written by some other person?
They undoubtedly are her name, but occurring as they do after
the words ‘at the request of,’ it is contended that they form a
part of the recital and not a signature, the only signature being
the names of the witnesses themselves.
“In Guison vs. Concepcion, 9 Phil. 551, it was held that
there was no signature although the attestation clause which
followed the will contained the name of the testatrix and was
thereafter signed by the witnesses. The distinction between that
case and the present one is one of extreme nicety, and in the
judgment of the writer of this opinion should not be attempted.
The majority of the court, however, are of the opinion that the
distinction is a tenable one inasmuch as in the Concepcion
will, the name of the testatrix occurred only in the body of the
attestation clause after the first signature of the witnesses,
whereas in this will, it immediately follows the testament itself
and precedes the names of the witnesses.

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 259, p. 209.
Ex -parte Arcenas, 4 Phil. 700; Ex parte Ondevilla, 13 Phil. 470.
25
10 Phil.: 504.
23
24

58

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

“In sustaining this form of signature, this court does not
intend to qualify the decisions in Ex parte Santiago, Ex parte
Arcenas, or Abaya vs. Zalamero. In the Arcenas case the court
pointed out the correct formula for a signature which ought to
be followed but did not mean to exclude any other form substantially equivalent.”

Idem; Place of signature. — The law fixes the location of
the signature and requires that it must be at the foot or end of the
will. The purpose of such requirement is not only to show that the
testamentary purpose therein expressed is completed, but also to
prevent any opportunity for fraud or interpolations between the
written matter and the signature. The position of the signature at
the end of the will furnishes in itself internal evidence of finality or
completion of intent. Consequently, a writing in the form of a will
is a nullity where it is not signed at the end as required by law, and
probate thereof should be denied.26
Idem; Presence of witnesses. — Although it is not expressly
stated in the first paragraph of Art. 805, it is also required that
the subscription of an ordinary will by the testator should take
place in the presence of the instrumental witnesses. This statutory
requirement which is also mandatory in character is prescribed by
the third paragraph of the article which provides that the attestation
clause shall state, among others, “the fact that the testator signed the
will x x x or caused some other person to write his name, under his
express direction, in the presence of the instrumental witnesses.”
Attestation and subscription by witnesses. — Under Art.
805 of the Civil Code, it is also an indispensable requirement that
an ordinary will must be attested and subscribed by three or more
credible witnesses in the presence of the testator and of one another.
This fact, according to the same article, must be stated, among
others, in the attestation clause.
An instrumental witness may be defined as one who takes part
in the execution of an instrument or writing.27 Attestation of the
will consists in the act of the witnesses of witnessing the execution
of the will in order to see and take note mentally that such will has
been executed in accordance with the requirements prescribed by
26
27

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 267, p. 213.
Cuevas vs. Achacoso, 88 Phil. 730; Gonzales vs. Gonzales, 90 Phil. 444.

59

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

law. Strictly speaking, it is the act of the witnesses not that of the
testator, although it necessarily involves the acts of the testator in
executing the will.28 Its purpose is to render available proof during
the probate proceedings that the will has been executed in accordance with the requirements prescribed by law and that the instrument offered for probate is authentic.29 Subscription, on the other
hand, as it is used in this part of the Code, consists in the manual
act of the instrumental witnesses in affixing their signatures to the
instrument. Its only purpose is identification.
It is, therefore, evident that attestation and subscription are
different things and required for obviously different ends. They may
be distinguished from each other in the following ways:
(1) Attestation is an act of the senses, while subscription is
an act of the hand.
(2)

The first is a mental act, while the second is a mechanical

act.30
(3) The purpose of the first is to render available proof during
the probate of the will, not only of the authenticity of the will, but
also of its due execution, while the only purpose of the second is
identification.
Idem; Order of signing. — Is it essential for the validity of
the will that the testator or the person requested by him to write
his name should sign the will at the end thereof ahead of the three
attesting witnesses? In other words, will the fact that the testator
signed the will after one, two, or all of the witnesses have already
signed impair its validity? In the United States there are two
conflicting opinions.
One opinion which is followed in several states holds that until
the testator signs there is nothing to attest, since it is evident that
the signature of the testator is the principal, if not the only matter,
to which the attestation contemplated by law applies.31 Hence,
according to this view, everything required to be done by the testator
shall precede in point of time the subscription by the attesting

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 283, p. 219.
Ibid., Sec. 286, p. 221.
30
Tobin vs. Hack, 79 Minn. 101; 81 N.W. 758.
31
Brooks vs. Woodson, 87 Ga. 379.
28
29

60

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

witnesses.32 Protection of the testator as well as of the witnesses
demands that there shall be a signature before the attestation.33
The majority opinion which is followed in most of the states
holds that where the execution of the will by the testator and the
signing of the same by the subscribing witnesses constitute one continuous transaction, the signing by each, taking place in the presence of the others, is sufficient and is to all intents and purposes
and attestation by the subscribing witnesses to a fact which has already taken place. This view, which is more in conformity with the
liberal spirit which pervades the present Civil Code of the Philippines regarding the execution of wills, is illustrated by an American
case, the case of Gordon vs. Parker,34 In this case, it was established
during the probate of the will that the instrumental witnesses had
signed the will ahead of the testatrix. Is the defect fatal? According
to Justice Anderson, representing the court:
“There is a division among the courts on this question..
There is ample authority supporting either view. The courts adhering to the rule that the statute of wills should be construed
strictly hold that the signing of the will by the testator must
precede attestation and subscription by the witnesses, although
part of the same transaction, 40 Cyc. 1102; 1 Underhill on Wills,
p. 266, par. 95; 28 R.C.L., p. 128, par. 83. The authorities to the
contrary hold that where the signing and publication of the will
by the testator and the signing by the subscribing witnesses, is
all one continuous transaction, each signing in the presence of
the others, is sufficient, and the will is valid notwithstanding a
subscribing witness may sign the will before the testator does.
“The court’s holding to a strict construction of the statute
proceed on the theory that there can be no attestation of the fact
of the signing and publication of a will by the testator until such
signing and publication have actually taken place; that the subscribing witnesses are supposed to sign attesting an act which
has already taken place, and not one to be performed in the future. There is, of course, a good deal of force in that position.
The contrary view, however, is, and we think it is supported by
the better reasoned cases, that where the execution of the will
by the testator and the signing of the same by the subscribing

Gardner on Wills, p. 211.
Lasy vs. Dobbs, 63 N.J. Eq. 325.
34
931 Miss. 334, 104 So. 77, 39 A.L.R. 931, Costigan’s Cases on Wills.
32
33

61

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

witnesses constitute one continuous transaction, the signing by
each, taking place in the presence of the others, is sufficient as
is to all intents and purposes an attestation by the subscribing witnesses to a fact which has already taken place. In other
words, that under those circumstances the time intervening between the placing of the different signatures to the will is not to
be considered; it is too short for the law to take notice of. The
statute of wills is a statute of frauds. One of the, reasons why
wills are required to be in writing, and when not holographic, to
be attested by subscribing witnesses, is to prevent frauds and
perjuries. We are decidedly of the opinion that the better view is
that where the execution and publication of a will by the testator or testatrix and its attestation: by the subscribing witnesses
is one continuous transaction; the will is valid, notwithstanding
the subscribing witness may sign their names before the testator does.”

Idem; Meaning of presence. — The law also requires that the
will must be attested and subscribed by the instrumental witnesses
“in the presence of the testator and of one another.’’ The purpose
of such a requirement is evidently to prevent the substitution of a
surreptitious will.35
Under this rule, it is essential that each one of the three
instrumental witnesses must actually sign not only in the presence
of the testator, but also in the presence of the other witnesses. In
other words, the execution of a will is supposed to be a single act or
transaction and cannot be legally effective if the various participants
signed on various days or occasions and in various combinations of
those present.36 Hence, it is not sufficient if the witnesses merely
acknowledged their previously affixed signatures in the presence of
the testator or in the presence of each other.37 It is not, however,
essential that the testator must have actually seen the signing of
the will by each one of the instrumental witnesses.38
It is, therefore, evident that the phrase “in the presence of
the testator and of one another” has a technical meaning. Thus,
according to Thompson:

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 338, p. 251.
Andalis vs. Pulgueras, 59 Phil. 643.
37
Calkins vs. Calkins, 216 Ill. 458, 75 NE 182; 108 Am. St. Rep. 233.
38
In re Will of Siason, 10 Phil. 504; Yap Tua vs. Yap Ca Kuan, 27 Phil. 579.
35
36

62

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

“The words of the statute imply contiguity with an uninterrupted view between the testator and the witnesses, so that,
if he so desires, he can see the act of attestation, whether in the
same room or not, and an attestation in the same room with the
testator is generally held to be a sufficient subscription in his
presence, unless there is some obstruction or physical obstacle
which intervenes and prevents him from knowing of his own
knowledge or perceiving by his senses the act of attestation. It is
often stated that the testator need not actually see the witnesses sign provided he could have seen them sign if he desired to do
so, even though it would have been necessary for him to move
slightly in order to do so. There is no signing in his presence
where the testator for any reason is not aware of the nature of
the act being done, no matter how close to him it may be done.
“The testator’s consciousness of the fact that the attesting
signatures are being written is held to be an indispensable requirement under a statute requiring attestation in the presence
of the testator. It has also been said that the testator must have
actually seen, or have been in such position that he could have
seen, not only the witnesses but the instrument itself, considering both his position and the state of his health at the time, but,
according to some authorities, if the testator is unable to move
by reason of physical infirmities, this will not prevent the act of
attestation being considered as performed in his presence.
“The witnesses must subscribe ‘in his presence,’ but in cases where the testator has lost or cannot use his sense of sight, if
his mind and hearing are not affected, if he is sensible of what
is being done, if the witnesses subscribe in the same room or in
such close proximity as to be within the line of vision of one in
his position who could see, and within his hearing, they subscribe in his presence. In case the testator is blind, the superintending control, which in other cases is exercised by sight, must
be transferred to the other senses; and if they are, or may, at his
discretion, be made sensible that the witnesses are subscribing
the same will that he signed, it should be deemed a sufficient
compliance with the statute.”39

39

Thompson on Wills, Sec. 130, pp. 207-208.

63

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

The following case, which is well-known in American jurisprudence, will more or less illustrate the above principle:
Riggs vs. Riggs
1883, 135 Mass. 938, 48 Am. Rep. 646
(Taken from Costigan’s Cases on Wills)
Morton, C.J.: “The only question presented by this report
is as to the sufficiency of the attestation by the witnesses to the
will and codicil of the testator:
“It appeared at the hearing that the testator had received
a severe injury, and was lying upon his bed unable to move. His
sight was unimpaired, but he could only look upward, as he was
incapable of turning his head so as to see what took place at
his side. As to the codicil, it appeared that it was attested and
subscribed by the three witnesses in the same room with the
testator, at a table by the side of the bed about four feet from his
head. The contestant contends that this attestation was insufficient, because the testator did not and could not see the witnesses subscribed their names. It has been held by some courts,
upon the construction to similar statutes, that such an attestation is not sufficient. See Aikin vs. Weckerly, 19 Mich. 482, 505;
Downie’s Will, 42 Wis. 66; Tribe vs. Tribe, 13 Jur. 793; Jones vs.
Tuck, 48 N.C. 219. But we are of the opinion that so nice and
narrow a construction is not required by the latter, and would
defeat the spirit of our statute.
“It is true that it is stated, in many cases, that witnesses are not in the presence of a testator unless they are within
his sight; but these statements are made with reference to a
testator who can see. As most men can see, vision is the usual
and safest test of presence, but it is not the only test. A man
may take note of the presence of another by the other senses,
as hearing or touch. Certainly, if two blind men are in the same
room, talking together, they are in each other’s presence. If two
men are in the same room, conversing together and either or
both bandage or close their eyes, they do not cease to be in each
other’s presence.
“In England, where the tendency of the court has been to
construe the statute with great strictness, it has always been
held that a blind man can make a valid will, although of course
he cannot see, if he is sensible of the presence of the witnesses
through the other senses. Piercy’s Goods, Irob. Ecc. 278; Fincham vs. Edwards, 3 Cur. Ecc. 63. It would be against the spirit

64

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

of our statutes to hold that because a man is blind, or because
he is obliged to keep his eyes bandaged, or because, by an injury,
he is prevented from using his sight, he is deprived of the right
to make a will.”

Idem; Test of presence. — What test, therefore, shall we apply in order to be able to determine whether or not the witnesses
signed the will “in the presence of the testator and of one another?”
This question has been answered several times by our highest court
— notably in the cases of Jaboneta vs. Gustilo, 5 Phil. 541; Nera vs.
Rimando, 18 Phil. 450; Neyra vs. Neyra, 76 Phil. 296; and Dominador vs. Benedicto, 48 Off. Gaz. 213.
Jaboneta vs. Gustilo
5 Phil. 541
In these proceedings, the will of Mario Jaboneta was denied probate by the lower court on the ground that Javellana,
one of the witnesses, did not attach his signature thereto in the
presence of Jena, another of the witnesses. It is admitted that
after the testator and the witnesses Jalbuena and Jena had
signed the will and all of the pages thereof, the latter stood up
and left the room just as the third witness Javellana was signing
the will and all of the pages thereof. The question now is — did
Javellana sign his name in the presence of Jena as required by
law? According to the Supreme Court, speaking through Justice
Carson:
“We cannot agree with so much of the above finding of the
facts as holds that the signature of Javellana was not signed in
the presence of Jena. The fact that Jena was still in the room
when he saw Javellana moving his hand and pen in the act of
affixing his signature to the will, taken together with the testimony of the remaining witnesses, which shows that Javellana
did in fact there and then sign his name to the will, convinces us
that the signature was affixed in the presence of Jena. The fact
that he was in the act of leaving, and that his back was turned,
while a portion of the name of the witness was being written is
of no importance. He, with the other witnesses and the testator,
had assembled for the purpose of executing the testament, and
were together in the same room for that purpose and at the moment when the witness, Javellana signed the document he was
actually and physically present and in such position with relation to Javellana that he could see everything which took place

65

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

by merely casting his eyes in the proper direction, and without
any physical obstruction to prevent his doing so, therefore, we
are of the opinion that the document was in fact signed before
he finally left the room.
“This conclusion is in accordance with American authorities
which hold that the true test of presence of the testator and the
witnesses in the execution of a will is not whether they actually
saw each other sign, but whether they might have seen each
other sign, had they chosen to do so, considering their mental
and physical condition and position with relation to each other
at the moment of inscription of each signature.”
Nera vs. Rimando
18 Phil. 450
This case concerns the probate of the last will and testament of Pedro Rimando. The pertinent facts are embodied in
the following opinion of the Supreme Court which was penned
by Justice Carson:
“The only question raised by the evidence in this case, as
to the due execution of the instrument propounded as a will in
the court below, is whether one of the subscribing witnesses was
present in the small room where it was executed at the time
when the testator and other subscribing witnesses attached
their signatures; or whether at that time he was outside, some
eight or ten feet away, in a large room connecting with the
smaller room by a doorway, across which was hung a curtain
which made it impossible for one in the outside room to see the
testator and the other subscribing witnesses in the act of attaching their signatures to the instrument.
“A majority of the members of the court is of the opinion
that this subscribing witness was in the small room with the
testator and the other subscribing witnesses at the time when
they attached their signatures to the instrument, and this finding, of course, disposes of the appeal and necesitates the affirmance of the decree admitting the document to probate as the
last will and testament of the deceased.
“The trial judge does not appear to have considered the
determination of this question of fact of vital importance in the
determination of this case, as he was of the opinion that under
the doctrine laid down in the case of Jaboneta vs. Gustilo, 5 Phil.
541, the alleged fact that one of the subscribing witnesses was
in the outer room when the testator and the other subscribing

66

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

witnesses signed the instrument in the inner room, had it been
proven, would not be sufficient in itself to invalidate the execution of the will. But we are unanimously of opinion that had this
subscribing witness been proven to have been in the outer room
at the same time when the testator and the other subscribing
witness attached their signatures to the instrument in the inner room, it would have been invalid as a will, the attaching of
those signatures under such circumstances not being done in
the presence of the witness in the outer room. This is because
the line of vision from this witness to the testator and the other
subscribing witnesses would necessarily have been impeded by
the curtain separating the inner room from the outer one ‘at the
moment of inscription of each signature.’
“In the case just cited, on which the trial court relied, we
held that: ‘The true test of presence of the testator and the witnesses in the execution of wills is not whether they actually saw
each other sign, but whether they might have seen each other
sign, had they chosen to do so, considering their mental and
physical condition and position with relation to each other at the
moment of inscription of each signature.’ ’’

Marginal Signatures. — According to the first part of the
second paragraph of Art. 805, “the testator or the person requested
by him to write his name and the instrumental witnesses of the will,
shall also sign, as aforesaid, each and every page thereof, except the
last, on the left margin.” Again, it must be observed that this requirement is mandatory in character. As a matter of fact, as an additional safeguard, the law also provides that the attestation clause
shall state the fact.40
Under this requirement, it is essential that all of the pages of
the will, except the last, should be signed not only by the testator
but also by all of the instrumental witnesses. Consequently. if even
one of the pages of the will does not contain the required marginal
signature41 or the pages are not signed by the witnesses although
they are signed by the testator or such pages are not signed by the
testator although they are signed by the witnesses,42 the will which
is offered for probate shall be disallowed.

Art. 805, Civil Code.
In re Estate of Saguinsin, 41 Phil. 875.
42
In re Will of Prieto, 45 Phil. 700.
40
41

67

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

Icasiano vs. Icasiano
11 SCRA 422
The records show that the original of the will, which was
surrendered simultaneously with the filing of the petition and
marked as Exhibit “A” consists of five pages, and while signed
at the end and in every page, it does not contain the signature
of one of the attesting witnesses, Atty. Jose V. Natividad, on
page three (3) thereof; but the duplicate copy attached to the
amended and supplemental petition and marked as Exhibit “AI” is signed by the testatrix and her three attesting witnesses in
each and every page.
The testimony presented by the proponents of the will
tends to show that the original of the will and its duplicate were
subscribed at the end and on the left margin of each and every
page thereof by the testatrix herself and attested and subscribed
by the three mentioned witnesses in the testatrix’s presence and
in that of one another as witnesses (except for the missing signature of attorney Natividad on page three (3) of the original);
that pages of the original and duplicate of said will were duly
numbered; that the attestation clause thereof contains all the
facts required by law to be recited therein and is signed by the
aforesaid attesting witnesses; that the will is written in the language known to and spoken by the testatrix; that the attestation clause is in a language also known to and spoken by the
witnesses; that the will was executed on one single occasion in
duplicate copies; and that both the original and the duplicate
copies were duly acknowledged before Notary Public Jose Oyengco of Manila on the same date — June 2, 1956.
Witness Natividad, who testified on his failure to sign
page three (3) of the original, admits that he may have lifted
two pages instead of one when he signed the same, but affirmed
that page three (3) was signed in his presence.
Oppositors-appellants in turn introduced expert testimony to the effect that the signatures of the testatrix in the
duplicate (Exhibit “A-1”) are not genuine nor were they written
or affixed on the same occasion as the original, and further aver
that granting that the documents were genuine, they were executed through mistake and with undue influence and pressure
because the testatrix was deceived into adopting as her last will
and testament the wishes of those who will stand to benefit from
the provisions of the will, as may be inferred from the facts and
circumstances surrounding the execution of the will and provisions and dispositions thereof, whereby proponent-appellees

68

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

stand to profit from properties held by them as attorneys-in-fact
of the deceased and not enumerated or mentioned therein, while
oppositors-appellants are enjoined not to look for other properties mentioned in the will, and not to oppose the probate of it, on
penalty of forfeiting their share in the portion of free disposal.
Speaking through Justice J.B.L. Reyes, the Supreme
Court held:
“We have examined the record and are satisfied, as the
trial court was, that the testatrix signed both original and duplicate copies (Exhibits “A” and “A-I”, respectively) of the will spontaneously, on the same occasion, in the presence of the three attesting witnesses, the notary public who acknowledged the will;
and Atty. Samson, who actually prepared the documents; that
the will and its duplicate were executed in Tagalog, a language
known to and spoken by both the testator and the witnesses,
and read to and by the testatrix and Atty. Fermin Samson, together before they were actually signed; that the attestation
clause is also in a language known to and spoken by the testatrix and the witnesses. The opinion of expert for oppositors, Mr.
Felipe Logan, that the signatures of the testatrix appearing in
the duplicate original were not written by the same hand which
wrote the signatures in the original will leaves us unconvinced,
not merely because it is directly contradicted by expert Martin
Ramos for the proponents, but principally because of the paucity
of the standards used by him to support the conclusion that the
differences between the standard and questioned signatures are
beyond the writer’s range of normal scriptural variation. The
expert has, in fact, used as standards only three other signatures of the testatrix besides those affixed to the original of the
testament (Exh. A); and we feel that with so few standards the
expert’s opinion and the signatures in the duplicate could not be
those of the testatrix becomes extremely hazardous. This is particularly so since the comparison charts Nos. 3 and 4 fail to show
convincingly that there are radical differences that would justify
the charge of forgery, taking into account the advanced age of
the testatrix, the evident variability of her signatures, and the
effect of writing fatigue, the duplicate being signed right after
the original. These factors were not discussed by the expert.
“Similarly, the alleged slight variance in blueness of the
ink in the admitted and questioned signatures does not appear
reliable, considering the standard and challenged writings were
affixed to different kinds of paper, with different surfaces and
reflecting power. On the whole, therefore, we do not find the
testimony of the oppositor’s expert sufficient to overcome that

69

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

of the notary and the two instrumental witnesses, Torres and
Natividad (Dr. Diy, being in the United States during the trial,
did not testify).
“Nor do we find adequate evidence of fraud or undue influence. The fact that some heirs are more favored than others is
proof of neither (see In re Butalid, 10 Phil. 27; Bugnao vs. Ubag,
14 Phil. 163; Pecson vs. Coronel, 45 Phil. 216). Diversity of apportionment is the usual reason for making a testament; otherwise, the decedent might as well die intestate. The testamentary
dispositions that the heirs should not inquire into other property and that they should respect the distribution made in the
will, under penalty of forfeiture of their shares in the free part
do not suffice to prove fraud or undue influence. They appear
motivated by the desire to prevent prolonged litigation which,
as shown by ordinary experience, often results in a sizeable portion of the estate being diverted into the hands of non-heirs and
speculators. Whether these clauses are valid or not is a matter
to be litigated on another occasion. It is also well to note that,
as remarked by the Court of Appeals in Sideco, 45 Off. Gaz. 168,
fraud and undue influence are mutually repugnant and exclude
each other; their joining as grounds for opposing probate shows
absence of definite evidence against the validity of the will.
“On the question of law, we hold that the inadvertent failure of one witness to affix his signature to one page of a testament, due to the simultaneous lifting of two pages in the course
of signing, is not per se sufficient to justify denial of probate.
Impossibility of substitution of this page is assured not only by
the fact that the testatrix and two other witnesses did sign the
defective page, but also by its bearing to the coincident imprint
of the seal of the notary public before whom the testament was
ratified by testatrix and all three witnesses. The law should
not be so strictly and literally intepreted as to penalize the testatrix on account of the inadvertence of a single witness over
whose conduct she had no control, where the purpose of the law
to guarantee the identity of the testament and its component
pages is sufficiently attained, no intentional or deliberate deviation existed, and the evidence on record attests to the full
observance of the statutory requisites. Otherwise, as stated in
Vda. de Gil vs. Murciano, 49 Off. Gaz. 1459, at 1479 (decision on
reconsideration) “witnesses may sabotage the will by muddling
or bungling it in the attestation clause”.
“That the failure of witness Natividad to sign page three
(3) was entirely through pure oversight is shown by his own
testimony as well as by the duplicate copy of the will, which

70

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

bears a complete set of signatures in every page. The test of the
attestation clause and the acknowledgment before the Notary
Public likewise evidence that no one was aware of the defect at
the time.
“This would not be the first time that this Court departs
from a strict and literal application of the statutory requirements, where the purposes of the law are otherwise satisfied.
Thus, despite the literal tenor of the law, this Court has held
that a testament, with the only page signed at its foot by testator and witnesses, but not in the left margin, could nevertheless
be probated (Abangan vs. Abangan, 41 Phil. 476); and that despite the requirement for the correlative lettering of the pages of
a will, the failure to make the first page either by letter or numbers is not a fatal defect (Lopez vs. Liboro, 81 Phil. 429). These
precedents exemplify the Court’s policy to require satisfaction
of the legal requirements in order to guard against fraud and
bad faith but without undue or unnecessary curtailment of the
testamentary privilege.
“The appellants also argue that since the original of the
will is in existence and available, the duplicate (Exh. A-I) is not
entitled to probate. Since they opposed probate of the original
because it lacked one signature in its third page, it is easily
discerned that oppositors-appellants run here into a dilemma;
if the original is defective and invalid, then in law there is no
other will but the duly signed carbon duplicate (Exh. A-I), and
the same is probatable. If the original is valid and can be probated, then the objection to the signed duplicate need not be
considered, being superfluous and irrelevant. At any rate, said
duplicate, Exhibit A-I, serves to prove that the omission of one
signature in the third page of the original testament was inadvertent and not intentional.
“The carbon duplicate, Exhibit A-I, was produced and admitted without a new publication does not affect the jurisdiction
of the probate court, already conferred by the original publication of the petition for probate. The amended petition did not
substantially alter the one first filed, but merely supplemented
it by disclosing the existence of the duplicate, and no showing
is made that new interests were involved (the contents of Exhibit A and A-I are admittedly identical); and appellants were
duly notified of the proposed amendment. It is nowhere proved
or claimed that the amendment deprived the appellants of any
substantial right, and we see no error in admitting the amended
petition.

71

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

“IN VIEW OF THE FOREGOING, the decision appealed
from is affirmed, with costs against appellants.”

There are, however, certain exceptions to the rule that all of
the pages of the will shall have to be signed on the left margin by the
testator and the witnesses. Such requirement is not necessary: (1) in
the last page, when the will consists of two or more pages; (2) when
the will consists of only one page; and (3) when the will consists of
two pages, the first of which contains all the testamentary dispositions and is signed at the bottom by the testator and the witnesses
and the second contains only the attestation clause duly signed at
the bottom by the witnesses.43
Idem; Location of signatures. — The law requires that the
signatures of the testator and the instrumental witnesses should be
on the left margin of every page of the will except the last. According
to the weight of authority, this requirement regarding the location
of the marginal signatures is not mandatory in character, provided,
of course, that such signatures are present in every page of the will,
except the last.44 Thus, in Avera vs. Garcia and Rodriguez,45 the
Supreme Court, through Justice Street, declared:
“It is true that the statute says that the testator and the
instrumental witnesses shall sign their names on the left margin of each and every page; and it is undeniable that the general
doctrine is to the effect that all the statutory requirements as
to the execution of wills must be fully complied with. The same
doctrine is also deducible from cases heretofore decided by this
court. Still some details at times creep into legislative enactments which are so trivial that it would be absurd to suppose
that the Legislature could have attached any decisive importance to them. The provision to the effect that the signature of
the testator and witnesses shall be written on the left margin of
each page rather than on the right margin — seems to be of this
character. So far as concerns the authentication of the will and
of every part thereof it can make no possible difference whether
the names appear on the left or on the right margin provided
they are on one or the other.

Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476.
Avera vs. Garcia, 42 Phil. 145; Nayre vs. Mojal, 47 Phil. 153.
45
42 Phil. 145.
43
44

72

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

“The controlling considerations on the point now before us
were stated in In re Will of Abangan, 40 Phil. 476, where the
court, speaking through Justice Avancena, in a case where the
signatures were placed at the bottom of the page and not in the
margin, said:
“‘The object of the solemnities surrounding the execution
of wills is to close the door against bad faith and fraud, to avoid
substitution of wills and testaments and to guarantee their truth
and authenticity. Therefore, the laws on this subject should be
interpreted in such a way as to attain these primordial ends.
But, on the other hand, also one must not lose sight of the fact
that it is not the object of the law to restrain and curtail the
exercise of the right to make a will. So when an interpretation
already given assures such ends, any other interpretation whatsoever, that adds nothing but demands more requisites entirely
unnecessary, useless and frustrative of the testator’s last will,
must be disregarded.’
“In the case before us, where ingenuity could not suggest
any possible prejudice to any person, as attendant upon the actual deviation from the letter of the law, such deviation must be
considered too trivial to invalidate the instrument.”

Numbering of Pages. — According to the last part of the
second paragraph of Art. 805, it is also essential that “all of the pages
of the will shall be numbered correlatively in letters placed on the
upper part of each page.” The principal object of this requirement is
to forestall any attempt to suppress or substitute any of the pages
of the will.46 Again, it must be observed that this requirement is
mandatory in character. However, it is not necessary when all of the
dispositive parts of a will are written on one sheet only.47 Neither is it
necessary that the pages of the will shall be numbered correlatively
in letters such as “one,” “two” or “three.” According to the weight of
authority, substantial compliance with the statutory requirement
is sufficient. Consequently, if the page of a will are numbered by
mere alphabetical letters,48 or by Arabic numerals,49 or by any form

Martir vs. Martir, 70 Phil. 89.
Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476. Here the will consisted of two pages, the second
of which contained only the attestation clause.
48
Aldaba vs. Roque, 43 Phil. 379.
49
Unson vs. Abella, 43 Phil. 494; Nayre vs. Mojal, 47 Phil. 152; Martir vs. Martir, 70
Phil. 89.
46
47

73

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

of identification,50 there is sufficient compliance with the statutory
requirement.
Attestation Clause. — Another essential requirement for the
validity of an ordinary will is the attestation clause. Ever since the
enactment of Act No. 2645 in 1916, amending the provision of Sec.
618 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the Supreme Court, in a long line
of decisions, has uniformly held that there must be an attestation
clause and that it must express the material matters mentioned in
the law (now Art. 805 of the Civil Code) with substantial accuracy.51
Absence of this clause will render the will a nullity.
The attestation clause is a memorandum or record of facts
wherein the witnesses certify that the instrument has been executed
before them, and that it has been executed in accordance with
the formalities prescribed by law.52 It is made for the purpose of
preserving in permanent form, a record of the facts attending the
execution of a will, so that in case of failure of the memory of the
instrumental witnesses or in case such witnesses are no longer
available, such facts may still be proved.53
Since the attestation clause is a declaration of the instrumental witnesses and not of the testator, it is, therefore, clear that it
must be signed by the witnesses, not by the testator.54 In the words
of the Supreme Court, “the attestation clause is a memorandum of
facts attending the execution of the will required by law to be made
by the attesting witnesses, and it must necessarily bear their signatures.”55 As a matter of sequence or continuity, it must be located
right after the signature of the testator at the end of the will. There
is, however, no statutory provision which would make this rule a
mandatory requirement; hence, it is elastic or flexible in character.
Thus, where the attestation clause is written on a separate page and
not on the last page in direct continuation of the body of the will,
although there might still be a space at the bottom thereof not big
enough to contain the whole clause, the defect, if it can be considered

Lopez vs. Liboro, 46 Off. Gaz. 211.
In re Will of Newmark, 45 Phil. 841
52
Testate Estate of Toray vs. Abaja, 47 Off. Gaz. 327.
53
Leynez vs. Leynez, 68 Phil. 745.
54
Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476; Testate Estate of Toray vs. Abaja, 47 Off. Gaz.
50
51

327.
55

Cagro vs. Cagro, 92 Phil. 1032.

74

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

a defect, is a matter of minor importance and will not invalidate the
will.56 As a matter of fact, where the clause is found in the body of
the will itself followed by the signatures of the testator and of the
instrumental witnesses, so that, on its face, it appears to be an attestation made by the testator himself more than by instrumental
witnesses, it has been held that, although the attestation clause is
clearly defective, the anomaly is not serious and substantial as to
affect the validity of the will.57 While perfection in the drafting of a
will may be desirable, unsubstantial departure from the usual forms
should be ignored, especially where the authenticity of the will is not
assailed.58
Idem; Contents. — According to the third paragraph of Art.
805 of the Civil Code, “the attestation shall state the number of pages
used upon which the will is written, and the fact that the testator
signed the will and every page thereof, or caused some other person
to write his name, under his express direction, in the presence of the
instrumental witnesses, and that the latter witnessed and signed
the will and all the pages thereof in the presence of the testator and
of one another.” It is, therefore, clear that there are three essential
facts which must necessarily appear in the attestation clause
in order that it will properly constitute a real certification by the
instrumental witnesses that the formalities which are required by
law in the execution of an ordinary will have been complied with.
These essential facts are:
(1)
written;

The number of pages used upon which the will is

(2) The fact that the testator signed the will and every page
thereof, or caused some other person to write his name, under his
express direction, in the presence of the instrumental witnesses;
and
(3) The fact that the instrumental witnesses witnessed and
signed the will and all the pages thereof in the presence of the
testator and of one another.

Villaflor vs. Tobias, 53 Phil. 714.
Aldaba vs. Roque, 43 Phil. 378; Cuevas vs. Achacoso, 88 Phil. 730; Gonzales vs.
Gonzales, 90 Phil. 444.
58
Gonzales vs. Gonzales, 90 Phil. 444.
56
57

75

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

Idem; Effect of defects or imperfections. — If the defect of
the attestation clause goes into the very essence of the clause itself
or consists in the omission of one, some or all of the essential facts
which, according to law, must be stated in such clause, and such
omission cannot be cured by an examination of the will itself, the
defect is substantial in character, as a consequence of which the will
is invalidated. This is true even where the authenticity of the will
which is offered for probate is not assailed. The reason for this is that
the requirements regarding the attestation clause affords additional
security against the danger that the will may be tampered with; and
as the Legislature has seen fit to prescribe these requirements, they
must be considered material in determining whether or not the will
or instrument should be admitted to probate.59
In re Will of Andrada
42 Phil. 180
This case concerns the probate of the last will and testament of Lucina Andrada. The attestation clause of the will
which is questioned, is incorporated in the will itself, constituting the last paragraph thereof; and its defect consists in the fact
that it does not state the number of sheets or pages upon which
the will is written. According to the contestant, the defect in
the attestation clause goes into the very essence of the will itself, and therefore, it should be disallowed. The Supreme Court,
speaking through Justice Street, held:
“The court is unanimous upon the point that the defect
pointed out in the attesting clause is fatal. The law plainly says
that the attestation clause shall state the number of sheets or
pages used, the evident purpose being to safeguard the document from the possibility of the interpolation of additional pages
or the omission of some of the pages actually used. It is true that
this point is also safeguarded by the other two requirements
that the pages shall be consecutively lettered and that each page
shall be signed on the left margin by the testator and the witnesses. In the light of these requirements it is really difficult to
see any practical necessity for the additional requirement that
the attesting clause shall state the number of pages or sheets
used. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that the last mentioned
requirement affords additional security against the danger that

59

In re Will of Andrada, 42 Phil. 180.

76

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 805

the will may be tampered with; and as the Legislature has seen
fit to prescribe this requirement, it must be considered material.”
Cagro vs. Cagro
92 Phil. 1032
This is an appeal interposed by the oppositors from a decision of the lower court to probate the alleged will of Vicente
Cagro. The main objection insisted upon by the appellants is
that the will is fatally defective, because its attestation clause is
not signed by the attesting witnesses. There is no question that
the signatures of the three witnesses to the will do not appear at
the bottom of the attestation clause, although the page containing the same is signed by the witnesses on the left-hand margin.
The Supreme Court, through Chief Justice Paras, held:
“We are of the opinion that the position taken by the appellants is correct. The attestation clause is ‘a memorandum of
the facts attending the execution of the will’ required by law
to be made by the attesting witnesses, and it must necessarily
bear their signatures. An unsigned attestation clause cannot be
considered as an act of the witnesses, since the omission of their
signatures at the bottom thereof negatives their participation.
“The petitioner-appellee contends that the signatures of
the three witnesses on the left-hand margin conforms substantially to the law and may be deemed as their signatures to the
attestation clause. This is untenable, because said signatures
are in compliance with the legal mandate that the will be signed
on the left-hand margin of all its pages. If an attestation clause
not signed by the three witnesses at the bottom thereof, be admitted as sufficient, it would be easy to add such clause to a will
on a subsequent occasion and in the absence of the testator and
any or all of the witnesses.’’60

However, if the defects of the attestation clause do not go
into the very essence of the clause itself or they consist in defects
or imperfections in the form of the attestation or in the language
used therein, such defects are merely formal in character, as a con-

60
This case was still decided under the old law, not under the new. Considering
the provision of Art. 809 of the new Civil Code which was not found in the old law, there are
some who maintain that the above decision is of doubtful application under the present law.
See dissenting opinion of Justice Angelo Bautista.

77

ART. 805

SUCCESSION

sequence of which the validity of the will is not affected, provided
that it is proved that such will was in fact executed and attested in
substantial compliance with all the requirements of Art. 805 of the
Code. This rule which is sometimes known as the doctrine of liberal
interpretation as distinguished from the doctrine of strict interpretation is now embodied in Art. 809 of the Code. It must be noted,
however, that the rule is predicated upon the concurrence of two essential pre-requisites. In the first place, the will must have been executed and attested without bad faith, forgery, fraud, or undue and
improper pressure and influence; and in the second place, it must be
proved that the will was in fact executed and attested in substantial
compliance with all the requirements of Art. 805.
Idem; Language of attestation. — Under our Code if the
attestation clause is in a language not known to the witnesses, it
shall be interpreted to them. This rule is different from that which
is required of the will itself because in the case of the latter the rule
is that it must be executed in a language or dialect known to the
testator.61
Problem – Clara, thinking of her mortality drafted a will
and asked Roberta, Hannah, Luisa and Benjamin to be witnesses. During the day of the signing of her will, Clara fell down
the stairs and broke both her arms. Coming from the hospital, Clara insisted on signing her will by thumbmark and said
that she can sign her full name later. While the will was being
signed, Roberta experienced a stomach ache and kept going to
the restroom for long periods of time. Hannah, while waiting for
her turn to sign the will, was reading the 7th Harry Potter Book
on the couch, beside the table on which everyone was signing.
Benjamin, aside from witnessing the will also offered to notarize
it. A week later, Clara was run over by a drunk driver while
crossing the street in Greenbelt. May the will of Clara be admitted to probate? Give your reasons briefly (2007).
Answer — Yes, the will of Clara may be probated.
A thumbmark has been considered by the SC as a valid
signature if intended by the testator to be his signature (Garcia
vs. La Cuesta, G.R. No. L-4067, Nov. 29, 1951; De Gala vs. Gonzales, G.R. No. L-37756, Nov. 28, 1933).

61

Art. 804, Civil Code.

78

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 806

The three witness rule required for the validity of an
ordinary will is satisfied, provided, either of the two following
conditions exists:
1. Roberta could see Clara and the other witnesses sign
the will at any time while she was in the toilet, had she wanted
to.
2. If Roberta could not have seen Clara and the other
witnesses sign the will, the same is valid if the will was acknowledged before a Notary Public other than Benjamin.
It is not necessary that the testator or the witnesses should
actually see the others subscribe their names to the instrument,
provided that he is in a position to see them sign if he chooses
(Nera vs. Rimando, G.R. No. 5971, Feb. 27, 1911;Yap Tua vs.
Yap Ka Kuan, G.R. No. L-6845, Sept. 1, 1914). Thus, the signing
must be considered to be in the presence of Hannah who was
reading a book on the couch beside the table (Suggested Answers
to the 2007 Bar Examination Questions, PALS).

Art. 806. Every will must be acknowledged before a notary
public by the testator and the witnesses. The notary public shall
not be required to retain a copy of the will, or file another with the
office of the Clerk of Court.62
Notarial Acknowledgment. — Another mandatory requirement in the execution of an ordinary will is that it must be acknowledged before a notary public by the testator and the instrumental
witnesses. The notary public in such case shall not be required to
retain a copy of the will, or file another with the office of the Clerk of
Court as in the case of other instruments.63 Although the law speaks
of “every will,” it is apparent that the provision prescribing this requirement is applicable only to ordinary wills. Under the Spanish
Civil Code, notarial intervention was also required, although it was
subsequently abrogated by the Code of Civil Procedure.
Cruz vs. Villasor
54 SCRA 31
The only question presented for determination, on which
the decision of the case hinges, is whether the supposed last will
62
63

New provision.
Art. 806, Civil Code.

79

ART. 806

SUCCESSION

and testament of Valente Z. Cruz (Exhibit “E”) was executed in
accordance with law, particularly Articles 805 and 806 of the
new Civil Code, the first requiring at least three credible witnesses to attest and subscribe to the will, and the second requiring the testator and the witnesses to acknowledge the will
before a notary public.
Of the three instrumental witnesses thereto, namely, Deogracias T. Jamaoas, Jr., Dr. Francisco Panares, and Atty. Angel H. Teves, Jr., one of them, the last named, is at the same
time the Notary Public before whom the will was supposed to
have acknowledged. Reduced to simpler terms, the will was attested and subscribed by at least three credible witnesses in the
presence of the testator and of each other, considering that the
three attesting witnesses must appear before the notary public to acknowledge the same. As the third witness is the notary
public himself, petitioner argues that the result is that only two
witnesses appeared before the notary public to acknowledge the
will. On the other hand, private respondent-appellee, Manuel B.
Lugay, who is the supposed executor of the will, following the
reasoning of the trial court, maintains that there is substantial
compliance with the legal requirement of having at least three
attesting witnesses even if the notary public acted as one of
them, bolstering up his stand with 57 American Jurisprudence,
p. 227 which, insofar as pertinent, reads as follows:
“It is said that there are practical reasons for upholding a
will as against the purely technical reason that one of the witnesses required by law signed as certifying to an acknowledgment of the testator’s signature under oath rather than as attesting the execution of the instrument.”
Speaking through Justice Esguerra, the Supreme Court
held:
“After weighing the merits of the conflicting claims of the
parties, We are inclined to sustain that of the appellant that
the last will and testament in question was not executed in accordance with law. The notary public before whom the will was
acknowledged cannot be considered as the third instrumental
witness since he cannot acknowledge before himself his having
signed the will. To acknowledge before means to avow (Javellana v. Ledesma, 97 Phil. 258, 262; Castro v. Castro, 100 Phil. 239,
247); to own as genuine, to assent, to admit; and “before” means
in front or preceding in space or ahead of. (The New Webster
Encyclopedic Dictionary of the English Language, p. 72; Funk
& Wagnalls New Standard Dictionary of the English Language,

80

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 806

p. 252; Webster’s New International Dictionary 2d. p. 245). Consequently, if the third witness were the notary public himself,
he would have to avow, assent, or admit his having signed the
will in front of himself. This cannot be done because he cannot split his personality into two so that one will appear before
the other to acknowledge his participation in the making of the
will. To permit such a situation to obtain would be sanctioning
a sheer absurdity.
“Furthermore, the function of a notary public is, among
others, to guard against any illegal or immoral arrangements.
(Balinon v. de Leon, 50 O.G. 583). That function would be defeated if the notary public were one of the attesting or instrumental witnesses. For then he would be interested in sustaining
the validity of the will as it directly involves himself and the
validity of his own act. It would place him in an inconsistent
position and the very purpose of the acknowledgment, which is
to minimize fraud (Report of the Code Commission, p. 106-107),
would be thwarted.
“Admittedly, there are American precedents holding that
a notary public may, in addition, act as a witness to the execution of the document he has notarized. (Mahilum v. Court of Appeals, 64 O.G. 4017; 17 SCRA 482; Sawyer v. Cox, 43 III. 130).
There are others holding that his signing merely as a notary in
a will nonetheless makes him a witness thereunder (Ferguson
v. Ferguson, 47 S. E. 2d. 346; In Re Douglas’ Will, 83 N. Y. S. 2d,
641; Ragsdal v. Hill, 269 S. W. 2d. 911, Tyson v. Utterback, 122
So. 496; In Re Baybee’s Estate 160 N. W. 900; Merill v. Boal, 132
A. 721; See also Trenswith v. Smallwood, 15 So. 1030). But these
authorities do not serve the purpose of the law in this jurisdiction or are not decisive of the issue herein, because the notaries
public and witnesses referred to in the aforecited cases merely
acted as instrumental, subscribing or attesting witnesses, and
not as acknowledging witnesses. Here the notary public acted
not only as attesting witness but also as acknowledging witness,
a situation not envisaged by Article 806 of the Civil Code which
reads:
“Art. 806. Every will must be acknowledged before a notary public by the testator and the witnesses. The notary public
shall not be required to retain a copy of the will or filed another
with the office of the Clerk of Court.”
“To allow the notary public to act as third witness, or one
of the attesting and acknowledging witnesses, would have the
effect of having only two attesting witnesses to the will which

81

ARTS. 807-809

SUCCESSION

would be a contravention of the provisions of Article 805 requiring at least three credible witnesses to act as such and of Article
806 which requires that the testator and the required number of
witnesses must appear before the notary public to acknowledge
the will. The result would be, as has been said, that only two
witnesses appeared before the notary public for that purpose. In
the circumstances, the law would not be duly observed.
“FOR ALL THE FOREGOING, the judgment appealed
from is hereby reversed and the probate of the last will and testament of Valente Z. Cruz (Exhibit “E”) is declared not valid and
hereby set aside.”

Art. 807. If the testator be deaf, or a deaf-mute, he must
personally read the will, if able to do so; otherwise, he shall
designate two persons to read it and communicate to him, In some
practicable manner, the contents thereof.64
Art. 808. If the testator is blind, the will shall be read to him
twice; once, by one of the subscribing witnesses, and again, by
the notary public before whom the will is acknowledged.65
Art. 809. In the absence of bad faith, forgery, or fraud, or undue and improper pressure and influence, defects and imperfections in the form of attestation or in the language used therein
shall not render the will invalid if it is proved that the will was in
fact executed and attested in substantial compliance with all the
requirements of Article 805.66
Doctrine of Liberal Interpretation. — The rule stated
in the above article is sometimes known as the doctrine of liberal
interpretation. As a consequence of the adoption of this doctrine, the
rule of strict interpretation, which used to be upheld by the Supreme
Court during that period immediately following the enactment
of Act No. 2645 which amended the provisions of Sec. 618 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, is abrogated. Thus, according to the Code
Commission:

New provision.
New provision.
66
New provision.
64
65

82

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 809

“The Supreme Court of the Philippines had previously
upheld the strict compliance with the legal formalities and
had even said that the provisions of Section 618 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, as amended, regarding the contents of the
attestation clause were mandatory, and noncompliance, therewith invalidated the will (Uy Coque vs. Sioca, 43 Phil. 405). The
decisions necessarily restrained the freedom of the testator in
disposing of his property.
“However, in recent years the Supreme Court changed
its attitude and has become more liberal in the interpretation
of the formalities in the execution of wills. This liberal view is
enunciated in the cases of Rodriguez vs. Yap, G.R. No. 45924,
May 18, 1939; Leynez us. Leynez, G.R. No. 46097, October 18,
1939; Martir vs. Martir, G.R. No. 46995, June 21, 1940 and Alcala vs. Villa, G.R. No. 47351, April 18, 1941.
“In the above mentioned decisions of our Supreme Court,
it has practically gone back to the original provisions of Section
618 of the Code of Civil Procedure before its amendment by Act
No. 2645 in the year 1916. To turn this attitude into a legislative declaration and to attain the main objective of the proposed
Code in the liberalization of the manner of executing wills, Article 809 of the Project is recommended.’’67

Before the promulgation of the New Civil Code, there used to
be two conflicting views with regard to the possible effect of the failure of the attestation clause to state one or some of the essential
facts or matters which must appear in it as required by law. The
question around which the conflict revolved was whether or not the
failure of the instrumental witnesses to state one or some of the essential facts which, according to law, must be stated in the attestation clause, would be fatal to the validity of the will in spite of the
fact that it can be established by either intrinsic or extrinsic evidence
that all of the statutory requirements for the execution of a will have
been complied with. One view (the rule of strict interpretation) held
that the omission would be fatal to the validity of the will,68 while
the other view (the rule of liberal interpretation) held that it would
not be fatal provided that it can be established or deduced from an

Report of the Code Commission, pp. 104-105.
See Uy Coque vs. Sloca, 43 Phil. 405; Sano vs. Quintana, 48 Phil. 506; Gumban vs.
Gorecho, 50 Phil. 30; Quinto vs. Morata, 54 Phil. 841; Rodriguez vs. Alcala, 55 Phil. 105;
Testate Estate of Toray vs. Abaja, 47 Off. Gaz. 327.
67
68

83

ART. 809

SUCCESSION

examination of the will itself that all of the statutory requirements
have been complied with.69
The existence of these divergent views had been recognized in
the past by the Supreme Court in several cases. Thus, in Dichoso
vs. Gorostiza, 57 Phil. 437, it was noted “that there have been
noticeable in the Philippines two divergent tendencies in the law of
wills — the one being planted on strict construction and the other
on liberal construction.” These conflicting or divergent views may
be illustrated by what happened in the case of Gil vs. Murciano.
The will which presented for probate in this case had the following
attestation clause, properly signed:
“We, the undersigned, all of legal age, certify: that the
foregoing will written in Spanish which is known to the testator,
composed of two pages actually used including the attestation
clause paged correlatively in letters and numbers of the upper
part thereof as well as the pages of the same, in our presence
and that each one of us have attested and signed said document
and all the pages thereof in the presence of the testator and of
each one of us.” (Translation)

Counsel for the contestant contended that the phrase “have been
signed by the testator” between the words “of the same” and the
words “in our presence” should have been inserted if the attestation
clause is to be complete and have sense. As it is, the last part of the
clause is meaningless. On March 1, 1951, the Supreme Court, by a
vote of six to five, reversed the order of the probate court admitting
the will to probate. Speaking through Justice Jugo, the Court held:
“It will be noted that the attestation clause abovequoted
does not state that the alleged testator signed the will. It declares only that it was signed by the witnesses. This is a fatal defect, for the precise purpose of the attestation clause is to certify
that the testator signed the will, this being the most essential
element of the clause. Without it there is no attestation at all.
It is said that the court may correct a mere clerical error. This
is too much of a clerical error for it affects the very essence of
the clause. Alleged errors may be overlooked or corrected only
in matters of form which do not affect the substance of the statement.
69

See infra.

84

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 809

“It is claimed that the correction may be made by inference. If we cure a deficiency by means of inferences, when are we
going to stop making inferences to supply fatal deficiencies in
wills? Where are we to draw the line? Following that procedure
we would be making interpolations by inferences, implications
and even by internal circumstantial evidence. This would be
done in the face of the clear, unequivocal language of the statute
as to how the attestation clause should be made. It is to be supposed that the drafter of the alleged will read the clear words of
the statute when he prepared it. For the court to supply alleged
deficiencies would be against the evident policy of the law.’’70

There was, however, a strong dissenting opinion penned by Justice
Mason. Subsequently, the proponent filed a motion for reconsideration of the Court’s decision. By the time the motion was taken up,
there was already a change in composition of the Court. Chief Justice
Moran, who concurred with Justice Jugo, had already resigned and
was replaced by Justice Labrador. In the motion for reconsideration,
Justice Labrador concurred with Justice Tuason’s dissenting opinion. The result was that the Court’s decision of 1951 was reversed on
March 20, 1953, with Justice Tuason’s dissenting opinion becoming
the majority opinion by a vote of six to five. Thus, as it finally stands,
the Supreme Court’s decision is as follows:
“The problem posed by the omission in question is governed not by the law of wills which requires certain formalities
to be fulfilled in the execution, but by the rules of construction
applicable to statutes and documents in general. And this rule
would obtain whether the omission occurred in the original
documents or in the copy alone. In either case, the court may
and should correct the error by supplying the omitted word or
words.
“But let it be assumed, for the sake of this decision only,
that the attestation clause was drawn exactly as it was copied
in Toledo’s record on appeal, was the mistake fatal? Was it, or
was it not cured by the testator’s own declaration, to wit: In
testimony whereof, I sign this my will and on the left margin
of each of its two used pages including the attestation clause in
the presence of the witnesses, who on their part signed one of
said pages and the attestation clause in my presence and in the

70

Gil vs. Murciano, 88 Phil. 260.

85

ART. 809

SUCCESSION

presence of one another, in Porac, Pampanga, P.I., this 27th day
of March, nineteen hundred thirty-nine.’
“This Court noted in Dichoso de Ticson vs. De Gorostiza
(1922), 57 Phil. 437, “that there have been noticeable in the
Philippines two divergent tendencies in the law of wills — the
one being planted on strict construction and the other on liberal
construction. A late example of the former view may be found in
the decision, in Rodriguez vs. Alcala (1930), 55 Phil. 150, sanctioning a literal enforcement of the law. The basic case in the
other direction, predicated on reason, is Abangan vs. Abangan
(1919) 40 Phil. 476, oft-cited approvingly in later decisions.’
“It is objected ‘If we cure a deficiency by means of inferences, when are we going to stop making inferences to supply
fatal deficiencies in wills? Where are we to draw the line? These
same questions might well have been asked by the opponents of
the new trends in the cases above cited. But the so-called liberal
rule does not offer any puzzle or difficulty, nor does it open the
door to serious consequences. The later decisions do tell us when
and where to stop; they draw the dividing line with precision.
They do not allow evidence aliunde to fill a void in any part of
the document or supply missing details that should appear in
the will itself. They only permit a probe into the will, an exploration within its confines, to ascertain its meaning or to determine
the existence or absence of the requisite formalities of law. This
clear, sharp limitation eliminates uncertainty and ought to banish any fear of dire results.
“The case at hand comes within the bounds thus defined.”71

Idem; Limitation. — By virtue of the provision of Art. 809 of
the New Civil Code, the doctrine of liberal interpretation has become
part and parcel of the law on wills in this jurisdiction. One difficulty,
however, still remains and that is with regard to the admissibility of
evidence aliunde in order to prove or establish the fact that the will
was in fact executed and attested in substantial compliance with
all the requirements prescribed by law. The law states that “defects
or imperfections in the form of attestation or in the language used
therein shall not render the will invalid if it is proved that the will
was in fact executed and attested in substantial compliance with
the requirements of Article 805.” Does this mean that such defects
71

Gil vs. Murciano, 88 Phil. 260.

86

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 809

or imperfections can be cured by evidence aliunde? If the attestation does not state that the testator had signed the will and all of
the pages in the presence of the instrumental witnesses and nothing can be inferred of such fact from the context of the will itself,
can evidence aliunde be presented in order to prove that the testator actually signed the will and all of the pages thereof in the presence of the instrumental witnesses? Under the old law, there was
no question. According to the cases decided by the Supreme Court
under the old law, whether applying the doctrine of liberal interpretation or the doctrine of strict interpretation, such evidence cannot
be presented in order “to fill a void in any part of the document or
supply missing details that should appear in the will itself.” There
can only be “a probe into the will, an exploration within its confines,
to ascertain its meaning or to determine the existence or absence of
the requisite formalities of law.” Is this limitation still applicable
under the present law considering the phraseology of Art. 809? It is
submitted that the limitation is still applicable. It must be observed
that the doctrine of liberal interpretation, as enunciated in Art. 809,
can only be applied to defects or imperfections either in the form of
the attestation or in the language used therein. It cannot be applied
to defects which are substantial, such as when there is an absolute
omission in the attestation clause of one, or some, or all of these
essential facts, which, according to the law, must be stated in such
clause, and such an omission cannot be cured by an examination of
the entire will itself. It is evident that such an omission cannot be
classified as a defect or imperfection in the form of the attestation or
in the language used therein.
Idem; Illustrative cases. — The following cases will serve to
illustrate the rule of liberal interpretation as applied by the Supreme
Court.72

72
See also: Abangan vs. Abangan, 40 Phil. 476; Pecson vs. Pecson, 45 Phil. 216; Nayve vs.
Mojal, 47 Phil. 153; De Gala vs. Gonzales, 53 Phil. 104; Rey vs. Cartagena, 56 Phil. 282; Sebastian vs. Panganiban, 59 Phil. 653; Rodriguez vs. Yap, 68 Phil. 126; Leynez vs. Leynez, 68
Phil. 745; Martir vs. Martir, 70 Phil. 89; Alcala vs. Villa, 71 Phil. 561; Sabado vs. Fernandez,
72 Phil. 541; Mendoza vs. Pilapil, 72 Phil. 546; Testate of Rollos, (CA), 44 Off. Gaz. 4938;
Singson vs. Florentino, 48 Off. Gaz. 4353; Dia v. Zuniga, 89 Phil. 129; Gonzales vs. Gonzales,
90 Phil. 444; Gil vs. Murciano, 88 Phil. 260.

87

ART. 809

SUCCESSION

Cuevas vs. Achacoso
88 Phil. 730
The attestation clause of the will which is offered for probate is as follows:
“In witness whereof, I sign this testament or last will in
the municipality of Iba, Zambales, Philippines, this 10th day of
October, 1945, in the presence of the three witnesses, namely
Dr. Nestorio Trinidad, Don Baldomero Achacoso, and Mr. Proceso Cabal as instrumental witnesses to my signing; this instrument is written in three (3) sheets marked by letters ‘A,’ ‘B,’ and
‘C’ consecutively on top of each sheet and upon my request and
in my presence and also in the presence of each of the aforesaid
instrumental witnesses, they also sign this instrument already
referred to.
(Sgd.) “Jose Venzon
Witnesses:
(Sgd.) “Nestorio Trinidad
(Sgd.) “Baldomero Achacoso
(Sgd.) “Proceso Cabal”
According to the contestant, the above clause is not an attestation clause, or if it is, the same is an attestation of the testator
and not of the witnesses. The Supreme Court, however, speaking through Justice Bautista, held:
“The clause above quoted is the attestation clause referred
to in the law which, in our opinion, substantially complies with
its requirements. The only apparent anomaly we find is that it
appears to be an attestation made by the testator himself more
than by the instrumental witness. This apparent anomaly, however, is not in our opinion, serious nor substantial, as to affect
the validity of the will, it appearing that right under the signature of the testator, there appear the signatures of the three
instrumental witnesses.
“Instrumental witnesses,’’ as defined by Escriche in his
Diccionario Razonado de Legislacion y Jurisprudencia, Vol. 4, p.
1115, ‘are those who take part in the execution of an instrument
or writing.’ An instrumental witness, therefore, does not merely
attest to the signature of the testator but also to the proper execution of the will. The fact that the three instrumental witnesses have signed the will immediately under the signature of
the testator, shows that they have in fact attested not only to

88

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 809

the genuineness of his signature but also to the due execution of
the will as embodied in the attestation clause.”
Dichoso vs. Gorostiza
57 Phil. 437
The attestation clause of the will which is offered for probate is as follows:
“We, the undersigned attesting witnesses,
whose residences are stated opposite our respective
names, do hereby certify that the testatrix, whose
name is signed herein above, has published unto
us the foregoing will consisting of two pages as her
last will and testament, and has signed the same in
our presence, and in witness whereof we have each
signed the same and each page thereof in the presence of said testatrix and in the presence of each
other.”
According to the contestant, the above clause is fatally defective because it fails to state that the testatrix signed every page
of the will as required by law. The Supreme Court, however,
speaking through Justice Malcolm, held:
“Placing the attestation clause under the judicial microscope, we observe, after analytical study, that it shows compliance with statutory provisions. We must reject as untenable
the interpretation of the appellant relative to the word ‘hereinabove,’ for this simply has reference to the signature at the end
of the will. We must reject also as untenable the interpretation
of the appellant that the word ‘same’ refers back to ‘pages’ and
not to for such an interpretation would be considered with the
language used further in the attestation clause where mention
is made of the signing by the witnesses of the same and each
page thereof,’ meaning the will and each page thereof. We are,
however, clear that when the attestation clause states that the
testatrix ‘has published unto us the foregoing will consisting of
two pages as her last will and testament, and has signed the
same,’ the word ‘same’ signifies the foregoing will consisting of
two pages, which necessarily implies the signing by the testatrix
of the will and every page thereof. In our judgment, an interpretation sustaining the validity of the attestation clause is neither
forced nor illogical.
“Precision of language in the drafting of an attestation
clause is desirable. However, it is not imperative that a par-

89

ART. 809

SUCCESSION

rot-like copy of the words of the statute be made. It is sufficient
from the language employed if it can reasonably be deduced that
the attestation clause fulfills what the law expects of it. Legalistic formalities should not be committed to obscure the use of
good sound common sense in the consideration of wills and to
frustrate the wishes of deceased persons solemnly expressed in
testaments, regarding the execution of which there is not even a
hint of bad faith or fraud. We find the attestation clause legally
sufficient, and order that the will of the deceased Caridad Alcantara de Gorostiza be admitted to probate.”
Merza vs. Porras
93 Phil. 142
The attestation clause of the will which is offered for probate is as follows:
“The foregoing instrument consisting of three
(3) pages, on the date above mentioned, was executed,
signed and published by testatrix Pilar Montealegre
and she declared that the said instrument is her last
will and testament; that in our presence and also in
the very presence of the said testatrix as likewise in
the presence of two witnesses and the testatrix each
of us three witnesses signed this testament.”
According to the contestant, the above clause is fatally defective. The Supreme Court, however, speaking through Justice
Tuason, held:
“The opponent objected that this clause did not state that
the testatrix and the witnesses had signed each and every page
of the will or that she had signed the instrument in the presence
of the witnesses.
“The premise of this conclusion is, in our opinion, incorrect.
“It must be admitted that the attestation clause was very
poorly drawn; its language exceedingly ungrammatical to the
point of being difficult to understand; but from a close examination of the whole context in relation to its purpose the implication seems clear that the testatrix signed in the presence
of the witnesses. Considering that the witnesses’ only business
at hand was to sign and attest to the testatrix’s signing of the
document, and that the only actors in the proceeding were the
maker and the witnesses acting and speaking collectively and

90

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 809

in the first person, the phrase ‘in the presence,’ used as it was in
connection with the process of signing, cannot imply anything
but, that the testatrix signed before them. No other inference is
possible. The propositional phrase ‘in our presence’ denotes an
active verb and the verb a subject. The verb could be no other
than signed and the subject no other than the testatrix.
“The use of the word ‘also’ is no less enlightening. It denotes that, as each of the witnesses signed in the presence of the
testatrix and of one another, so the testatrix signed in similar or
like manner — in their presence.
“In consonance with the principle of liberal interpretation, adhered to in numerous later decisions of this Court and
affirmed and translated into enactment in the new Civil Code
(Art. 809), we are constrained to hold that the attestation clause
under consideration is sufficient and valid.”
In the case of Teodoro Caneda et al. vs. Hon. CA, G.R. No.
103554, May 28, 1993, the SC ruled that there are two kinds of
wills. One is the ordinary will which must be acknowledged before a notary public by the testator and the attesting witnesses,
hence it is likewise known as a notarial will. Where the testator
is deaf-mute, Art. 807 requires that he must personally read
the will, if able to do so. Otherwise, he should designate two
persons who will read the will and communicate its contents to
him in a practicable manner. On the other hand, if the testator
is blind, the will should be read to him twice; once, by anyone
of the witnesses thereto, and then again, by the notary public
before whom it is acknowledged. The other kind of will is the
holographic will which Art. 10 defines as one that is entirely
written, dated and signed by the hand of the testator himself.
This kind of will unlike the ordinary type, requires no attestation by witnesses. A common requirement in both kinds of wills
is that they should be in writing and must have been executed
in a language or dialect known to the testator. However, in the
case of an ordinary or attested will, its attestation clause need
not be written in a language or dialect known to the testator
since it does not form part of the testamentary disposition. Furthermore, the language used in the attestation clause likewise
need not even be known to the attesting witnesses.
Problem – What is the effect of the failure to state the
number of pages on which the will was written?
Answer – The failure of the attestation clause to state the
number of pages on which the will was written is a fatal flaw,
despite Art. 809. The purpose of the law in requiring the clause

91

ART. 809

SUCCESSION

to state the number of pages on which the will is written is to
safeguard against possible interpolation or omission of one or
some of its pages and to prevent any increase or decrease in the
pages. The failure to state the number of pages equates with
the absence of an averment on the part of the instrumental witnesses as to how many pages consisted the will, the execution
of which they had ostensibly just witnessed and subscribed to.
There is substantial compliance with this requirement if the will
states elsewhere in it how many pages it is comprised of. However, in the case of Felix Azuela vs. CA, et al., G.R. No. 122880,
April 12, 2006 , there could have been no substantial compliance
with the requirements under Art. 805 since there is no statement in the attestation clause or anywhere in the will itself as
to the number of pages which comprise the will.
Problem – What is the effect of an unsigned attestation
clause?
Answer — An unsigned attestation clause results in an
unattested will. The attestation clause is a “memorandum of the
facts attending the execution of the will” required by law to be
made by the attesting witnesses, and it must necessarily bear
their signatures. An unsigned attestation clause cannot be considered as an act of the witnesses since the omission of their signatures at the bottom thereof negates their participation. The
signatures on the left-hand corner of every page signify that the
witnesses are aware that the page they are signing forms part
of the will. On the other hand, the signatures to the attestation
clause establish that the witnesses are referring to the statements contained in the attestation clause itself. An unsigned
attestation clause results in an unattested will (Felix Azuela vs.
CA, et al., supra).
Problem – What is the effect of a notarial will that has
been subscribed and sworn to before a notary public but has not
been acknowledged before the notary public by the testator and
the witnesses?
Answer — A notarial will that is not acknowledged before
a notary public by the testator and the witnesses is fatally defective, even if it is subscribed and sworn to before the notary
public.
A jurat is that part of an affidavit where the notary public certifies that before him, the document was subscribed and
sworn to by the executor. On the other hand, an acknowledgment is the act of one who has executed a deed in going before

92

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ARTS. 810-814

some competent officer or court and declaring it to be his act or
deed. It involves an extra step undertaken whereby the signor
actually declares to the notary that the executor of a document
has attested to the notary that the same is his own free act and
deed. (Ibid).

Art. 810. A person may execute a holographic will which must
be entirely written, dated, and signed by the hand of the testator
himself. It is subject to no other form, and may be made in or out
of the Philippines, and need not be witnessed.73
Art. 811. In the probate of a holographic will, it shall be necessary that at least one witness who knows the handwriting and
signature of the testator explicitly declared that the will and the
signature are in the handwriting of the testator. If the will is contested, at least three of such witnesses shall be required.
In the absence of any competent witness referred to in the
preceding paragraph, and if the court deems it necessary, expert
testimony may be resorted to.74
Art. 812. In holographic wills, the dispositions of the testator
written below his signature must be dated and signed by him in
order to make them valid as testamentary dispositions.75
Art. 813. When a number of dispositions appearing in a holographic will are signed without being dated, and the last disposition has a signature and date, such date validates the dispositions
preceding it, whatever be the time of prior dispositions.76
Art. 814. In case of any insertion, cancellation, erasure or alteration in a holographic will, the testator must authenticate the
same by his full signature.77
Special Formalities of Holographic Wills. — From the
provisions of Arts. 804 and 810 of the Code, it is clear that the
testator, in the execution of a holographic will, must comply with
the following formalities:
New provision.
New provision.
75
New provision.
76
New provision.
77
New provision.
73
74

93

ART. 814

SUCCESSION

(1) The will must be entirely written by the hand of the
testator himself;
(2) The will must be entirely dated by the hand of the testator
himself; and
(3) The will must be entirely signed by the hand of the testator
himself; and
(4) The will must be executed in a language or dialect known
to the testator.
It must be observed that in Art. 810 of the Civil Code, the word
“entirely” modifies not only the word “written” but also the words
“dated” and “signed”. The purpose of the law is obvious. In addition
to insuring and safeguarding the authenticity of the holographic
will, it will also serve to deter or prevent any possible insertion or
interpolation by others or any possible forgery. And this is logical
because of the simplicity of the make-up or format of a holographic
will. As Justice J.B.L. Reyes has so aptly put it: “Its simplicity is an
invitation to forgery.” Consequently, in order that a holographic will
may be admitted to probate, it is essential that it must be entirely
written, dated and signed in the handwriting of the testator himself.
The law exacts literal compliance with these requirements. Hence,
the doctrines of liberal interpretation and substantial compliance as
applied to ordinary or notarial wills cannot be applied to holographic
wills. Thus, if the holographic will is partly printed or typewritten
and partly written in the handwriting of the testator, it is clearly void.
The same is also true in case there are insertions or interpolations
made by a third person at the time of the execution of the will. The
will in such case is void. The same is also true if the date used is the
printed date of a diary. The will is void because of non-compliance
with an essential requisite. The same is also true if the signature of
the testator is a mark, such as a cross or even a thumbmark. The will
is also void because of non-compliance with an essential requisite.
Of course, we must not go to extremes in applying the law literally.
Thus, a blind testator can certainly execute a holographic will if he
can still write despite his blindness. The same is also true in the
case of one whose hands or arms have been amputated. So long as
he has found an effective substitute for his hands so that he can still
write, there is no reason why he cannot execute a holographic will.
However, in the case of insertions or interpolations by third
persons, there are several possible situations which must be consid94

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 814

ered. According to Dr. Tolentino, citing Valverde and Castan, the
following rules may be laid down:
(1) If the insertion was made after the execution of the will,
but without the consent of the testator, such insertion is considered
as not written, because the validity of the will cannot be defeated by
the malice or caprice of a third person.
(2) If the insertion was made after the execution of the will
with the consent of the testator, the will remains valid but the
insertion is void.
(3) If the insertion was made after the execution of the will,
and such insertion is validated by the testator by his signature
thereon, it becomes part of the will, and therefore, the entire will
becomes void, because of failure to comply with the requirement
that it must be entirely written by the hand of the testator.
(4) If the insertion was made contemporaneous to the
execution of the will, then the will is void because it is not entirely
written by the hand of the testator.78
It must also be observed that Art. 810 does not require that
the testator must sign the will with his full signature, although
this is required when it comes to the authentication of an insertion,
cancellation, erasure or alteration.79 Consequently, the testator may
sign the will with his initials, or nickname, or appellation. All that
the law requires is that such signature must be entirely signed by
the hand of the testator. To a certain extent this creates a sort of
absurdity considering the fact that the authentication of the will
is certainly more important than the authentication of a mere
insertion, cancellation, erasure or alteration.
An interesting illustration of what may be considered as a
holographic will is found in an American case — the case of Milam
vs. Stanley.80 The testator Fletcher, was convicted of rape, and
sentenced to be hanged, Before his execution, he wrote the following
letter to his daughters:

Tolentino, 1973 Ed., 102.
Art. 814, Civil Code.
80
111 S.W. 296, 33 Ky. Law Rep. 783.
78
79

95

ART. 814

SUCCESSION

“My Dear Loving Daughters: I guess my last hope is gone.
I don’t want you all to grieve after me for I think I will be better
off than to be in jail, for I am prepared to go and I want to ask
one thing of you all is to meet me in heaven. Jennie, Lula and
Bettie, and Mary, I want you to understand that I am as innocent of the charge which I have to die for as an angel in heaven
and it does me good to know that God knows that I am not guilty.
Jennie tell John to see that my body is taken home and buried
in our graveyard and get Stinson to preach my funeral. Tell him
I am at rest. I want to make you and Lula a deed to that house
and lot and I don’t want you and her to have any trouble over it.
Jennie I don’t do this because I think more of you and Lula than
I do of Mary and Bettie, but I do it because you both attended to
your dear old mother so good. I hope to soon meet her in heaven.
Jennie, Mary has not enough for my money to bury me I guess.
So this is from your father, W. R. Fletcher.
“To Jennie and Lula may God bless you all is my prayer.
Yours, W.R.F.”

After Fletcher’s execution, the above letter was presented for
probate as his last will and testament. The decision of the court is
as follows:
“In determining whether the paper is testamentary or not
the court will look not only at the language of the instrument, but
at the situation of the maker and at his intention. W.R. Fletcher
knew when he wrote this paper that he was to die on February
15th. His last hope of life was gone; and, knowing that he was to
die on the 15th, he wrote this letter to his daughters. The letter
shows on its face that it is inartistically written, but his meaning is sufficiently apparent. He did not have in mind that he was
thereafter to make his daughters a deed to the house and lot,
and not to have any trouble over it; for he added: ‘I don’t do this
because I think more of you and Lula than I do of Mary and Bettie, but I do it because you both attended to your dear old mother
so good.’ These words show that he had in mind, not something
that he was going to do, but something he was then doing. In
other words, they show that he intended to give the house and
lot by virtue of the letter he was then writing, and not by virtue
of some instrument he was thereafter to write.
“A will may be in any form. The words in which the intention of the testator is expressed are immaterial, if it sufficiently
appears from the instrument that he was making a disposition
of his property testamentary in character. In Clarke vs. Ran-

96

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 814

som, 50 Cal. 595, the following note, written in expectation of
death, was probated as a will: ‘Dear old Nance, I wish to give
you my watch, two shawls and also $5,000, your old friend, E.A.
Gordon.’ In Byers vs. Hope, 61 Md. 206, 48 Am. Rep. 89, the
decedent wrote on the back of a business letter, addressed to
a man and his wife, the following addressed to the wife: ‘After
my death you are to have $40,000. This you are to have will or
no will. Take care of this until my death.’ In Hunt vs. Hunt, 4
N.H. 434, 17 Am. Dec. 438, the decedent indorsed on the back of
a note these words: ‘If I am living at the time this note is paid,
I order the contents to be paid to A.H.’ He died before the note
was paid. In Fickle vs. Snepp, 97 Ind. 289, 49 Am. Rep. 449,
the instrument was in a form of a promissory note. In all these
cases the papers were probated as a will, if properly executed,
whatever its form be, if the intention of the maker to dispose
of his estate after his death is sufficiently manifested. Bobb vs.
Harrison, 9 Rich. Eq. (S.C.) 111, 70 Am. Dec. 203.
“Under these principles the circuit court properly admitted the paper to probate as the will of W. R. Fletcher. Judgment
affirmed.”

Probate of Holographic Wills. — According to Art. 811, if
the probate of a holographic will is not contested, it shall be necessary that at least one witness who knows the handwriting and
signature of the testator shall explicitly declare that the will and
the signature of the testator are in the handwriting of the testator.
If the probate is contested, at least three of such witnesses shall be
required. Nevertheless, in the absence of any competent witness,
expert testimony may be resorted to, if the court deems it necessary.
There are, however, two interesting problems which will arise as a
result of these requirements. They are:
First: If the testator himself, while he is still living, will present
his holographic will for probate, shall the above requirements still
have to be complied with? According to Sec. 12, Rule 76 of the Rules
of Court: “Where the testator himself petitions for the probate
of his holographic will and no contest is filed, the fact that he
affirms that the holographic will and the signature are in his own
handwriting, shall be sufficient evidence thereof. If the holographic
will is contested, the burden of disproving the genuineness and due
execution thereof, shall be on the contestant. The testator may, in
his turn, present such additional proof as may be necessary to rebut
the evidence for the contestant.”
97

ART. 814

SUCCESSION

Second: If the holographic will was lost or was destroyed by a
third person without any authorization given by the testator during the lifetime of the latter, or if it was lost or destroyed or stolen
after his death, would it still be possible to have the will admitted to
probate, granting that its loss or unauthorized destruction, as well
as its due execution and contents can be properly established by
secondary evidence in accordance with the Rules of Court? Again,
our answer must be in the negative. While it is true that under the
Rules of Court, the proof of lost or destroyed wills by secondary evidence, such as by the testimony of witnesses, in lieu of the original documents, is expressly recognized,81 nevertheless, such Rules,
which were promulgated in 1940, could not have contemplated holographic wills which were not then recognized. Furthermore, because
of the special nature of holographic wills as stated in Art. 810 of the
Civil Code as well as the special requirements for their probate as
stated in Art. 811 of the same Code, it is clear that the law regards
the document itself as material proof of authenticity. Consequently,
a holographic will cannot be probated unless the document itself is
presented to the probate court for examination and unless there is
compliance with the special requirements stated in Art. 811.82 It is,
however, possible that a photostatic copy, or even a mimeographed
or carbon copy may be substituted for the original document. This
is so, because, after all, in these cases, compliance with the requirements stated in Art. 811 would still be possible. The authenticity of
the handwriting and signature of the testator may still be examined
and tested by the probate court.83
Gan vs. Yap
104 Phil. 509
The records show that the alleged testatrix, Felicidad Esguerra Yap, died on Nov. 20, 1951, leaving considerable properties. A few months later, a petition for the probate of a holographic will allegedly executed by her was filed in the Court of
First Instance of Manila. Her husband, Ildefonso Yap, opposed
the probate, asserting that the deceased had not executed any
will during her lifetime. The will itself was not presented, but
the petitioner tried to establish its due execution and contents
See Sec. 4, Rule 130, Rules of Court.
Gan vs. Yap, 104 Phil. 509.
83
Ibid.
81
82

98

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 814

by the testimony of witnesses, who declared that they had seen
the will and had read its contents. After hearing, the lower court
denied the probate of the will. Hence, this appeal. The question to be resolved, therefore, is whether or not a holographic
will which is lost or destroyed may be admitted to probate upon
the testimony of witnesses regarding its due execution and contents in accordance with Rule 77 of the Rules of Court. Holding
that such provisions of the Rules of Court cannot be applied to
holographic wills, not only because such wills could not have
been contemplated by such provisions which were prepared long
before the effectivity of the new Civil Code, but because of the
special nature of holographic wills as stated in Art. 810 of the
Civil Code as well as the special requirements for their probate
as stated in Art. 811 of the same Code, the Supreme Court, affirming the decision of the lower court, declared:
“When ordinary wills are submitted to the courts for allowance, authenticity and due execution are the dominant requirements to be fulfilled. For that purpose the testimony of one
of the subscribing witnesses would be sufficient, if there is no
opposition. If there is, the three must testify, if available. In
the matter of holographic wills, no such guaranties of truth and
veracity are demanded, since they need no witnesses; provided,
however, that they are ‘entirely written, dated and signed by the
hand of the testator himself.’ The law, it is reasonable to suppose, regards the document itself as material proof of authenticity, and as its own safeguard, since it could at any time, be
demonstrated to be — or not to be — in the hand of the testator
himself. In the probate of a holographic will, it shall be necessary that at least one witness who knows the handwriting and
signature of the testator explicitly declare that the will and the
signature are in the handwriting of the testator. If the will is
contested, at least three of such witnesses shall be required. The
witnesses so presented do not need to have seen the execution of
the holographic will. They may be mistaken in their opinion of
the handwriting, or they may deliberately lie in affirming that
it is in the testator’s hand. However, the oppositor may present
other witnesses who also know the testator’s handwriting, or
some expert witnesses, who after comparing the will with other
writings or letters of the deceased, have come to the conclusion
that such will has not been written by the hand of the deceased.
And the court, in view of such contradictory testimony may use
its own visual sense, and decide in the face of the document,
whether the will submitted to it has indeed been written by the
testator. Obviously, when the will itself is not submitted, these
means of opposition, and of assessing the evidence are not available.”

99

ART. 814

SUCCESSION

Azoala vs. Singson
109 Phil. 102
The records show that the probate of the holographic will
of the late Fortunata S. Vda. de Yance was denied on the ground
that under Art. 811 of the Civil Code, the proponent must present three witnesses who could declare that the will and the
signature are in the writing of the testatrix, the probate being
contested; and that the lone witness presented did not prove
sufficiently that the will was written in the handwriting of said
testatrix. The proponent appealed, urging: first, that he was not
bound to produce more than one witness because the will’s authenticity was not questioned; and second, that Art. 811 does
not mandatorily require the production of three witnesses to
identify the handwriting and signature of a holographic will,
even if its authenticity should be denied by the adverse party.
Speaking through Justice J.B.L. Reyes, the Supreme
Court held:
“We agree with the appellant that since the authenticity of
the will was not contested, he was not required to produce more
than one witness; but even if the genuineness of the holographic
will were contested, we are of the opinion that Article 811 of
our present Civil Code can not be interpreted as to require the
compulsory presentation of three witnesses to identify the handwriting of the testator, under penalty of having the probate denied. Since no witness may have been present at the execution
of a holographic will, none being required by law (Art. 810, new
Civil Code), it becomes obvious that the existence of witnesses
possessing the requisite qualifications is a matter beyond the
control of the proponent. For it is not merely a question of finding and producing any three witnesses; they must be witnesses
“who know the handwriting and signature of the testator” and
who can declare (truthfully, of course, even if the law does not so
express) “that the will and the signature are in the handwriting
of the testator”. There may be no available witness acquainted
with the testator’s hand; or even if so familiarized, the witnesses
may be unwilling to give a positive opinion. Compliance with the
rule of paragraph 1 of Article 811 may thus become an impossibility. That is evidently the reason why the second paragraph
of Article 811 prescribes that
“In the absence of any competent witness referred to in the
preceding paragraph, and if the court deems it necessary, expert
testimony may be resorted to.”

100

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 814

“As can be seen, the law foresees the possibility that no
qualified witness may be found (or what amounts to the same
thing, that no competent witness may be willing to testify to
the authenticity of the will), and provides for resort to expert
evidence to supply the deficiency.
“It may be true that the rule of this article (requiring that
three witnesses be presented if the will is contested and only
one if no contest is had) was derived from the rule established
for ordinary testaments (cf. Cabang vs. Delfinado, 45 Phil., 291;
Tolentino vs. Francisco, 57 Phil., 742). But it cannot be ignored
that the requirement can be considered mandatory only in the
case of ordinary testaments, precisely because the presence of at
least three witnesses at the execution of ordinary wills is made
by law essential to their validity (Art. 805). Where the will is
holographic, no witness need be present (Art. 810), and the rule
requiring production of three witnesses must be deemed merely
permissive if absurd results are to be avoided.
“Again, under Article 811, the resort to expert evidence
is conditioned by the word “if the Court deems it necessary”,
which reveal that what the law deems essential is that the
Court should be convinced of the will’s authenticity. Where the
prescribed number of witnesses is produced and the court is
convinced by their testimony that the will is genuine, it may
consider it unnecessary to call for expert evidence. On the other
hand, if no competent witness is available, or none of those produced is convincing, the Court may still, and in fact it should,
resort to handwriting experts. The duty of the court, in fine, is
to exhaust all available lines of inquiry, for the state is as much
interested as the proponent that the true intention of the testator be carried into effect.
“Commenting on analogous provisions of Article 691 of
the Spanish Civil Code of 1889, the noted commentator, Mucius
Scaevola (Vol. 12, 2nd Ed., p. 421), sagely remarks:
“La manera como esta concebida la redaccion
del ultimo apartado de dicho precepto induce la conclusion de que siempre o por lo menos, en la mayor
parte de los casos, el Juez debe acudir al criterio pericial para que le ilustre acerca de la autenticidad del
testamento olografo, aunque ya esten insertas en los
auntos del expediente las declarations testificales.
La prudencia con que el Juez debe de proceder en
resolutions de transcendencia asi lo exige, y la indole

101

ART. 814

SUCCESSION

delicada y peligrosa del testamento olografo lo hace
necesario para mayor garantia de todos os intereses
comprometidos en aquel.
En efecto, el cotejo pericial de letras peude ser
una confirmation facultativa del dicho profano de los
testigos y un modo de desvonecer las ultimas dudas
que pudieran’ocurrir al Juez acerca de la autenticidad que trata de averiguar y declarar. Para eso se ha
escrito la frase del citado ultimo apartado, (siempre
que al Juez lo estime conveniente), haya habido o no
testigos y dudaran o no estos respecto de los extremos
por que son preguntados.
El arbitrio judicial en este caso debe de formarse con independencia de los sucesos y de su significacion, para responder debidamente de las resoluciones que haya de dictar.”
“And because the law leaves it to the trial court to decide
if experts are still needed, no unfavourable inference can be
drawn from a party’s failure to offer expert evidence, until and
unless the court expresses dissatisfaction with the testimony of
the lay witnesses.
“Our conclusion is that the rule of the first paragraph of
Article 811 of the Civil Code is merely directory and is not mandatory.
“Considering, however, that this is the first occasion in
which this Court has been called upon to construe the import of
said article, the interest of justice would be better served, in our
opinion, by giving the parties ample opportunity to adduce additional evidence, including expert witnesses, should the Court
deem them necessary.
“In view of the foregoing, the decision appealed from is
set aside, and the records ordered remanded to the Court of origin, with instructions to hold a new trial in conformity with this
opinion. But evidence already on record shall not be retaken.
No costs.”
In the case of Jose Rivera vs. Intermediate Appellate Court
et al., G.R. Nos. 75005-06, February 15, 1990, the Court ruled
that the holographic wills of Venancio Rivera are valid because
the Court found them to have been written, dated and signed
by the testator himself in accordance with Art. 810 of the Civil
Code. It also held that there was no necessity of presenting the

102

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ARTS. 815-819

three witnesses required under Art. 811 because the authenticity of the wills had not been questioned. The Court determined
that Jose Rivera was not the only surviving legitimate son of the
deceased. Hence, being a mere stranger, he had no personality
to contest the wills and his opposition thereto did not have the
legal effect of requiring the three witnesses. The testimony of
Zenaida and Venancio Rivera Jr., who authenticated the wills
as having been written and signed by their father, was sufficient.

Art. 815. When a Filipino is in a foreign country, he is authorized to make a will in any of the forms established by the law of
the country in which he may be. Such will may be probated in the
Philippines.84
Art. 816. The will of an alien who is abroad produces effect in
the Philippines if made with the formalities prescribed by the law
of the place in which he resides, or according to the formalities
observed in his country, or in conformity with those which this
Code prescribes.85
Art. 817. A will made in the Philippines by a citizen or subject
of another country, which is executed in accordance with the
law of the country of which he is a citizen or subject, and which
might be proved and allowed by the law of his own country, shall
have the same effect as if executed according to the laws of the
Philippines.86
Art. 818. Two or more persons cannot make a will jointly, or
in the same instrument, either for their reciprocal benefit or for the
benefit of a third person.87
Art. 819. Wills, prohibited by the preceding article, executed
by Filipinos in a foreign country shall not be valid in the Philippines,
even though authorized by the laws of the country where they may
have been executed.88

New provision.
New provision.
86
Sec. 636, Act No. 190.
87
Art. 669, Spanish Civil Code.
88
Art. 733, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
84
85

103

ART. 819

SUCCESSION

Law Which Governs Formal Validity of Wills. — As a
general rule, the formal validity of a will shall be governed by the
law of the country in which it is executed. This rule is expressed
in the first paragraph of Art. 17 of the Code, which provides that
“the forms and solemnities of contracts, wills and other public
instruments shall be governed by the laws of the country in which
they are executed. This rule, however, is reiterated or supplemented
by the provisions of Arts. 815 to 819.
Idem; Where testator is a Filipino. — If the testator is a
Filipino citizen and he executes a will in the Philippines, the law
which governs the formal validity of the will shall be the law of the
Philippines.89 If he executes a will outside of the Philippines, the
law which governs shall be the law of the country in which it is
executed.90 Both of these rules are in accordance with the general
rule prescribed in the first paragraph of Art. 17.
May a will executed in a foreign country in accordance with the
formalities prescribed by the law of the Philippines, by a Filipino
citizen, who is either a resident or a transient in that country, be
probated in the Philippines? It is rather unfortunate that such a
situation is not covered by the provision of Art. 815 nor by any other
provision of the Civil Code. Hence, the question seems to require a
negative answer. It is submitted, however, that a Filipino, who is
either a resident or a transient in a foreign country, may execute a
will in that country in accordance with any of the forms established
by the law of the Philippines, because it would be absurd to allow a
will which is executed in accordance with any of the forms established
by the law of the country in which he may be and, at the same time,
disallow one which is executed in accordance with any of the forms
established by the law of his own country — a law with which he is
presumed to be familiar. Besides, under Art. 816, the will of an alien
which is executed abroad in conformity with the formalities which
the Civil Code prescribes may be probated in the Philippines. Not
to grant the same privilege to a Filipino citizen would be not only
illogical, but unjust.

89
90

Art. 17, par. 1, Civil Code.
Art. 815, Civil Code.

104

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 819

Idem; Where testator is an alien. — If the testator is an
alien and he executes a will in the Philippines, the laws which
govern the formal validity of the will shall be either; (1) the law
of the Philippines in accordance with the general rule established
in Art. 17, or (2) the law of the country of which he is a citizen or
subject in accordance with the special rule established in Art. 817.
In the latter case, it is a prerequisite that the will which is presented
for probate could have been proved and allowed by the law of his
own country.91 If he executes a will outside of the Philippines, the
laws which govern shall be either: (1) the law of the place where the
will is executed in accordance with the general rule established in
Art. 17, or (2) the law of the place in which he resides in accordance
with the special rule established in Art. 816, or (3) the law of his
country in accordance with the special rule established in Art. 816,
or (4) the law of the Philippines again in accordance with the special
rule established in Art. 816.
Problem — X, a Spanish citizen but a resident in San
Francisco, California, U.S.A., executed a will in Tokyo, Japan.
May such will be probated in the Philippines and his estate in
this country distributed in conformity with the provisions of the
will? Explain your answer. (1973 Bar Problem)
Answer — Yes, the will of X may be probated in the Philippines and his estate in this country may be distributed in conformity with the provisions of the will, provided that said will
was executed in accordance with the formalities prescribed by
any of the following laws:
(1) The law of the place where X resides (San Francisco,
California); or
(2)

The law of his own country (Spain); or

(3)

The Civil Code of the Philippines; or

(4) The law of the place where the will was made (Tokyo, Japan). (Arts. 17, par. 1, 816, Civil Code).
The first three are stated in Art. 816, while the last is stated in the first paragraph of Art. 17 of the Civil Code.

91
Art. 817, Civil Code. See In re Estate of Johnson, 39 Phil. 156; Templeton vs.
Babcock, 52 Phil. 130.

105

ART. 819

SUCCESSION

Idem; Joint wills. — According to Art. 818 of the Code,
“two or more persons cannot make a will jointly, or in the same
instrument, either for their reciprocal benefit or for the benefit of a
third person.”
A “joint” will is defined as a single testamentary instrument
which contains the wills of two or more persons, jointly executed by
them, either for their reciprocal benefit or for the benefit of a third
person.92 It must not be confused with “mutual” or with “reciprocal”
wills. “Mutual” wills are wills executed pursuant to an agreement
between two or more persons to dispose of their property in a
particular manner, each in consideration of the other.93 “Reciprocal”
wills are wills in which the testators name each other as beneficiaries
under similar testamentary plans.94 It is clear from these definitions
that a joint will may be either mutual or reciprocal, although it is
not necessarily so, just as mutual or reciprocal wills may be joint if
they are contained in a single testamentary instrument.
In practice, husband and wife ordinarily make mutual or reciprocal wills contained in separate instruments. Such a practice is not
prohibited by the provisions of Art. 818. What is prohibited is the
execution of a joint will or a will contained in the same instrument,
either for their reciprocal benefit or for the benefit of a third person.
The reason for the prohibition, especially as regards husband and
wife, “is that when a will is made jointly or in the same instrument,
the spouse who is more aggressive, stronger in will or character and
dominant is liable to dictate the terms of the will for his or her own
benefit or for that of third persons whom he or she desires to favor.
And, where the will not only joint but reciprocal either one of the
spouses may happen to be unscrupulous, wicked, faithless, or desperate, knowing as he or she does the terms of the will whereby the
whole property of the spouses both conjugal and paraphernal goes to
the survivor, may be tempted to kill or dispose of the other.”95
In its report, the Code Commission gives the following background and purpose of the provision:

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 681, p. 458.
Ibid., Sec. 681, p. 459.
94
Ibid., Sec. 681, p. 459.
95
In re Will of Bilbao, 47 Off. Gaz. 331; Dacanay vs. Florendo, 48 Off. Gaz. 81.
92
93

106

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Forms of Wills

ART. 819

“The Spanish Civil Code expressly prohibits the execution
of joint and mutual wills in its article 669. This article has an
interesting background. The Fuero Real (Ley 9, Tit. 6, Libro 3)
allowed this kind of will between husband and wife if they had
no children. The Partidas (Ley 335, Tit. 11, Partida 5) prohibited the same because it might lead to the commission of parricide. In spite of this express prohibition, such kind of will was
executed, hence, the enactment of article 669 of the Civil Code
(Spanish Civil Code) which embodies not only the provisions of
the Partidas but also makes the prohibition more extensive.
“In the Philippines, a similar kind of will has sometimes
been used as a basis for the distribution of the estate, as in the
case of Macrohon vs. Saavedra, 51 Phil. 267 (1927). To eliminate
all doubts, once and for all, and to establish a definite policy,
Article 818 of this Code is inserted expressly prohibiting the execution of joint and mutual wills.”

Under Art. 819 of the Code joint wills executed by Filipinos in
a foreign country shall not be valid in the Philippines, even though
authorized by the laws of the country where they may have been
executed. It is evident that this rule is an exception to the rule stated
in Art. 815. It is, however, in conformity with the provision of the
third paragraph of Art. 17 of the Civil Code which states:
“Prohibitive laws concerning persons, their acts or property, and those which have for their objects public order, public
policy and good customs shall not be rendered ineffective by laws
or judgments promulgated, or by determinations or conventions
agreed upon in a foreign country.”

It must be noted that the provision of Art. 819 is applicable
only to joint wills executed by Filipinos in a foreign country; it does
not apply to joint wills executed by aliens.
Problem — A and B, a married couple of French citizenship but residents of the Philippines, went to Argentina and
there executed a joint will, mutually instituting each other as
sole heir, which will is valid according to the law of the state.
Subsequently, they returned to the Philippines where A died.
May the joint and mutual will executed in Argentina be probated as valid in the Philippines? Reasons. (1971 Bar Problem)
Answer — The joint and mutual will executed in Argentina by A and B may be probated as valid in the Philippines.

107

ART. 819

SUCCESSION

True, Art. 818 of the Civil Code of the Philippines prohibits two
or more persons from making a will jointly, or in the same instrument, either for their reciprocal benefit or for the benefit
of a third person, and Art. 819 of the same Code extends this
prohibition to joint wills executed by Filipinos in a foreign country, even though authorized by the laws of the country where
they may have been executed. But then, from the phraseology of
Art. 819 itself, there is a clear implication that the prohibition
does not apply to foreigners, and certainly, A and B are foreigners. Therefore, the provision of the third paragraph of Art. 17 of
the Civil Code which declares that prohibitive laws concerning
persons, their acts or property, and those which have for their
object public order, public policy and good customs shall not be
rendered ineffective by laws or judgments promulgated or by
determinations or conventions agreed upon in a foreign country,
cannot be applied in the instant case. What is applicable is the
first paragraph of the same article, which declares that forms
and solemnities of contracts, wills, and other public instruments
shall be governed by the laws of the country in which they are
executed.

Law Which Governs Intrinsic Validity of Wills. — The
intrinsic validity of wills is governed by the national law of the person whose succession is under consideration. This is the precept or
principle which is enshrined in the second paragraph of Art. 16 of
the Civil Code. According to this provision, “intestate and testamentary succession, both with respect to the order of succession and to
the amount of successional rights and to the intrinsic validity of testamentary provisions shall be regulated by the national law of the
person whose succession is under consideration, whatever may be
the nature of the property and regardless of the country wherein
said property may be found.”96

96

For illustrative case, see Miciano vs. Brimo, 50 Phil. 867.

108

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Witnesses to Wills

ARTS. 820-824

Subsection 4. — Witnesses To Wills
Art. 820. Any person of sound mind and of the age of eighteen
years or more, and not blind, deaf or dumb, and able to read and
write, may be a witness to the execution of a will mentioned in
Article 805 of this Code.1
Art. 821. The following are disqualified from being witnesses
to a will:
(1)

Any person not domiciled in the Philippines;

(2) Those who have been convicted of falsification of a
document, perjury or false testimony.2
Art. 822. If the witnesses attesting the execution of a will are
competent at the time of attesting, their becoming subsequently
incompetent shall not prevent the allowance of the will.3
Art. 823. If a person attests the execution of a will, to whom
or to whose spouse, or parent, or child, a devise or legacy is given
by such will, such devise or legacy shall, so far only as concerns
such person, or spouse, or parent, or child of such person, or any
one claiming under such person, or spouse, or parent or child, be
void, unless there are three other competent witnesses to such
will. However, such person so attesting shall be admitted as a witness as if such devise or legacy had not been made or given.4
Art. 824. A mere charge on the estate of the testator for the
payment of debts due at the time of the testator’s death does not
prevent his creditors from being competent witnesses to his will.5
Qualifications of Witnesses. — According to Art. 820, a
witness to the execution of any ordinary will must have the following
qualifications: (1) He must be of sound mind; (2) he must be eighteen
years of age or more; (3) he must not be blind, deaf or dumb; and (4)
he must be able to read and write.

Taken from Sec. 620, Act No. 190.
New provision.
3
Taken from Sec. 621, Act No. 190.
4
Taken from Sec. 622, Act No. 190.
5
Taken from Sec. 622, Act No. 190.
1
2

109

ART. 824

SUCCESSION

The first two qualifications are also necessary for the making
of a will. In the case of instrumental witnesses, the law adds two
additional qualifications. Hence, even if a person has the capacity to
make a will, it does not necessarily follow that he can qualify as an
instrumental witness. A blind, deaf or dumb person or even a deafmute can make a will, but he cannot be a witness to the making of
a will. A person who cannot read and write can make a will, but he
cannot be a witness to the making of a will.
The reason for the inclusion of the last two requisites is evident.
During the probate of the will, the testimony of the attesting witness
will be required. Certainly, it will be quite difficult for an illiterate
witness to give an intelligent testimony. The same thing can be said
of a deaf-mute or a person who is either blind, deaf or dumb.
Is it necessary that the witnesses must know the contents of
the will? The law does not require it. All that the law requires is
that they must attest and subscribe the will in the presence of the
testator and of each other. To attest and subscribe do not mean that
they must read the will or comprehend the contents thereof. Hence,
even if the will is written in a dialect or language unknown to them,
the requirements of the law are still complied with.
Ibid; Competency and credibility of witnesses explained.
— Is there a difference between the competency of a person to be an
instrumental witness to a will and his credibility? This question is
answered in the following case:
Gonzales vs. Court of Appeals
90 SCRA 183
Petitioner contends that competency and credibility of a
witness are not synonymous terms and that one may be a competent witness and yet not a credible one. Therefore, since there
is no evidence on record to show that the three witnesses are
credible, such as the fact that they are of good standing in the
community and are reputed to be trustworthy and reliable, such
fact is fatal. Private respondents, on the other hand, maintains
that the qualifications of the three or more “credible witnesses”
under Art. 805 of the Civil Code are exactly the same as the
qualifications of the witnesses mentioned in Arts. 820 and 821.
Speaking through Justice Guerrero, the Supreme Court held:
“In Molo-Pekson and Perez-Nable vs. Tanchuco, et al., 100
Phil. 344, the Supreme Court held that “Section 620 of the same

110

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Witnesses to Wills

ART. 824

Code of Civil Procedure provides that any person of sound mind,
and of the age of eighteen years or more, and not blind, deaf, or
dumb and able to read and write, may be a witness to the execution of a will. This same provision is reproduced in our New
Civil Code of 1950, under Art. 820. The relation of employer and
employee, or being a relative to the beneficiary in a will, does not
disqualify one to be a witness to a will. The main qualification
of a witness in the attestation of wills, if other qualifications as
to age, mental capacity and literacy are present, is that said
witness must be credible, that is to say, his testimony may be
entitled to credence. There is a long line of authorities on this
point, a few of which we may cite:
“A ‘credible witness’ is one who is not disqualified to
testify by mental incapacity, crime, or other cause. Historical Soc. of Dauphin Country vs. Kelker, 74 A. 619, 226
Pa. 16 134 Am. St. Rep. 1010.” (Words and Phrases, Vol.
10, p. 340).
“As construed by the common law, a ‘credible witness’ to a will means a ‘competent witness.’ Appeal of
Clark, 95 A. 517, 114 Me. 105, Ann. Cas. 1917A, 837.”
(Ibid, p. 34).
“Expression credible witness’ in relation to attestation of wills means ‘competent witness’; that is, one competent under the law to testify to fact of execution of will.
Vernon’s Ann. Civ. St. Art. 8283. Moos vs. First State
Bankof Uvalde, Tx. Civ. App. 60 S.W. 2nd 888, 889.” (Ibid.
p. 342).
“The term ‘credible’, used in the statute of wills requiring that a will shall be attested by two credible witnesses means competent witnesses who, at the time of attesting the will, are legally competent to testify, in court of
justice, to the facts attested by subscribing will, the competency being determined as of the date of execution of the
will and not of the time it is offered for probate. Smith vs.
Goodell, 101 N.E. 255, 256, 258, III. 145.” (Ibid.).
“‘Credible witnesses’, as used in the statute relating to will, means competent witnesses — that is, such
persons as are not legally disqualified from testifying in
courts of justice, by reason of mental incapacity, interest,
or the commission of crimes, or other cause excluding them
from testifying generally, or rendering them incompetent
in respect of the particular subject matter or in the particular suit. Hill vs. Chicago Title & Trust Co., 152 N.E.
545, 546, 322 III. 42.” (Ibid, p. 343).

111

ART. 824

SUCCESSION

“In the strict sense, the competency of a person to an instrumental witness to a will is determined by the statute, that is
Art. 820 and 821, Civil Code, whereas his credibility depends on
the appreciation of his testimony and arises from the belief and
conclusion of the Court that said witness is telling the truth.
Thus, in the case of Vda. de Arroyo vs. El Beaterio del Santissimo Rosario de Molo, No. L-22005, May 3, 1968, and Supreme
Court held and ruled that: “Competency as a witness is one
thing, and it is another to be a credible witness, so credible that
the Court must accept what he says. Trial courts may allow a
person to testify as a witness upon a given matter because he is
competent, but may thereafter decide whether to believe or not
to believe his testimony.”
“In fine, We state the rule that the instrumental witnesses
in order to be competent must be shown to have the qualifications under Article 820 of the Civil Code and none of the disqualifications under Article 821 and for their testimony to be
credible, that is worthy of belief and entitled to credence, it is
not mandatory that evidence be first established on record that
the witnesses have a good standing in the community or that
they are honest and upright or reputed to be trustworthy and
reliable, for a person is presumed to be such unless the contrary
is established otherwise. In other words, the instrumental witnesses, must be competent and their testimonies must be credible before the court allows the probate of the will they have
attested. We, therefore, reject petitioner’s position that it was
fatal for respondent not to have introduced prior and independent proof of the fact that the witnesses were “credible witnesses,” that is, that they have a good standing in the community
and reputed to be trustworthy and reliable.”

Disqualifications of Witnesses. — Under Arts. 820 and 821,
the following are disqualified from being witnesses to a will: (1) Any
person not domiciled in the Philippines; (2) those who have been
convicted of falsification of a document, perjury or false testimony;
(3) any person who is not of sound mind; (4) any person who is less
than eighteen years of age; (5) any person who is blind, deaf, or
dumb; and (6) any person who cannot read and write.
The purpose of the law is disqualifying the persons mentioned
in Art. 821 from being instrumental witnesses is evident. A person
not domiciled in the Philippines will practically be useless during
the probate proceedings, while a person convicted of falsification of a
document, perjury or false testimony is unworthy of credence.
112

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Witnesses to Wills

ART. 824

Problem — Would a person who is qualified to make a will
necessarily be qualified to be a witness to the will of another?
Explain. (1968 Bar Question)
Answer — A person who is qualified to make a will is not
necessarily qualified to be a witness to the will of another.
In order that a person can make a will, two requisites are
necessary. They are: first, that the testator is at least 18 years
old; and second, that he is of a sound mind. (Arts. 797, 798, Civil
Code). In order that a person can act as a witness to the will of
another, four requisites are necessary. They are: first, that he is
at least 18 years of age; second, that he is of a sound mind; third,
that he is not blind, deaf, or dumb; and fourth, that he is able to
read and write (Art. 820, Civil Code). In addition, the law also
declares the following are disqualified from being witnesses to a
will: first, any person not domiciled in the Philippines; and second, those who have been convicted of falsification of a document,
perjury or false testimony (Art. 821, Civil Code). It is clear, therefore, that even if a person can make a will because he can comply
with the age and mental requirements imposed by law, he cannot
be a witness to the will of another in four specific cases. They are:
(1) where he is not domiciled in the Philippines; (2) where he had
been convicted of falsification of a document, perjury or false testimony; (3) where he is blind, deaf, or dumb, and (4) where he is
not able to read and/or write.

Effect of Subsequent Incompetency. — The competency of
a witness to a will is to be determined as of the time of the execution
of the instrument, and not as of the time when the will is presented
for probate. To hold that the tests as to competency should be
applied at the time when the will is presented for probate, and not
at the date of its execution would defeat one of the most important
and salutary purposes contemplated by the statute. If a witness
is competent when he signs and attests the will, his subsequent
incompetency, from whatever cause, will not prevent the probate of
the will. Thus, where a witness was competent at the time the will
was executed, the will is not invalidated by his subsequent death, by
his subsequent blindness, by his intermarriage with a beneficiary,
by acquiring a legacy under a later codicil, or by subsequently
acquiring the interest of a beneficiary. Conversely, if the witness is
incompetent when he signed the will, his subsequent competency, in
the absence of an enabling statute, will be of no avail.6
6

Thompson on Wills, Sec. 119, p. 189; Art. 822, Civil Code.

113

ARTS. 825-826

SUCCESSION

Competency of Interested Witness. — In American law,
it is a rule of general application that interest will disqualify one
as a subscribing witness to a will and that a will attested by an
interested witness is invalid unless it is otherwise attested by
a sufficient number of competent witnesses.7 Thus, if a person is
interested as legatee or devisee under the will, or is to derive a
pecuniary benefit or advantage from any part of it, he is disqualified
to act as an attesting witness. Under our law, however, the rule is
different. According to Art. 823, he is competent. This is evident
from the second sentence which states that such person so attesting
shall be admitted as a witness. However, the validity of the devise
or legacy is affected. In other words, the devise or legacy given to
such person, or to his spouse, parent or child, shall be void, unless
there are three other competent witnesses. This rule is reiterated in
Art. 1027, No. 4, of the Civil Code, which states that any attesting
witness to the execution of the will, as well as the spouse, parents, or
children, or anyone claiming under such witness, spouse, parents, or
children, are incapable of succeeding from the testator.
Competency of Creditor. — Under our law, a creditor is also
competent, by express provision of Art. 824 of the Code, although
the testator in his will may have imposed a charge upon his estate
for the payment of his debts.

Subsection 5. — Codicils and Incorporation
by Reference
Art. 825. A codicil is a supplement or addition to a will made
after the execution of a will and annexed to be taken as a part
thereof, by which any disposition made in the original will is
explained, added to, or altered.1
Art. 826. In order that a codicil may be effective, it shall be
executed as in the case of a will.2

7

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 314, pp. 239-240; Art. 823, Civil Code.

1

New provision.
New provision.

2

114

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Codicils and Incorporation by Reference

ART. 827

Codicils. — Art. 825 of the Code enunciates the definition of
a codicil, while Art. 826 gives the requisites in order that the codicil
may be effective.
The word “codicil” imports a reference to some prior paper as
a will. There may, however, be a valid codicil to a revoked will. At
first codicils were writings actually attached to the will, but this is
no longer necessary; when they are separate documents, the codicil
referring to and ratifying the will may be said to incorporate the will
by reference, or to republish the will.
In order to operate as a republication of the will, it is sufficient
if the codicil refers to the will in such a way as to leave no doubt as to
the identity of that instrument. A reference to the will in the codicil
constitutes a sufficient identification of the will.3
Art. 827. If a will, executed as required by this Code, incorporates into itself by reference any document or paper, such document or paper shall not be considered a part of the will unless the
following requisites are present:
(1) The document or paper referred to in the will must be in
existence at the time of the execution of the will;
(2) The will must clearly describe and identify the same,
stating among other things the number of pages thereof;
(3) It must be identified by clear and satisfactory proof as
the document or paper referred to therein; and
(4) It must be signed by the testator and the witnesses
on each and every page, except in case of voluminous books of
account or inventories.4
Incorporation by Reference. — Stated generally, the
doctrine is that a will, duly executed and witnessed according to
statutory requirements, may incorporate into itself by an appropriate
reference a written paper or document which is in existence at
the time of the execution of the will, irrespective of whether such
document is one executed by the testator or a third person, whether it

3
4

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 605, pp. 415-417.
New provision.

115

SUCCESSION

ART. 828

is in and of itself a valid instrument, provided the document referred
to is identified by clear and satisfactory proof. So incorporated, the
extrinsic paper takes effect as part of the will and is admitted to
probate as such.5

Subsection 6. — Revocation of Wills
Art. 828. A will may be revoked by the testator at any time
before his death. Any waiver or restriction of this right is void.1
Revocation Defined. — According to Gardner, revocation as
applied to wills may be defined as an act of the mind, terminating the
potential capacity of the will to operate at the death of the testator,
manifested by some outward or visible act or sign, symbolic thereof.2
According to some American decisions, it may simply be defined as
an act to annul a will in whole or in part.3
Nature and Effect of Revocation. — As it is popularly stated
by American authorities one of the most essential characteristics of
a will is that it is revocable and ambulatory during the testator’s
lifetime. Thus, according to Thompson:
“From the definition of a will heretofore given, it will be
observed that the instrument does not pass a present interest or
right in property, and that such right or interest does not take
effect until after the death of the testator. During his lifetime it
is entirely inoperative and is wholly ineffective for any purpose
until his death.
“The axiom of Holy Writ that ‘A testament is of force after
men are dead; otherwise, it is of no strength at all while the
testator liveth,’ has never been changed by legislation or court
decision. The characteristic of revocability is so strongly insisted
upon that courts have held that a provision in a will against revocation does not deprive the testator of the power to revoke the
will by a later instrument.

5

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 233, p. 193.

Art. 737, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Gardner on Wills, p. 224.
3
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 445, p. 319.
1
2

116

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 829

“A will being a unilateral disposition of property, acquiring binding force only at the death of the testator, it follows that
no present rights are conferred at the time of its execution, and
no title vests in the beneficiary during the life of the testator.
Comparison may be made between a will and an undelivered
deed or power of attorney containing an expression of a purpose
not yet effective, but ceases to be ambulatory on the death of the
maker, acquires a fixed status, and operates to pass title.”4

Hence, under our Code, it is declared that “a will may be revoked by
the testator at any time before his death. Any waiver or restriction of
this right is void.” Upon being revoked, the will or the testamentary
disposition intended to be revoked, ceases to exist, and is as
inoperative as if it has never been written.5
Art. 829. A revocation done outside the Philippines, by a
person who does not have his domicile in this country, is valid
when it is done according to the law of the place where the will was
made, or according to the law of the place in which the testator
had his domicile at the time; and if the revocation takes place in
this country, when it is in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.6
Law Which Governs Revocation. — It is evident from the
provisions of Art. 829 that the only time when the testator may
revoke his will either in accordance with the law of the place where
the will was made or in accordance with the law of the place in
which he had his domicile at the time is when he is not domiciled
in the Philippines. In all other cases, the law which governs the
revocation is the law of the Philippines. Consequently, the rules
may be restated as follows:
(1) If the act of revocation takes place in the Philippines, it
is essential that it must be done in accordance with the laws of the
Philippines. This is true whether the testator is domiciled in this
country or in some other country.

Thompson on Wills, Sec. 13, pp. 26-28.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 445, p. 319.
6
New provision.
4
5

117

ARTS. 830-832

SUCCESSION

(2) If the act of revocation takes place outside of the Philippines
by a testator who is domiciled in the Philippines, it is essential that
it must be done in accordance with the laws of the Philippines.
(3) If the act of revocation takes place outside of the Philippines
by a testator who is not domiciled in the Philippines, it is essential
that it must be done either in accordance with the laws of the place
where the will was made or in accordance with the laws of the place
where the testator had his domicile at the time of revocation.
Art. 830. No will shall be revoked except in the following
cases:
(1)

By implication of law; or

(2) By some will, codicil, or other writing executed as
provided in case of wills; or
(3) By burning, tearing, cancelling, or obliterating the will
with the intention of revoking it, by the testator himself, or by
some other person in his presence, and by his express direction.
If burned, torn, cancelled, or obliterated by some other person,
without the express direction of the testator, the will may still be
established, and the estate distributed in accordance therewith,
if its contents, and due execution and the fact of its unauthorized
destruction, cancellation, or obliteration are established according
to the Rules of Court.7
Art. 831. Subsequent wills which do not revoke the previous
one in an express manner, annul only such dispositions in the
prior wills as are inconsistent with or contrary to those contained
in the later wills.8
Art. 832. A revocation made in a subsequent will shall take
effect, even if the new will should become inoperative by reason
of the incapacity of the heirs, devisees or legatees designated
therein, or by their renunciation.9
Modes of Revocation. — Under Art. 830 of the Code,
there are three general modes of revoking wills. They are: (1) by
Taken from Sec. 623, Act No. 190, in modified form.
New provision.
9
Art. 740, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
7
8

118

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

implication of law; (2) by some will, codicil, or other writing executed
as provided in case of wills; and (3) by burning, tearing, cancelling or
obliterating the will with the intention of revoking it, by the testator
himself, or by some other person in his presence, and by his express
direction.10
Revocation by Implication of Law. — According to No. 1 of
Art. 830 of the Code, a will may be revoked by implication of law.
The rule of revocation by implication of law recognizes that a
will may be revoked by the occurrence of certain circumstances not
specifically mentioned in the statutes which prescribe the methods
of revocation. The doctrine is that the revocation of a will is to be
implied from certain changes in the family or domestic relations
of the testator, or in his property, or involving the beneficiaries of
his will, from which the law infers or presumes that he intended a
change, either total or partial, in the disposition of his property. The
rule is based on the theory that by reason of such changes new moral
duties and obligations have accrued to the testator subsequent to
the date of the will. Although stated in terms of the presumed intent
of the testator to change the disposition of his property to conform to
the alteration of his circumstances, revocation by operation of law is
usually regarded as a purely arbitrary rule. A revocation may occur
by intendment of law contrary to the actual intent of the testator.11
Under the Civil Code, there are five instances when a will,
or more accurately, a testamentary disposition may be revoked by
implication of law. They are:
(1) When there is a decree of legal separation. In such case,
provisions in favor of the offending spouse made in the will of the
innocent spouse shall be revoked by operation of law.12
(2) Where there is a preterition of omission of one, some, or all
of the compulsory heirs in the direct line, whether living at the time
of the execution of the will or born after the death of the testator. In
such case, the preterition shall annul and institution of heir.13

Art. 830, Civil Code.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 521, pp. 362-363.
12
Art. 106, No. 4, Civil Code.
13
Art. 854, Civil Code.
10
11

119

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

(3) When in the testator’s will there is a legacy of a credit
against a third person or of the remission of a debt of the legatee,
and subsequently, after the execution of the will, the testator brings
an action against the debtor for the payment of his debt. In such
case, the legacy is revoked.14
(4) When the testator transforms the thing bequeathed in
such a manner that it does not retain either the form or denomination
it had, or when he alienates by any title or for any cause the thing
bequeathed or any part thereof, or when the thing bequeathed is
totally lost during the testator’s lifetime or after his death without
the heir’s fault. In such cases, the legacy is revoked.15
(5) When the heir, devisee or legatee commits any of the acts
of unworthiness which by express provision of law will incapacitate
a person to succeed. In such case, any testamentary disposition in
favor of such heir, devisee or legatee is revoked.16
Revocation of Will, Codicil, or Writing. — According to
No. 2 of Art. 830, a will may be revoked by some will, codicil, or
other writing executed as provided in case of wills. This method of
revocation may be either express or implied. It is express when in a
subsequent will, or codicil, or other writing executed as provided in
case of wills, there is a revocatory clause expressly revoking the will
or a part thereof. It is implied when the provisions of the subsequent
will or codicil are partially or absolutely inconsistent with those of
the previous will. It is evident that while express revocation may
be effected by a subsequent will, or a codicil, or a nontestamentary
writing executed as provided in case of wills, implied revocation may
be effected only by either a subsequent will or a codicil. It is also
evident that whether the revocation is express or implied it may
be either total or partial depending upon the circumstances of each
case.
Idem; Express revocation. — As previously stated, express
revocation may be effected by a subsequent will, or a codicil, or a
nontestamentary writing executed as provided in case of wills. It
is of course essential that in the revocatory clause contained in the
subsequent will, codicil or other writing the intention of the testator
Arts. 935, 936, Civil Code.
Art. 957, Civil Code.
16
Art. 1032, Civil Code.
14
15

120

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

to revoke the previous will must be clearly and unmistakably
manifested.17 As regards revocation by a codicil, it must be observed
that ordinarily, a codicil to a will is a republication thereof. If the
revocation is partial, it will have the effect of republishing the will as
of the date of the codicil with respect to all parts not revoked. If the
revocation is total, there is no republication.18 As regards revocation
by a nontestamentary writing executed as provided in case of wills,
it is not essential that the writing should contain any affirmative
disposition of property. Neither is it essential that a writing which
is not in fact a will be erroneously characterized a will in order to
be effective as a revoking instrument. Thus, a will may be revoked
by express words of revocation contained in a deed of trust or in
a letter, signed by the testator and executed in accordance with
the formalities prescribed by law for the making of wills the exact
wording of a revocatory writing is not so important, if the intent to
revoke the will is clear from the language used, and the formalities
of execution are observed.19
Idem; Id. — Effect if will is inoperative. — According to
Art. 832, if the subsequent will which contains the revocatory clause
should become inoperative either by reason of the incapacity of the
heirs, devisees or legatees designated therein or by reason of their
renunciation or repudiation, the revocation shall still take effect.
This rule is logical, because, while the capacity or the desire of the
heirs, devisees or legatees to succeed is absolutely beyond the control
of the testator, the act of revocation is within his absolute control.
Consequently, the revocatory clause must be entirely separated
from the other testamentary dispositions which are affected by the
incapacity or the renunciation of the heirs, devisees or legatees.
Idem; Id. — Effect if will is disallowed. — If a subsequent
will, containing a clause revoking a previous will, is disallowed by
the probate court on the ground that it has not been executed in
accordance with the formalities prescribed by law, the revocatory
clause will not produce any effect whatsoever.20 This is logical,
because, after all, the effect of the disallowance is to nullify the will
altogether, including the revocatory clause contained in such will.

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 466, p. 326.
Ibid., Sec. 467, p. 326.
19
Ibid., Sec. 469, p. 328.
20
Samson vs. Naval, 41 Phil. 838; Vda. de Molo vs. Molo, 90 Phil. 37.
17
18

121

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

Idem; Implied revocation. — As previously stated, implied
revocation may be effected only by a subsequent will or a codicil. It
is evident that it cannot be effected by a nontestamentary writing
executed as provided in case of wills since such writing does not
contain any affirmative disposition of property which can be said to
be inconsistent with the dispositions contained in the will.
According to Art. 831, subsequent wills which do not revoke the
previous ones in an express manner, annul only such dispositions
in the prior wills as are inconsistent with or contrary to those
contained in the later wills. The general rule, however, is that two
or more instruments, each purporting to be a will, may be admitted
to probate if they are not inconsistent with each other.21 Thus, in one
case, the Supreme Court declared that “in the absence of any legal
provision to the contrary — and there is one in this jurisdiction — it
is the general, well-established rule that two separate and distinct
wills may be probated if one does not revoke the other and provided
that the statutory requirements relative to the execution of wills
have been complied with.”22
As regards implied revocation by a codicil, it must be noted
that although it is possible that there might be a revocation in whole
or in part, as a rule a codicil should not be construed as a complete
revocation of a will if any other conclusion can be reached consistent
with the terms of the two instruments, since, if the testator intended
to make an entire disposition of his property in substitution of that
made by a prior will he probably would have proceeded to make a
new will rather than a codicil. Consequently, in order that there
will be an implied revocation there must be absolute inconsistently
between the provisions of the will and the codicil.23
Revocation by Physical Destruction. — According to
No. 3 of Art. 830, a will may also be revoked by burning, tearing,
cancelling, or obliterating with the intention of revoking it. These
methods of revoking a will require the concurrence of the following
requisites:

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 474, pp. 331-332.
Merza vs. Forras, 93 Phil. 142; where the wills could not stand together — see
Bustamante vs. Arevalo, 73 Phil. 635.
23
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 484, pp. 337-339.
21
22

122

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

(1) The testator must have testamentary capacity at the time
of performing the act of destruction;
(2) The act of destruction must have been performed with the
intention of revoking the will;
(3) Such intention must have been accompanied by an actual
physical act of destruction manifested by burning, or tearing, or
cancelling, or obliterating of the will or a part thereof; and
(4) Such act of destruction must have been performed by the
testator himself, or by some other person in his presence, and by his
express direction.
Idem; Intention of revocation. — The intent to revoke is
essential to a revocation by act of the testator. In order that an
act shall have the effect of revoking a will, the intention to revoke
must appear clearly and unequivocally; a will is not revoked by any
act of destruction not deliberately done animo revocandi. An act of
destruction which is done accidentally, by mistake, or as a result of
fraud or undue influence, does not operate as a revocation. The same
rule applies to the partial destruction of a will by accident. Even
where one of the statutory methods for revoking a will is followed
by the testator, his act is ineffectual unless his intent thereby to
revoke or alter the will appears. The intent may be inferred from
the nature of the act or it may be shown by extrinsic evidence, but
it must in some competent way be made to appear. The mere act
of destroying a will or a part thereof is of no legal effect, unless it
is done animo revocandi. As a general rule, an intent to revoke a
will in its entirety is necessary to effect an entire as distinguished
from a partial revocation. A will, however, may be held to have been
revoked where it has been so mutilated that the portion remaining,
if probated, would cause a devolution of the property of the decedent
in a manner entirely different from his express intent. The intention
to revoke must concur with an act manifesting the intention. Aptly
stated, neither destruction without intention nor intention without
destruction will revoke a will.24
Idem; Actual physical destruction. — The revocation
of a will is a matter of a mental process demonstrated by some

24

Ibid., Sec. 494, pp. 343-344.

123

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

outward and visible sign. A revocation by an act to the document
comprehends the performance of one or more of the acts specified
in the statute as a means of revocation, with the intent to revoke. A
symbolical destruction, cancellation or obliteration will not suffice.
There must be the act as well as the intention. A literal destruction
of the instrument, however, is not essential to effect a revocation.
A will may be revoked in its entirety notwithstanding the act of
revocation does not accomplish the complete physical destruction of
the will. A will executed in duplicate, one copy being retained in the
possession of the testator, is revoked by the destruction of such copy
by the testator with intent to revoke the will. If any one of the acts
prescribed by statute is performed in the slightest manner, joined
with a declared intent to revoke, it may be an effectual revocation.
An act of little significance from the standpoint of physical change
in the instrument will constitute a revocation if it was performed
with the purpose and intent to revoke the will. But in order for an
act of destruction to effect an entire, as distinguished from a partial
revocation, it must be directed against the whole or an essential part
of it.25
The law requires that the act of physical destruction or
cancellation must be performed by the testator himself, or by some
other person in his presence, and by his express direction.26 It is
therefore clear that the act of revocation is a personal act of the
testator. He cannot delegate to an agent authority to do the act
for him. Another person, however, may be selected by him as an
instrument and directed to do the revocatory acts in his presence,
in which case any so done in his presence and by his direction is
his personal act and operates to the same extent as if done by his
own hands. Hence, a destruction not accomplished in the testator’s
presence is ineffective as a revocation of the will.27 Thus, in Diaz
vs. De Leon,28 where the act of physical destruction was done by a
servant of the testator, the Supreme Court, speaking through Justice
Romualdez, held:

Ibid., Sec. 495, p. 345.
Art. 830, No. 3 Civil Code.
27
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 496, pp. 345-346.
28
43 Phil. 433.
25
26

124

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

“According to the statute governing the subject in this jurisdiction, the destruction of a will with animo revocandi constitutes, in itself, a sufficient revocation.
“From the evidence submitted in this case, it appears that
the testator, shortly after the execution of the first will in question, asked that the same be returned to him. The instrument
was returned to the testator who ordered his servant to tear the
document. This was done in his presence and before a nurse
who testified to this effect. After some time, the testator, being
asked by Dr. Cornelio Mapa about the will, said that it had been
destroyed.
“The intent to revoke a will is manifest from the established fact that the testator was anxious to withdraw or change
the provisions he had made in his first will. This fact is disclosed
by the testator’s own statement to the witnesses Canto and the
Mother Superior of the Hospital where he was confined.
“The original will herein presented for probate having
been destroyed with animo revocandi, cannot now be probated,
as the will and last testament of Jesus de Leon.”

The law also provides that if the will is burned, torn, cancelled
or obliterated by some other person without the express direction of
the testator, it may still be established, and the estate distributed
in accordance therewith if its contents, and due execution, and the
fact of its unauthorized destruction, cancellation, or obliteration are
established in accordance with the Rules of Court.29 Thus, in Lipana
vs. Court of First Instance,30 the proponent filed a petition for probate of the will, the carbon copy of which was attached. Opposition
was entered on the ground that the original of the alleged will was
destroyed and therefore revoked. Judgment was entered dismissing
the petition on the ground that a carbon copy cannot be admitted
to probate. On appeal, it was held by the Supreme Court that if a
will is shown to have been torn by some other person without the
express direction of the testator, it may be admitted to probate, if its
contents, due execution and the fact of its unauthorized destruction
are established by satisfactory evidence. The petitioner, therefore,
was entitled to a hearing to prove the due execution of the original

29
30

Art. 830, No. 3, Civil Code.
70 Phil. 365.

125

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

will and its loss or destruction. Hence, the respondent court had no
statutory authority to dismiss the petition without such hearing.
Idem; Id. — Revocation by burning. — The burning of a
will by the testator or by someone else acting at the direction of the
testator and in his presence, with intent to revoke the will, is one of
the most efficient modes of destruction, and is therefore sufficient
as a revocatory act. To constitute revocation by burning, it would
seem that there must be at least a burning of a part of the paper on
which the will is written, although a very slight burn will suffice.31
Otherwise, there is no revocation. Thus, in a well-known English
case, where the testator, with intent to revoke his will, threw it in
a stove so that it would be burned, and a third person, who was one
of the beneficiaries, was able to save the will, without the testator’s
knowledge, before any part of it could be burned, it was held that since
there was no physical act of destruction, there was no revocation.32
It must be noted, however, that in this jurisdiction, there would be a
revocation, not by burning under No. 3 of Art. 830, but by implication
of law under No. 1 of the same article, and only with respect to the
testamentary disposition in favor of the beneficiary. The reason
is that such beneficiary fraudulently prevented the testator from
revoking his will. Hence, he has committed an act of unworthiness
which will incapacitate him to inherit from the testator.33 But the
will itself is not revoked.
Idem; Id. — Revocation by tearing. — Tearing a will with
the intent to revoke it is one of the recognized modes of revocation.
The degree of tearing necessary to the revocation of a will is not fixed
by statute. Consequently, a slight act of tearing is generally held
sufficient, although the greater the degree of tearing the stronger is
the presumption that the instrument was torn animo revocandi.34
The act of tearing, however, must be a complete act. Otherwise, if
the testator desists voluntarily or through the persuasion of others
before the act of destruction could be consummated, it is clear that
the act of revocation has not also been consummated. Consequently,
it will not produce any effect. This principle is very well illustrated in

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 501, p. 348.
Reed vs. Harris, Court of King’s Bench, 6 A & E., 209.
33
Art. 1032, No. 7, Civil Code.
34
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 500, pp. 347-348.
31
32

126

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

a classic English case — the case of Perkes vs. Perkes,35 The records
show that the testator, having had some quarrel with the principal
beneficiary under his will, in a fit of passion, took the will from his
desk, and then, with intent of revoking it, began to tear it. He was
able to tear it twice through, but before he could tear it for the third
time, he was persuaded by the pleas of the beneficiary and of some
friends who were around to desist. He returned the torn will to his
desk, declaring that it is still a good will. Has the will been revoked?
According to Justice Best:
“I am of opinion, that the verdict is right. Tearing is one
of the modes by which a will may be cancelled; but it cannot
be contended that every tearing is a cancellation for if it were,
a testator, who took his will into his hands with intent to tear
it, must, if he should tear it in the smallest degree and then
stop, be considered as having cancelled it. The real question in
these cases is whether the act be complete. If the testator here,
after tearing it twice through, had thrown the fragments on the
grounds, it might have been properly considered, that he intended to go no farther, and that the cancellation was complete;
but here there is evidence, that he intended to go farther, and
that he was only stopped from proceeding by an appeal made to
his compassion by the person who was one of the objects of his
bounty. The case in Blackstone (Bibb vs. Thomas, 2 W. Black,
1043) is very distinguishable; for there the testator completed
his purpose, although the will was not destroyed. I see no reason, therefore, for disturbing the verdict.”

Idem; Id. — Revocation by cancelling and obliterating.
— Generally, revocation by cancellation is effected by diagonal or
horizontal lines, or criss-crosses written upon the face of the will or
upon any part thereof, while revocation by obliteration is effected by
erasing or scraping off any word or disposition which the testator
intends to revoke. Hence, in the first, as a rule, the words are still
legible, while in the second the words are rendered illegible. Most
American courts, however, consider the two terms synonymous.36
From the very nature of these two methods of revocation, it is
evident that the revocation of the will may be either total or partial in

35
36

Court of King’s Bench, 3 B. & ald. 489.
Rood on Wills, p. 289.

127

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

character. This is what differentiates them from revocation effected
by burning or tearing. In the latter, the revocation is always total,
while in the former, the revocation is total if it is directed against
an essential part of the will and partial if it is directed against a
nonessential part of the will.
Marks made upon a will by the testator are effective as a
revocation by cancellation, regardless of their depth, faintness, or
other characteristics, if they were placed there for the purpose of
cancelling the will. The act of the testator in drawing lines across
his will constitutes a revocation in toto, if so intended by him. It is
necessary, however, that the testator, with an intention to revoke,
must have caused some physical defacement of the will adopted to
give expression to that purpose. The general rule is that revocation
by cancellation or obliteration requires the making of marks or
lines across the will, or of some portion thereof which is of such
significance that its elimination would cause a material alteration
in the meaning or legal effect of the will.37
The efficacy of marks or lines upon a will as a cancellation is
not lessened by the fact that they are in the form of written and
legible words. Thus, if words indicating an intent to revoke the
will are written upon the instrument in such a manner that many
words of the will are touched, there is an effective revocation by
cancellation. Most American authorities make a distinction between
a writing across the face of the will constituting a defacement of the
used portion of the instrument and a similar writing upon a blank
portion, and hold that while in the first there is a revocation, in the
second there is none. Accordingly, a memorandum written upon the
blank margin of the instrument stating that the will is “revoked”
or that an indicated portion is “annulled” does not constitute a
sufficient revocation.38 If the memorandum, however, was executed
in accordance with all of the formalities prescribed by law for the
execution of wills, there would be a revocation, not by cancellation,
but by a nontestamentary writing executed as provided in case of
wills.
Presumptions of Revocation. — Because it is not only difficult but sometimes impossible to prove by competent evidence that

37
38

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 503, pp. 349-350.
Ibid., Sec. 506, p. 361.

128

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ART. 832

a will has been destroyed or cancelled with intent to revoke, American courts have been compelled to recognize certain presumptions of
revocation, which by their very nature are disputable in character.
Some of these presumptions have been adopted in this jurisdiction.39
They are:
(1) Where the will cannot be found following the death of the
testator and it is shown that it was in the testator’s possession when
last seen, the presumption is, in the absence of other evidence, that
he must have destroyed it animo revocandi.40
(2) Where the will cannot be found following the death of the
testator and it is shown that the testator had ready access to it, the
presumption is, in the absence of other evidence, that he must have
destroyed it animo revocandi.41
(3) Where it is shown that the will was in the custody of the
testator after its execution, and subsequently, it was found among
the testator’s effects after his death in such a state of mutilation,
cancellation or obliteration as represents a sufficient act of revocation
within the meaning of the applicable statute, it will be presumed, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary, that such act was performed
by the testator with the intention of revoking the will.42
Conditional or Dependent Relative Revocation. — There
is also another presumption connected with revocation of wills
which is recognized in this jurisdiction. This presumption is what
is known as “the doctrine of dependent relative revocation.” Under
this doctrine, the established rule is that if a testator revokes a will
with a present intention of making a new one immediately and as a
substitute, and the new will is not made, or, if made, fails of effect
for any reason, it will be presumed that the testator preferred the
old will to intestacy, and the old one will be admitted to probate in
the absence of evidence overcoming the presumption, provided its
contents can be ascertained.
The doctrine of dependent relative revocation is a rule of
presumed intention rather than a substantive rule of law. The
presumption recognized by the doctrine is not artificial. Neither is
Gago vs. Mamuyat, 49 Phil. 902.
Ibid., 57 Am. Jur., Sec. 549, pp. 377-378.
41
Ibid.
42
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 550, pp. 378-379.
39
40

129

ART. 832

SUCCESSION

it conclusive; it does not prevail as against actual evidence of the
testator’s intention. Being merely a rule of presumed intention, the
doctrine of dependent relative revocation cannot be carried so far as
to defeat the real intention of the testator in a case where the facts
in evidence do not support the presumption.43
Vda. de Molo vs. Molo
90 Phil. 37
This is an appeal from an order of the lower court admitting to probate the last will and testament of Mariano Molo.
The proponent of the will is the widow of the testator, while the
oppositors are nephews and nieces of the testator. The records
show that after the death of Mariano Molo, his widow filed a
petition seeking the probate of a will executed by the deceased
on June 20, 1939. This will was denied probate on the ground
that it was not executed in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law. In view of the disallowance the widow filed a
second petition for the probate of a copy of another will executed
by the deceased on August 17, 1918. This will was admitted to
probate in spite of the opposition of the oppositors-appellants.
The widow is the instituted heiress in both wills. It must also be
added that the will of 1939 contains a revocatory clause expressly revoking of will of 1918. The oppositors contend, among others, that the will of 1918 cannot be given effect because there is
a presumption that the testator, after executing the will of 1939,
and with full knowledge of the revocatory clause contained in
said will, deliberately destroyed and revoked the original of the
will of 1918. The Supreme Court, however, speaking through
Justice Bautista Angelo, held:
“Granting for the sake of argument that the earlier will
was voluntarily destroyed by the testator after the execution
of the second will, which revoked the first, could there be any
doubt that said earlier will was destroyed by the testator in the
honest belief that it was no longer necessary because he had
expressly revoked it in his will of 1939? In other words, can we
not say that the destruction of the earlier will was but the necessary consequence of the testator’s belief that the revocatory
clause contained in the subsequent will was valid and the latter
would be given effect? If such is the case, then it is our opinion
that the earlier will can still be admitted to probate under the
principle of ‘dependent relative revocation.’ Under this doctrine
43

Ibid., Sec. 514, pp. 356-357.

130

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Revocation of Wills

ARTS. 833-834

the rule is established that where the act of destruction is connected with the making of another will so as fairly to raise the
inference that the testator meant the revocation of the old to
depend upon the efficacy of the new disposition intended to be
substituted, the revocation will be conditional and dependent
upon the efficacy of the new disposition; and if, for any reason,
the new will intended to be made as a substitute is inoperative,
the revocation fails and the original will remains in full force.’
(Gardner, pp. 232-233).”

Art. 833. A revocation of a will based on a false cause or an
illegal cause is null and void.44
Revocation by Mistake. — In American jurisdiction, the
rule stated in Art. 833 is known as “revocation by mistake.” Thus,
where a testator by a codicil or later will revokes a devise or legacy
in his will, expressly grounding such revocation on the assumption
of a fact which turns out to be false, as where it is stated that the
legatees or devisees named in the will are dead, when, in fact, they
are living, the revocation does not take effect.45
Art. 834. The recognition of an illegitimate child does not lose
its legal effect, even though the will wherein it was made should
be revoked.46
Effect of Revocation upon Recognition of Child. — Under
Art. 834, the revocation of the will where an illegitimate child is
acknowledged by the testator as his natural child will not affect
the validity of the recognition or acknowledgment. This rule is of
course logical considering the fact that even if the will is revoked,
the instrument still constitutes an authentic instrument within the
meaning of Art. 278 of the Civil Code, which states that recognition
of natural children shall be made in the record of birth, or in a will, or
in a statement before a court of record, or in an authentic writing.

New provision.
Dunham vs. Averill, 45 Conn. 61, 29 Am. Rep. 624; Mendinhall’s Appeal, 124
Pac. 387, 10 Am St. Rep. 590.
46
New provision.
44
45

131

ARTS. 835-837

SUCCESSION

Subsection 7. — Republication and Revival
of Wills
Art. 835. The testator cannot republish, without reproducing
in a subsequent will, the dispositions contained in a previous one
which is void as to its form.1
Art. 836. The execution of a codicil referring to a previous will
has the effect of republishing the will as modified by the codicil.2
Republication of Wills. — Republication, as applied to wills,
may be defined as “an act of the testator whereby he reproduces in a
subsequent will the dispositions contained in a previous will which
is void as to its form or executes a codicil to his will.” It may be either
express or constructive.3 It is express if the testator reproduces in a
subsequent will the dispositions contained in a previous one which
is void as to its form. This is the republication which is referred to
in Art. 835 of the Code. Its purpose is to cure the will of its formal
defects. It is constructive if the testator for some reason or another
executes a codicil to his will. This is the republication which is
referred to in Art. 836 of the Code.
A duly executed codicil operates as a republication of the
original will and makes it speak from the new date, in so far as it
is not altered or revoked by the codicil, although such codicil is not
physically annexed to the will, and although the will is not in the
presence of the testator at the time of executing the codicil where it
refer to the will in such a way as to identify that instrument beyond
doubt. If a codicil revokes in terms portions of the will, it republishes
the will as of the date of the codicil with respect to all parts not
revoked.4
Art. 837. If after making a will, the testator makes a second
will expressly revoking the first, the revocation of the second will
does not revive the first will, which can be revived only by another
will or codicil.5
New provision.
New provision.
3
Jarman on Wills, p. 157.
4
57 Jur., Sec. 626, p. 428.
5
Art. 739, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
1
2

132

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Republication and Revival of Wills

ART. 837

Revival of Wills. — Revival is the restoration to validity
of a previously revoked will by operation of law. It differs from
republication in that it takes place by operation of law, while the
latter takes place by the act of the testator. It seems that under our
law, the only way by which a previously revoked will may be revived
is through another will or codicil.6 This is tantamount to saying
that the testator will have to make another will or codicil either
reproducing the contents of the revoked will or incorporating thereto
such revoked will by reference in accordance with the provisions of
Art. 837 of the Code.
If after making a will, the testator makes a second will
expressly revoking the first, the revocation of the second will does
not revive the first will. This rule is clearly stated in Art. 837.
Suppose, however, that instead of an express revocatory clause, the
dispositions found in the second will are merely inconsistent with
those found in the first — shall the express revocation of the second
will by a third will or a codicil result in the revival of the first will?
It is rather unfortunate that while the Code provides for the effect
of the revocation of the second will which expressly revoked a first
will, it does not provide for the effect of the revocation of the second
will in case the second will merely impliedly revoked the first will.
The problem may be illustrated as follows: “A” executed three wills
— the first in 1968, the second in 1969, and the third (a codicil)
in 1970. The dispositions found in the second will are absolutely
inconsistent with those found in the first. The codicil, on the other
hand, contains nothing but a revocatory clause expressly revoking
the will of 1969. Will such revocation result in the revival of the will
of 1968? It must be noted that the effect of revocation is to annul the
will or disposition which is revoked. Upon being revoked, the will or
disposition which is revoked ceases to exist, and is as inoperative as
if it had never been written. Consequently, with the revocation of the
will of 1969 by the codicil of 1970, only one will — the will of 1968
— remains. It would, therefore, be absurd to speak of the revival of
the will since it has never been validly revoked in the first place.
Besides, under the doctrine of dependent relative revocation it will
be presumed that the testator preferred the old will to intestacy.

6

Art. 837, Civil Code.

133

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

Subsection 8. — Allowance and Disallowance
of Wills
Art. 838. No will shall pass either real or personal property
unless it is proved and allowed in accordance with the Rules of
Court.
The testator himself may, during his lifetime, petition the
court having jurisdiction for the allowance of his will. In such case,
the pertinent provisions of the Rules of Court for the allowance of
wills after the testator’s death shall govern.
The Supreme Court shall formulate such additional Rules of
Court as may be necessary for the allowance of wills on petition
of the testator.
Subject to the right of appeal, the allowance of the will,
either during the lifetime of the testator or after his death, shall be
conclusive as to its due execution.1
Concept of Probate of Wills. — The probate of a will may
be defined as a special proceeding for establishing the validity of the
will. It may also be defined as a special proceeding for the purpose of
proving that the instrument offered for probate is the last will and
testament of the testator, that it has been executed in accordance
with the formalities prescribed by law, and that the testator had the
necessary testamentary capacity at the time of the execution of the
will.
Nature of Probate. — A proceeding on an application for the
probate of a will is not an ordinary civil action. A will is nothing more
than a species of conveyance whereby a person is permitted with
the formalities prescribed by law, to control to a certain degree the
dispositions of his property after his death. Out of the consideration
for the important interests involved the execution and proof of wills
has been surrounded by numerous safeguards, among which is the
provision that after the death of the testator his will may be judicially
established in court. The action of the court in admitting a will to
probate has all the effects of a judgment; and as such is entitled to
full faith and credit in other courts. The proceeding by which this

1

New provision.

134

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

is accomplished is considered to be in the nature of a proceeding in
rem, and upon this idea the decree of probate is held binding on all
persons in interest, whether they appear to contest the probate or
not. Notice of the time and place of hearing is required to be published
(Sec. 3, Rule 76 in relation to Sec. 3, Rule 79, Rules of Court). The
publication of the notice of the proceedings is constructive notice to
the whole world.2
The proceeding is not a contentious litigations, and, although
the persons in interest are given an opportunity to appear and reasonable precautions are taken for publicity, they are not impleaded
or required to answer.3
Necessity of Probate. — According to the first paragraph of
Art. 838, which is identical to the rule stated in Sec. 1 of Rule 75 of
the New Rules of Court, no will shall pass either real or personal
property unless it is proved and allowed in accordance with the Rules
of Court. It is within the jurisdiction of a probate court to approve
the sale of property of a deceased person by his prospective heirs or
administrator before final adjudication; otherwise, such sale is null
and void and title does not pass to the purchaser. (Dillena vs. CA, G.R.
No. 77660, July 28, 1988.) Consequently, under our legal system the
probate of a will is mandatory. Even if the decedent left no debts and
nobody raises any question as to the authenticity and due execution
of the will, none of the heirs may sue for the partition of the estate
in accordance with that will without first securing its allowance or
probate by the Court: first, because the law expressly provides that
“no will shall pass either real or personal estate unless it is proved
and allowed in the proper court”; and, second, because the probate
of a will, which is a proceeding in rem, cannot be dispensed with
the substituted by any other proceeding, judicial or extrajudicial,
without offending against public policy designed to effectuate the
testator’s right to dispose of his property by will in accordance with
law and to protect the rights of the heirs and legatees under the will
thru the means provided by law, among which are the publication
and the personal notices to each and all of said heirs and legatees.4
2
Celedonia Solivio vs. the Honorable Court of Appeals and Concordia Javellana
Villanueva, G.R. No. 83484, February 12, 1990.
3
Riera vs. Palmaroli, 40 Phil. 105; see also Manalo vs. Paredes, 47 Phil. 938.
4
Rosario Guevara vs. Ernesto Guevara, 74 Phil. 479, reiterated in Ernesto Guevara vs. Rosario Guevara, 98 Phil. 249, and Ventura vs. Ventura, 106 Phil. 1159. (unrep.).

135

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

Rosario Guevara vs. Ernesto Guevara
74 Phil. 479
This is an action commenced by Rosario Guevara to recover from Ernesto Guevara what she claims to be her strict
legitime as an acknowledged natural daughter of the deceased
Victorino Guevara. Ernesto Guevara is a legitimate son of the
deceased. It appears that the deceased had left a will disposing of his properties in favor of the defendant and the rest of
his relatives, the plaintiff among them. This will, however, has
not been presented for probate. Rosario Guevara, who appears
to have had her father’s will in her custody, did nothing judicially to invoke the testamentary dispositions made there in her
favor. But a little over four years after her father’s death, she
commenced this action for the purpose hereinbefore indicated. It
was only during the trial of this case that she presented the will
to the court, not for the purpose of having it probated, but only
to prove that the deceased had acknowledged her as his natural daughter. Upon that proof of acknowledgment she claimed
her share of the inheritance on the theory that the deceased
died intestate, because the will had not been probated. Both the
trial court and the Court of Appeals sustained the theory. Consequently, the principal question to determine in this appeal is
whether the procedure adopted by the plaintiff is in accordance
with law. Invoicing the provisions of the different sections of
Rule 76 (Now Rule 75) of the Rules of Court, especially Sec. 1
(now reproduced in Art. 838 of the Civil Code), the Supreme
Court, speaking through Justice Ozaeta, held:
“We cannot sanction the procedure adopted by the respondent Rosario Guevara it being in our opinion in violation of procedural law and an attempt to circumvent and disregard the
last will and testament of the decedent.
“We hold that if the decedent left a will and no debts and
the heirs and legatees desire to make an extrajudicial partition
of the estate, they must first present that will to the court for
probate and divide the estate in accordance with the will. They
may not disregard the provisions of the will unless those provisions are contrary to law. Neither may they do away with the
presentation of the will to the court for probate, because such
suppression of the will is contrary to law and public policy.
“Even if the decedent left no debts and nobody raises any
question as to the authenticity and due execution of the will,
none of the heirs may sue for the partition of the estate in accordance with that will without first securing its allowance or
probate by the court, first, because the law expressly provides

136

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

that ‘no will shall pass either real or personal estate unless it is
proved and allowed in the proper court’; and second, because the
probate of a will, which is a proceedings in rem, cannot be dispensed with and substituted by any other proceeding, judicial or
extrajudicial, without offending against public policy designed
to effectuate the testator’s right to dispose of his property by will
in accordance with law and to protect the rights of the heirs and
legatees under the will thru the means provided by law, among
which are the publication and the personal notice to each and all
of said heirs and legatees. Nor may the court approve and allow
the will presented in evidence in such an action for partition,
which is one in personam, any more than it could decree the
registration under the Torrens system of the land involved in an
ordinary action for reivindicacion or partition.”5

Imprescriptibility of Probate. — It must also be noted
that the statute of limitations is not applicable to the probate of
wills. According to the trend of authority, the applicability of the
statute of limitations to probate proceedings must be rejected on the
ground that such proceedings are not established in the interest of
the surviving heirs, but primarily for the protection of the testator’s
expressed wishes. If the probate of validly executed wills is required
by public policy, the state could not have intended the statute of
limitations to defeat that policy. It is of course true that the rights
of the parties should not be left hanging in uncertainty for periods
of time far in excess of the maximum period of ten years allowed by
law, but the obvious remedy is for the other interested person either
(1) to petition for the production of the will and for its probate, or (2)
to inflict upon the guilty party the penalties prescribed by Rule 75
of the Rules of Court, or (3) to declare the unworthiness of the heir
under Art. 1032 of the Civil Code for concealing or suppressing the
will.6
Ernesto Guevara vs. Rosario Guevara
98 Phil. 249
This case is a sequel and aftermath of the case of Rosario
Guevara vs. Ernesto Guevara, 74 Phil. 479. Pursuant to the decision of the Supreme Court in that case Rosario Guevara presented the will of the deceased Victorino Guevara for probate. A
5
But read Justice Moran’s concurring and dissenting opinion — Guevara vs.
Guevara, 74 Phil. 496, 512.
6
Ernesto Guevara vs. Rosario Guevara, 98 Phil. 249.

137

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

motion to dismiss was filed by Ernesto Guevara on the ground,
among others, that the petition for probate is barred by the statute of limitations considering that the testator died on September 27, 1933, and that the petition was filed twelve years later,
or, to be exact, on October 5, 1945. As a consequence, the lower
court dismissed the petition. The petitioner thereupon appealed
to the Court of Appeals which reversed the order of the lower
court. The case was finally elevated to the Supreme Court for
review by certiorari. Speaking through Justice Concepcion, the
Supreme Court held:
“In holding the statute of limitations applicable to the
probate of wills, the Court below failed to notice that its doctrine was destructive of the right of testamentary disposition
and violative of the owner’s right to control his property within
the legal limits. The appealed order in fact leaves wills at the
mercy and whim of custodians and heirs interested in their suppression. The lower Court would in effect abdicate the tutelary
power that passed to the Republic from the former sovereigns,
that ‘potestad suprema que en mi reside para velar por el puntual cumplimento de las ultimas voluntades,’ asserted as one of
the royal prerogatives in the ‘Real Cedula’ of March 18, 1776.
“It is not without purpose that Rule of Court 77 prescribes
that any ‘person interested in the estate may, at any time after
the death of the testator, petition the Court having jurisdiction
to have the will allowed.’ Taken from the Code of Procedure in
California, this provision has been interpreted (by a long line of
decisions) as meaning that the statute of limitations has no application to probate of wills.
“These decisions are of high persuasive value; they represent the trend of authority (57 Am. Jur. 535), and enable us to
conclude that reason and precedent reject the applicability of
the Statute of Limitations to probate proceedings because these
are not exclusively established in the interest of the surviving
heirs, but primarily for the protection of the testator’s expressed
wishes, that are entitled to respect as an effect of his ownership
and right of disposition. If the probate of validly executed will is
required by public policy, as declared by the Supreme Court in
the previous case, the state could not have intended the statute
of limitations to defeat the policy.”

Questions Determinable by Probate Court. — Under our
law, there are only three possible questions which can be determined
by the probate court. They are:
138

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

(1) Whether or not the instrument which is offered for probate
is the last will and testament of the decedent; in other words, the
question is one of identity.
(2) Whether or not the will has been executed in accordance
with the formalities prescribed by law; in other words, the question
is one of due execution.
(3) Whether the testator had testamentary capacity at the
time of the execution of the will; in other words, the question is one
of capacity.
Consequently, the probate court cannot inquire into the
intrinsic validity of testamentary dispositions. Thus, according to
the Supreme Court:
“To establish conclusively as against everyone, and once
and for all, the facts that a will was executed with the formalities required by law and that the testator was in a condition to
make a will, is the only purpose of the proceedings under the new
Code for the probate of a will. The judgment in such proceedings
determines and can determine nothing more. In them the court
has no power to pass upon the validity of any provisions made
in the will. It cannot decide, for example, that a certain legacy is
void, and another one valid. It could not in this case make any
decision upon the question whether the testatrix had the power
to appoint by will a guardian for the property of her children by
her first husband, or whether the person so appointed was or
was not a suitable person to discharge such trust.
“All such questions must be decided in some other proceeding. The grounds on which a will may be disallowed are stated
in Section 634 (now Art. 839, CC). Unless one of those grounds
appears, the will must be allowed. They all have to do with the
personal condition of the testator at the time of its execution and
the formalities connected therewith. It follows that neither this
court nor the court below has any jurisdiction in this proceedings to pass upon the questions raised by the appellants by the
assignment of error relating to the appointment of a guardian
for the children of the deceased.’’7

7
Castañeda vs. Alemany, 3 Phil. 427. To the same effect — Montanano vs. Suesa,
14 Phil. 676; Palacios vs. Palacios, 106 Phil. 739; Nuguid vs. Nuguid, G.R. No. L23445, June 23, 1966, 17 SCRA 449; Sumilang vs. Ramagosa, G.R. No. L-23135, Dec.
26, 1967, 27 SCRA 1369.

139

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

It was stressed in the case of Cuizon vs. Remolete (129 SCRA,
45, 1984) as cited in the case of Morales vs. Court of First Instance
of Cavite, Branch V (146 SCRA, 373, 1986), as further cited in the
case of Ofelia Parungao, et al. vs. Intermediate Appellate Court, et
al., G.R. Nos. 73241-42, July 23, 1990 that:
“It is a well-settled rule that a probate court or one in
charge of proceedings, whether testate or intestate, cannot adjudicate or determine title to properties claimed to belong to
outside parties. All that the said court could do as regards said
properties is to determine whether they should or should not be
included in the inventory or administration. If there is no dispute, well and good; but if there is, then the parties, the administrator, and the opposing parties have to resort to an ordinary
action for a final determination of the conflicting claims of title
because the probate court cannot do so.”

Furthermore, it was held that a person who intervenes in the
probate proceedings can be required to show his interest in the will
or in the property affected thereby.8 For such purpose, it is sufficient
that he must show or produce prima facie evidence of his relationship
to the testator, or of his right to the latter’s estate. Consequently,
if he claims to be an acknowledged natural child of the testator,
the probate court will certainly allow him to produce evidence
regarding his status, but the nature of the evidence submitted
would nevertheless be only prima facie, and only for the purpose of
justifying his intervention in the probate proceeding.9 The reason for
this is evident. The final determination of the status of such person
can be made only during the proceedings for the distribution of the
estate and not during the probate proceedings.
In the case, however, of Celedonia Solivia vs. The Honorable
Court of Appeals, et al., G.R. No. 83484, February 12, 1990, it was
held that the probate court has exclusive jurisdiction to make just and
legal distribution of the estate. In the interest of orderly procedure
and to avoid confusing and conflicting dispositions of a decedent’s
estate, a court should not interfere with probate proceedings in a co-

8
In re Cabigting, 14 Phil. 463; Paras vs. Narcisco, 35 Phil. 144; Ngo The Hua vs.
Chung Kiat Hua, G.R. No. L-17091, Sept. 30, 1963, 9 SCRA 113; Teotico vs. Del Val, G.R.
No. L-18753, March 26, 1965, 13 SCRA 406; Sumilang vs. Ramagosa, supra.
9
Reyes vs. Ysip, 51 Off. Gaz. 2357.

140

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

equal court. This was earlier ruled in Guilas vs. Judge of the Court
of First Instance of Pampanga, L-26695, January 31, 1972, which
states that:
“The better practice, however, for the heir who has not
received his share is to demand his share through a proper motion in the same probate or administration proceedings, or for
reopening of the probate or administrative proceedings if it had
already been closed, and not through an independent action.

When Probate Commenced. — The probate of a will may
be commenced either during the lifetime of the testator or after his
death. In the first, it is the testator himself who files the petition for
the probate of the will;10 in the second, it is any person interested in
the estate.11 Consequently, we can very well say that there are two
kinds of probate — probate ante mortem and probate post mortem.
Explaining the reasons behind the inclusion of the former in our
Code Commission says:
“One of the principal innovations of the proposed Code is
the allowance of a will during the lifetime of the testator.
“Most of the cases that reach the courts involve either
the testamentary capacity of the testator or the formalities adopted in the execution of wills. There are relatively few cases
concerning the intrinsic validity of testamentary dispositions.
It is far easier for the courts to determine the mental condition
of a testator during his lifetime than after his death. Fraud, intimidation, and undue influence are minimized. Furthermore,
if a will does not comply with the requirements prescribed by
law, the same may be corrected at once. The probate during the
testator’s life, therefore, will lessen the number of contests upon
wills. Once a will is probated during the lifetime of the testator, the only question that may remain for the courts to decide
after the testator’s death will refer to the intrinsic validity of
the testamentary dispositions. It is possible, of course, that even
when the testator himself asks for the allowance of the will, he
may be acting under duress or undue influence, but these are
rare cases.
“After a will has been probated during the lifetime of the
testator it does not necessarily mean that he cannot alter or

10
11

Art. 838, par. 1, Civil Code.
Sec. 1, Rule 76, New Rules of Court.

141

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

revoke the same before his death. Should he make a new will,
it would also be allowance on his petition, and if he should die
before he has had a chance to present such petition, the ordinary probate proceedings after the testator’s death would be in
order.”12

Procedure in Probate Proceedings. — Whether the will
is presented for probate during the lifetime of the testator or after
his death, the procedure which is followed is that which is provided
for in the New Rules of Court, although, with respect to the first,
the third paragraph of Art. 838 of the Civil Code provides that the
Supreme Court shall formulate such additional Rules of Court as
may be necessary for the allowance of will on petition of the testator.
In addition to these, the special rules provided for in Art. 811 of the
Civil Code, which is now embodied in Sec. 5, Rule 76 of the New
Rules of Court regarding the probate of holographic wills must be
observed.
Effect of Allowance of Will. — A judgment or decree of
a court with jurisdiction of a proceeding to probate a will, which
admits the will to probate, is conclusive of the validity of the will; it
is not subject to collateral attack, but stands as final, if not modified,
set aside, or revoked by a direct proceeding, or reversed on appeal
to a higher court. This is clear from the provision of the fourth
paragraph of Art. 838 of the New Civil Code, a provision which is
also found in Sec. 1 of Rule 75 of the New Rules of Court. Since a
proceeding for the probate of a will is essentially one in rem which
determines the status of the decedent’s estate as testate or intestate,
the judgment rendered by a court having jurisdiction is conclusive
on the whole world, irrespective of who appeared as parties of record
in the proceeding.13
The following case will serve to illustrate the conclusive character of the allowance of the will by the probate court.14

Report of the Code Commission, pp. 53-54.
See 57 Am. Jur., 934, pp. 614-615.
14
For other cases — see Castañeda vs. Alemany, 3 Phil. 838; Pimentel vs. Palanca,
5 Phil. 436; Sahagun vs. Corostiza, 7 Phil. 347; Limjuco vs. Ganara, 11 Phil. 393; Montano vs. Suesa. 14 Phil. 676; In re Estate of Johnson, 39 Phil. 156; Riera vs. Palmaroli, 40
Phil. 105; Austria vs. Ventanilla, 41 Phil. 180; Manahan vs. Manahan, 55 Phil. 448;
Trillana vs. Crisostomo, 89 Phil. 710; Fernandez vs. Dimagiba, G.R. No. L-23638, Oct. 12,
1967, 21 SCRA 428.
12
13

142

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

Mercado vs. Santos
66 Phil. 215
The records show that the petitioner had presented a will
purporting to be the last will and testament of his deceased
wife for probate. The will was admitted to probate without any
opposition. Sixteen months after the allowance of the will, a
complaint for forgery of the probated will was instituted by the
brothers and sisters of the deceased against the petitioner. The
latter moved to dismiss claiming that the will alleged to have
been forged had already been probated and that the order of
allowance is conclusive as to its due execution. The motion was
overruled. Whereupon the petitioner elevated the case to the
Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals denied the petition. As
a result, the case was elevated to the Supreme Court for review
by certiorari. The question to be resolved, therefore, is whether
or not the probate of the will is a bar to the subsequent criminal prosecution of the petitioner for the alleged forgery of the
said will. After citing the pertinent provision of the Code of Civil
Procedure (all of which are reproduced in the Rules of Court,
and now crystallized in the provision of the last paragraph of
Art. 838) and examining all of the authorities and sources of
the laws cited, the Supreme Court, speaking through Justice
Laurel, held:
“American and English cases show a conflict of authorities on the question as to whether or not the probate of a will
bars criminal prosecution of the alleged forger of the probated
will. We have examined some important cases and have come to
the conclusion that no fixed standard may be adopted or drawn
therefrom, in view of the conflict no less than of diversity of statutory provisions obtaining in different jurisdictions. It behooves
us, therefore, as the court of last resort, to choose that rule most
consistent with our statutory law, having in view that needed
stability of property rights and the public interest in general.
To be sure, we have seriously reflected upon the dangers of evasion from punishment of culprits deserving of the severity of the
law in case where, as here, forgery is discovered after the probate of the will and the prosecution is had before the prescription of the offense. By and large, however, the balance seems
inclined in favor of the view that we have taken. Not only does
the law surround the execution of the will with the necessary
formalities and require probate to be made after an elaborate
judicial proceeding, but it provides for an adequate remedy to
any party who might have been adversely affected by the probate of a forged will, much in the same way as other parties

143

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

against whom a judgment is rendered under the same or similar circumstances. The aggrieved party may file an application
for relief with the proper court within a reasonable time, but in
no case exceeding six months after said court has rendered the
judgment of probate, on the ground of mistake, inadvertence,
surprise or excusable neglect. An appeal lies to review the action
of a court of first instance when that court refuses to grant relief.
After a judgment allowing a will to be probated has become final
and unappealable, and after the period fixed by law has expired,
the law as an expression of the legislative wisdom goes no further and the case ends there.
“We hold, therefore, that criminal action will not lie in this
jurisdiction against the forger of a will which had been duly admitted to probate by a court of competent jurisdiction.”

Idem; When allowance may be set aside. — Since a proceeding for the probate of a will is essentially one in rem, a judgment
allowing a will shall be conclusive as to its due execution. Consequently, no question of the validity or invalidity of the will could be
thereafter raised, except (1) by means of an appeal, or (2) by means
of a petition for relief from the judgment by reason of fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable negligence, or (3) by means of a petition
to set aside the judgment by reason of lack of jurisdiction or lack of
procedural due process, or (4) by means of an action to annul and
judgment by reason of extrinsic or collateral fraud.
The first exception is recognized by the provision of the fourth
paragraph of Art. 838, as well as by the provision of Sec. 1, Rule
75, Rules of Court, while the second exception is recognized by the
general provisions of Secs. 2 and 3, Rule 38, Rules of Court. These
provisions recognizing the second are:
“Sec. 2. Petition for relief from judgment, order, or other
proceedings. — When a judgment or final order is entered, or
any other proceeding is thereafter taken against a party in any
court through fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable negligence,
he may file a petition in such court and in the same cause praying that the judgment, order, or proceeding be set aside.
“Sec. 3. Time for filing petition; contents and verification.
— A petition provided for in either of the preceding sections of
this Rule must be verified, filed within sixty (60) days after the
petitioner learns of the judgment, final order, or other proceedings to be set aside, and not more than six (6) months after such

144

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

judgment or final order was entered, or such proceeding was
taken; and must be accompanied with affidavits showing the
fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable negligence relied upon,
and the facts constituting the petitioner’s good and substantial
cause of action or defense, as the case may be.”

Thus, in In re Estate of Johnson,15 the Supreme Court, speaking
through Justice Street, declared:
“The laws of these Islands, in contrast with the laws in
force in perhaps all of the States of the American Union, contain no special provision, other than that allowing an appeal in
the probate proceedings, under which relief of any sort can be
obtained from an order of a court of first instance improperly
allowing or disallowing a will. We do, however, have a provision
of a general nature authorizing a court under certain circumstances to set aside any judgment, order, or other proceedings
whatever. This provision is found in Section 113 of the Code of
Civil Procedure (now Secs. 2 and 3, Rule 38, Rules of Court).
“The use of the words’ judgment, order or other proceeding’
in this section indicates an intention on the part of the Legislature to give a wide latitude to the remedy here provided, and in
our opinion its operation is not to be restricted to judgments or
orders entered in ordinary contentious litigation where a plaintiff impleads a defendant and brings him into court by personal
service of process. In other words, the utility of the provision is
not limited to actions proper but extends to all sorts of judicial
proceedings.
“In the second section of the Code of Civil Procedure it is
declared that the provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to promote its objects and to assist the parties in obtaining speedy justice. We think that the intention thus exhibited
should be applied in the interpretation of Section 113 (now Secs.
2 and 3, Rule 38, Rules of Court); and we hold that the word
‘party’ used in this section, means any person having an interest
in the subject matter of the proceeding who is in a position to be
concluded by the judgment, order or other proceeding taken.”

15

39 Phil. 156.

145

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

Gallanosa vs. Arcangel
83 SCRA 676
Florentino Hitosis executed a will in 1938 when he was
eighty years old wherein he instituted as his only heirs his stepson Pedro Gallanosa and the latter’s wife Corazon Grecia. He
died in 1939, survived by his brother Leon Hitosis and several
nephews and nieces. A petition for probate was duly filed by the
testamentary heirs. Opposition to the probate was registered by
the legal heirs. After hearing, the probate court admitted the
will to probate and appointed Gallanosa as executor. In 1943,
a project of partition of sixty-one (61) parcels of land constituting the bulk of the testator’s estate was finally approved. There
was no appeal from the decree of probate and from the order
of partition and distribution. In 1952, the testator’s legal heirs
instituted an action for the recovery of the 61 parcels of land
on the ground of acquisitive prescription. The action was dismissed. Again, there was no appeal from the order of dismissal.
In 1967, said legal heirs instituted another action in the same
court against the testamentary heirs for the “annulment” of the
will and the recovery of the 61 parcels of land, alleging that the
Gallanosa spouses caused the execution of the will through fraud
and deceit. Upon motion of defendants, the court dismissed the
action. Plaintiffs filed a motion for reconsideration. Respondent
Judge granted it and set aside the order of dismissal. From this
order of dismissal, defendants went up to the Supreme Court by
certiorari. Petitioners (defendants) contend that private respondents (plaintiffs) do not have a cause of action for the “annulment” of the will and for the recovery of the 61 parcels of land
by reason of res judicata and of prescription. On the other hand,
private respondents contend that the will is void, and therefore
their right of action is imprescriptible. Speaking through Justice Aquino, the Supreme Court held:
“It is evident from the allegations of the complaint and
from defendants’ motion to dismiss that plaintiffs’ 1967 action
is barred by res judicata, a double-barrelled defense, and by prescription, acquisitive and extinctive, or by what are known in
the jus civile and the jus gentium as usucapio, longi temporis
possesio and praescriptio (See Ramos vs. Ramos, L-19872, December 3, 1974, 61 SCRA 284).
“Our procedural law does not sanction an action for the
“annulment” of a will. In order that a will may take effect, it
has to be probated, legalized or allowed in the proper testamentary proceeding. The probate of the will is mandatory (Art. 838,

146

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

Civil Code; Sec. 1, Rule 75, formerly Sec. 1, Rule 76, Rules of
Court; Guevara vs. Guevara, 74 Phil. 479; Guevara vs. Guevara,
98 Phil. 249).
“The testamentary proceeding is a special proceeding for
the settlement of the testator’s estate. A special proceeding is
distinct and different from an ordinary action (Sec. 1, Rule 2 and
Sec. 1, Rule 72, Rules of Court).
“We say that the defense of res judicata, as a ground for the
dismissal of plaintiffs’ 1967 complaint, is a two-pronged defense
because (1) the 1939 and 1943 decrees of probate and distribution in Special Proceeding No. 3171 and (2) the 1952 order of
dismissal in Civil Case No. 696 of the lower court constitute bars
by former judgment. Rule 39 of the Rules of Court provides:
“SEC. 49. Effect of judgments. — The effect of a
judgment or final order rendered by a court or judge of
the Philippines, having jurisdiction to pronounce the judgment or order, may be as follows:
“(a) In case of a judgment or order against a specific thing, or in respect to the probate of a will or the administration of the estate of a deceased person, or in respect
to the personal, political, or legal condition or status of a
particular person or his relationship to another, the judgment or order is conclusive upon the title to the thing, the
will or administration, or the condition, status or relationship of the person; however, the probate of a will or granting of letters of administration shall only be prima facie
evidence of the death of the testator or intestate;
“(b) In other cases the judgment or order is, with
respect to the matter directly adjudged or as to any other
matter that Could have been raised in relation thereto,
conclusive between the parties and their successors in interest by title subsequent to the commencement of the action or special proceeding, litigating of the same thing and
under the same title and in the same capacity;
“(c) In any other litigation between the same parties or their successors in interest, that only is deemed to
have been adjudged in a former judgment which appears
upon its face to have been so adjudged, or which was actually and necessarily included therein or necessary thereto.”
“The 1939 decree of probate is conclusive as to the due
execution or formal validity of the will (Sec. 625, Act. 190; Sec.

147

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

1, Rule 76, now Sec. 1, Rule 75, Rules of Court; Last par. of Art.
838, Civil Code).
“That means that the testator was of sound and disposing
mind at the time when he executed the will and was not acting under duress, menace, fraud, or undue influence; that the
will was signed by him in the presence of the required number
of witnesses, and that the will is genuine and is not a forgery.
Accordingly, these facts cannot again be questioned in a subsequent proceeding, not even in a criminal action for the forgery
of the will. (3 Moran’s Comments on the Rules of Court, 1970
Edition, p. 395; Manahan vs. Manahan, 58 Phil. 448).
“After the finality of the allowance of a will, the issue as
to the voluntariness of its execution cannot be raised anymore
(Santos vs. De Buenaventura, L-22797, September 22, 1966, 18
SCRA 47).
“In Austria vs. Ventenilla, 21 Phil. 180, a “petition for annulment of a will” was not entertained after the decree of probate had become final. That case is summarized as follows”:
“Wills, Probate; Alleged Fraudulent Will; Appeal V.
died. His will was admitted to probate without objection.
No appeal was taken from said order. It was admitted that
due and legal notice had been given to all parties. Fifteen
months after the date of said order, a motion was presented in the lower court to have said will declared null and
void, for the reason that fraud had been practiced upon
the deceased in the making of his will.
“Held: That under Section 625 of Act No. 190 the
only time given parties who are displeased with the order admitting to probate a will, for an appeal is the time
given for appeals in ordinary actions; but without deciding
whether or not an order admitting a will of probate will be
opened for fraud, after the time allowed for an appeal has
expired, when no appeal is taken from an order probating a will, the heirs can not, in subsequent litigation in
the same proceedings, raise questions relating to its due
execution. The probate of a will is conclusive as to its due
execution and as to the testamentary capacity of the testator.” (See Austria vs. Heirs of Ventenilla, 99 Phil. 1069).
“On the other hand, the 1943 decree of adjudication rendered by the trial court in the testate proceeding for the settlement of the estate of Florentino, Hitosis, having been rendered

148

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

in a proceeding in rem, is under the above quoted Section 49(a),
binding upon the whole world (Manalo vs. Paredes, 47 Phil. 938;
In re Estate of Johnson, 39 Phil. 156; De la Cerna vs. Potot, 120
Phil. 1361, 1364; McMaster vs. Hentry Reissmann & Co., 68
Phil. 142).
“It is not only the 1939 probate proceeding that can be
interposed as res judicata with respect to private respondent’s
complaint. The 1952 order of dismissal rendered by Judge
Manalac in Civil Case No. 696, a judgment in personam, was an
adjudication on the merits (Sec. 4, Rule 30, old Rules of Court).
It constitutes a bar by former judgment under the aforequoted
Section 49(b) (Anticamara vs. Ong, L-29689, April 14, 1978).
“The plaintiffs or private respondents did not even bother
to ask for the annulment of the testamentary proceeding and
the proceeding in Civil Case No. 696. Obviously, they realized
that the final adjudications in those cases have the binding force
of res judicata and that there is no ground, nor is it timely, to
ask for the nullification of the final orders and judgments in
those two cases.
“It is a fundamental concept in the organization of every
jural system, a principle of public policy, that, at the risk of occasional errors, judgments of courts should become final at some
definite date fixed by law. Interest rei publicae ut finis sit litum.
“The very object for which the courts were constituted was to
put an end to controversies.” (Dy Cay vs. Crossfield and O’Brien,
38 Phil. 521; Peñalosa vs. Tuason, 22 Phil. 303; De la Cerna vs.
Potot, supra.).
“After the period for seeking relief from a final order or
judgment under Rule 38 of the Rules of Court has expired, a
final judgment or order can be set aside only on the grounds of
(a) lack of jurisdiction or lack of due process of law or (b) that the
judgment was obtained by means of extrinsic or collateral fraud.
In the latter case, the period for annulling the judgment is four
years from the discovery of the fraud (2 Moran’s Comments on
the Rules of Court, 1970 Edition, pp. 245-246; Mauricio vs. Villanueva, 106 Phil. 1159).
“To hurdle over the obstacle of prescription, the trial court,
naively adopting the theory of plaintiffs’ counsel, held that the
action for the recovery of the lands had not prescribed because
the rule in Article 1410 of the Civil Code, that “the action or
defense for the declaration of the inexistence of a contract does
not prescribe”, applies to wills.

149

ART. 838

SUCCESSION

“That ruling is a glaring error. Article 1410 cannot possibly apply to last wills and testaments. The trial court and
plaintiff’s counsel relied upon the case of Dingle vs. Guillermo,
48 O.G. 4410, allegedly decided by this Court, which cited the
ruling in Tipton vs. Velasco, 6 Phil. 67, that mere lapse of time
cannot give efficacy to void contracts, a ruling elevated to the
category of a codal provision in Article 1410. The Dingle case
was decided by the Court of Appeals. Even the trial court did not
take pains to verify the misrepresentation of plaintiffs’ counsel
that the Dingle case was decided by this Court. An elementary
knowledge of civil law could have alerted the trial court to the
egregious error of plaintiffs’ counsel in arguing that Article 1410
applies to wills.
“WHEREFORE, the lower court’s orders of May 3 and
June 17, 1968 are reversed and set aside and its order of dismissal dated January 10, 1968 is affirmed. Costs against the
private respondents. SO ORDERED.”

Idem; Effect upon probate of codicil. — Is the probate of
a will by final judgment prior to that of a codicil thereof a bar to the
probate of the codicil? This question was resolved in the negative by
the Supreme Court in the following case:
Macam vs. Gatmaitan
60 Phil. 358
The records show that Nicolasa Macam filed a petition in
the Court of First Instance of Bulacan for the probate of a will
and a codicil. Both will and codicil were executed by Leonardo
Macam. The will was admitted to probate without any opposition, but with regard to the codicil, however, an opposition to its
probate was filed by Juana Gatmaitan. After hearing, the court
ordered the dismissal of the petition for the probate of the codicil
as well as of the opposition thereto on the ground that since the
allowance of the will had already become final and executory, it
was too late to consider the codicil. Both parties appealed. The
appellants’ assignments of error, considered together, raise the
following questions of law: (1) Is the probate of a will by final
judgment prior to that of a codicil thereof a bar to the probate of
said codicil? (2) Does the failure to file opposition to the probate
of a will deprive the oppositor of the right to oppose the probate
of the codicil? The Supreme Court, speaking through Justice
Villareal, held:

150

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 838

“The fact that a will has been allowed without opposition
and the order allowing the same has become final and executory
is not a bar to the presentation of a codicil, provided it complies
with all the necessary formalities for executing a will.
“It is not necessary that the will and the codicil be probated
together as the codicil may be concealed by an interested party
and it may not be discovered until after the will has already
been allowed; and they may be presented and probated one after
the other, since the purpose of the probate proceeding is merely
to determine whether or not the will and the codicil meet all the
statutory requirements for their extrinsic validity, leaving the
validity of their provisions for further consideration.
“The appeal taken by the petitioner Nicolasa Macam is,
therefore, well-founded and the court a quo erred in flatly denying her petition for the probate of the codicil on the erroneous
ground that said codicil should have been presented at the same
time as the will.
“With respect to the opposition of the oppositor-appellant
Juana Gatmaitan, the fact that she failed to file opposition to
the probate of the will does not prevent her from filing opposition to the probate of the codicil thereof, inasmuch as the will
may satisfy all the external requisites necessary for its validity,
but the codicil may, at the time of its execution, not be in conformity therewith. If the testator had testamentary capacity at
the time of the execution of the will, and the will was executed
in accordance with all the statutory requirements, opposition to
its probate would not lie. On the contrary, if at the time of the
execution of the codicil, the testator lacked some of the subjective requisites legally capacitating him to execute the same, or
all the statutory requirements were not complied with in the
execution thereof, opposition to its probate would lie.
“The court a quo, therefore, erred in dismissing the opposition filed by the oppositor-appellant Juana Gatmaitan to
the probate of the codicil of the will of the deceased Leonarda
Macam.
“In view of the foregoing, we are of the opinion and so hold:
(1) That the fact a will has been probated, the order allowing
the same having become final and executory, is not a bar to the
presentation and probate of a codicil although its existence was
known at the time of the probate of the will; and (2) that the failure of the oppositor to the probate of a codicil to file opposition
to the probate of the will having knowledge of such proceeding,
does not constitute an abandonment of a right, nor does it deprive her of the right to oppose the probate of said codicil.”

151

ART. 839

SUCCESSION

Art. 839. The will shall be disallowed in any of the following
cases:
(1)

If the formalities required by law have not been complied

with;
(2) If the testator was insane, or otherwise mentally
incapable of making a will, at the time of its execution;
(3) If it was executed through force or under duress, or the
influence of fear, or threats;
(4) If it was procured by undue and improper pressure and
influence, on the part of the beneficiary or of some other person;
(5)

If the signature of the testator was procured by fraud;

(6) If the testator acted by mistake or did not intend that the
instrument he signed should be his will at the time of affixing his
signature thereto.16
Grounds for Disallowance of Wills. — The above article
enumerates the different grounds for the disallowance of wills. The
same grounds are also enumerated in Sec. 9 of Rule 76 of the New
Rules of Court.
These grounds are exclusive. Since the first and second grounds
have already been taken up under previous articles discussed in this
text, only the other grounds will be discussed here.
Idem; Violence or intimidation. — One of the grounds for
the disallowance of wills is if the will was executed through force
or under duress, or the influence of fear, or threats. Since there is
no definition of these terms under the law on wills, the definitions
of violence and intimidation found under the law on contracts can,
therefore, be applied. Hence, there is violence when in order to
compel the testator to execute the will, serious or irresistible force is
employed, and there is intimidation when the testator is compelled
by a reasonable and well-grounded fear of an imminent and grave
evil upon his person or property, or upon the person or property
of his spouse, descendants or ascendants, to execute the will.17

16
17

New provision.
Art. 1335, Civil Code.

152

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 839

Whether the violence or intimidation is employed by a beneficiary or
by a stranger is immaterial. The will must be disallowed. To determine the degree of intimidation, the age, sex and condition of the
person upon whom it is employed shall be borne in mind. However,
if the threat or intimidation is merely to enforce one’s claim through
competent authority, if the claim is just and legal, the will cannot
be disallowed.18
Idem; Undue influence. — Another ground for the disallowance of wills is if the will was procured by undue and improper pressure and influence on the part of the beneficiary or of some other
person.
There is undue influence when a person takes improper
advantage of his power over the will of another, depriving the latter
of a reasonable freedom of choice.19 Concisely stated, undue influence
invalidating a will is that which substitutes the wishes of another for
those of the testator. Although it has often been stated that undue
influence is an unlawful influence, it appears that no more is meant
by the expression “unlawful influence,” as used in this connection,
than that it is the influence which deprives the testator of his free
agency.20
No influence upon the testator is sufficient to invalidate a
will unless it was directly connected with the execution of the
instrument by the testator and was present and operating directly
upon the mind of the testator so as to control the disposition of his
property under the will. As stated by most authorities, to destroy the
validity of a will the undue influence must be specially directly on
the testamentary act, so that its effect may be registered there to the
benefit of some persons and a corresponding detriment to others. A
general influence over the testator, although strong and controlling,
is not such undue influence as invalidates a will unless, it is brought
to bear upon the testamentary act.21
Not every influence exerted by a beneficiary or a third person
over the testator inducing him to make a will is an undue influence,
authorizing the setting aside of the will. The law recognizes that
Arts. 1335, 1336, Civil Code.
Art. 1337, Civil Code.
20
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 350, p. 258.
21
Ibid., Sec. 352, p. 259.
18
19

153

ART. 839

SUCCESSION

a testator may act out of a sense of obligation to family or friends,
even though his feelings in this respect are quickened by acts of
kindness toward him, without having his will invalidated on the
ground of undue influence. To establish undue influence it must be
shown that the influence exerted upon the testator was such as to
amount to force, coercion, or importunities which he could not resist.
It is impossible to distinguish by arbitrary rule fitting all cases
between that which is within the bounds of legitimate influence
and that which makes the influence undue.22 The following facts
must be considered: the confidential, family, spiritual and other
relations between the parties, or the fact that the person alleged to
have been unduly influenced was suffering from mental weakness
or ignorance or in financial distress.23 Thus, in Barretto vs. Reyes,24
where the question that had to be resolved was whether or not the
importunities employed by a daughter upon her mother to change
her will constitutes undue influence so as to invalidate the will, the
Supreme Court declared:
“In our opinion, the alleged effort of Lucia Milagros Barretto in convincing her mother to change her will so as to leave
all her properties to Milagros were legitimate. The alleged importunities merely constituted fair arguments, persuasion, appeal to emotions, and entreaties which, without fraud or deceit
or actual coercion, compulsion or restraint, do not constitute
undue influence sufficient to invalidate a will. Indeed, it was
natural and proper for Milagros to exercise some influence over
her mother. ‘It is not enough to establish undue influence that
the testator has been persuaded to make his will; it must be
shown that he made his will under coercion, compulsion, or restraint, so that in fact the instrument does not represent his
own wishes. A person has a right, by fair argument, persuasion, or appeal to the emotions, to induce another to make a
will, and even to make it in his own favor, and such persuasion
or argument addressed to the judgment or affections, in which
there is no fraud or deceit, does not constitute undue influence.
Moderate and reasonable solicitation and entreaty addressed to
the testator do not constitute undue influence. Moderate and
reasonable solicitation and entreaty addressed to the testator
do not constitute undue influence even though they induce the

Ibid., Sec. 357, pp. 261-262.
Art. 1337, Civil Code.
24
98 Phil. 996 (unrep.)
22
23

154

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 839

testator to make the kind of a will requested, if he yields intelligently and from a conviction of duty. Even earnest entreaty and
persuasion may be employed upon the testator without affecting
the validity of the will so long as they are not irresistible, (57
Am. Jur., Wills, Sec. 361, pp. 264-265).
“The influence of a child or spouse to make a will in their
favor, in the absence of a showing that it was improperly exercised, does not vitiate the will, even though there may be proof
that such a provision would not have been made but for such
importunity. Indeed, it has been held to be natural and proper
that persons occupying family relations should exercise some
influence over each other and should remember each other in
their wills.” (68 C.J., Wills, Sec. 442, p. 752).

It can, therefore, be stated as a rule that every case wherein
undue influence is an issue must be viewed in its own particular
setting of fact, since in one case it takes but little to unduly influence
another, while in another case it takes much more.25
Be that as it may, the following summary of the basic principles of undue influence as a ground for the disallowance of wills
made by the Supreme Court in a recent case26 should always be remembered:
“It is worthwhile to recall the basic principles on undue
pressure and influence as laid down by the jurisprudence of
this Court: that to be sufficient to avoid a will, the influence
exerted must be of a kind that so overpowers and subjugates
the mind of the testator as to destroy his free agency and make
him express the will of another rather than his own (Coso vs.
Fernandez Deza, 42 Phil. 596; Icasiano vs. Icasiano, L-18979, 30
June 1964; Teotico vs. Del Val, L-18753, 26 March 1956); that
the contention that a will was obtained by undue influence or
improper pressure cannot be sustained on mere conjecture or
mere suspicion, as it is not enough that there was opportunity
to exercise undue influence, or a possibility that it might have
been exercised (Ozaeta vs. Cuartero, L-5597, 31 May 1956); that
the exercise of improper pressure and undue influence must be
supported by substantial evidence that it was actually exercised
(Ozaeta vs. Cuartero, ante; Teotico vs. Del Val, ante; Teotico vs.
Del Val, ante); that the burden is on the person challenging the
25
26

57 Am. Jur., Sec. 357, p. 262.
Pascual vs. De la Cruz, No. L-24819, May 30, 1969, 28 SCRA 421.

155

ART. 839

SUCCESSION

will to show that such influence was exerted at the time of its
execution (Teotico vs. Del Val, ante) that mere general or reasonable influence is not sufficient to invalidate a will (Coso vs.
Fernandez, Deza, ante); nor is moderate and reasonable solicitation and entreaty addressed to the testator (Barretto vs. Reyes,
L-5830-31, 31 January 1956), or omission of relations, not forced
heirs, evidence of undue influence (Bugnao vs. Ubay, 14 Phil.
163; Pecson vs. Coronel, 45 Phil. 415).”
Coso vs. Fernandez Deza
42 Phil. 585
This is an appeal from a decision of the lower court setting
aside a will on the ground of undue influence alleged to have
been exerted over the mind of the testator by one Rosario Lopez.
The evidence shows that the testator, a married man, became
acquainted with Rosario Lopez in Spain in 1898 and that he
had illicit relations with her for several years thereafter. After
his return to the Philippines, she followed him, and remained
his mistress until his death in 1919. In his will, the tercio libre
disposicion is given to their illegitimate son, while a certain sum
of money is given to Rosario Lopez as payment for expenses incurred when he was sick in Spain. The oppositor claims that the
will is invalid because it was procured by undue influence. The
Supreme Court, speaking through Justice Ostrand, held:
“The burden is upon the parties challenging the will to
show that undue influence existed at the time of its execution,
and we do not think that this burden has been carried in the
present case. While it is shown that the testator entertained
strong affections for Rosario Lopez, it does not appear that her
influence so overpowered and subjugated his mind as to ‘destroy
his free agency and make him express the will of another rather
than his own.’ He was an intelligent man, a lawyer by profession, appears to have known his own mind, and may well have
been actuated only by a legitimate sense of duty in making provisions for the welfare of his illegitimate son and by a proper
feeling of gratitude in repaying Rosario Lopez for the sacrifices
she had made for him. Mere affection, even if illegitimate, is not
undue influence and does not invalidate a will.
“For the reasons stated, the decision of the lower court disallowing the will of Federico Gimenez Zoboli is hereby reversed
and it is ordered that the will be admitted to probate.”27

27
See also Sancho vs. Abella, 59 Phil. 728; Hilado vs. Ponce de Leon, CA, 50 Off.
Gaz. 222; Barretto vs. Reyes, 98 Phil. 996 (unrep.)

156

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Allowance and Disallowance of Wills

ART. 839

Idem; Fraud. — Another ground for the disallowance of wills
is if the signature of the testator was procured by fraud.
Fraud is present to invalidate a will if by misrepresentation
and deception the testator is led into making a will different
from what he would have made but for the misrepresentation
and deception.28 Fraud invalidating a will is said to be any trick,
deception, or artifice by which the testator is so circumvented,
cheated, or deceived as to fall into error respecting the disposition
of his property. If the testator, under a belief of the truth of false
and fraudulent statement made to him, is influenced by them, and
makes a will disinheriting one who, but for the testator’s belief in
the truth of such false statements, would have been provided for in
it, the will is the product of fraud and subject to be declared invalid
on that ground. But intent to deceive the decedent is an essential
element of fraud avoiding a will in the absence of any element of
undue influence. Moreover, to invalidate a will it must have affected
the testator in the very act of making his will and at the time the
will was executed.29
Fraud in the sense of deceit is a ground of contest separate
and distinct from that of undue influence. To make a case of undue
influence, the free agency of the testator must be shown to have been
destroyed; but to establish a ground of contest based on fraud, the
free agency of the testator need not be shown to have been destroyed.
It has been observed that fraud and undue influence are usually the
very opposites of each other. Undue influence compels the testator
to yield through fear and make a will which he would instantly
repudiate if free and unconstrained, while fraud, although it may
poison the mind of the testator, leads him to use his testamentary
power not only willingly, but often with pleasure and satisfaction,
to disinherit persons who have the strongest natural claims upon
his affections. Concisely stated, fraud willfully deceives free agency,
while undue influence overmasters it.30
Idem; Mistake. — Another ground for the disallowance of
wills is if the testator acted by mistake or did not intend that the

See definition of fraud as applied to contracts in Art. 1338, Civil Code.
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 371, p. 270.
30
Ibid., Sec. 370, pp. 269-270.
28
29

157

ART. 839

SUCCESSION

instrument he signed should be his will at the time of affixing his
signature thereto.
In American jurisdiction, it is well-settled that mistake which
will invalidate a will is a mistake as to the identity or character of the
instrument which he signed, as well as a mistake as to the contents
of the will itself. These mistakes are generally known as mistakes in
the execution.31 Hence, a will should not be denied probate merely
because the testator was mistaken in his appreciation of the effect of
the language thereof. Mistakes in the expression, as distinguished
from mistakes in the execution, do not invalidate a will. As stated
by one court —”It is against sound public policy to permit a pure
mistake to defeat the duly solemnized and completely competent
testamentary act. It is more important that the probate of wills of
dead people be shielded effectively from the attacks of a multitude
of fictitious mistakes than that it be purged of wills containing a few
real ones. The latter a testator may by due care avoid in his lifetime.
Against the former he would be helpless.’’32
Effect of Disallowance. — A decree in the solemn form
rendered by a court having jurisdiction of a probate proceeding, is
conclusive on the parties equally when the decree rejects the will
and when it grants probate. Where an instrument purporting to be a
will is propounded for probate by an authorized person, and there is
a decree of the probate court, fairly obtained and pronounced on the
merits, excluding the paper from probate, such decree is conclusive
of the rights of the parties represented in the proceeding to propound
the will for probate, either in the same or in another tribunal. Such a
decree stands upon a footing analogous to a judgment in rem.33
Ratification. — Granting that the will should be disallowed
under any of the grounds stated in Art. 839, would it be possible
for the testator, before promulgation of the decree of disallowance,
to ratify the will?, It is submitted that our answer to this question
should be qualified. With respect to a will which is void because of
non-compliance with the formalities prescribed by law, ratification
is not possible. That which is void or inexistent is not susceptible
of ratification. Consequently, the only way by which such will

See Page on Wills, Vol, I, p. 323.
Re Gluckinan, 87 N.J. Eq. 638.
33
57 Am. Jur., Sec. 935, pp. 615-616.
31
32

158

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 840

may be validated would be for the testator to republish the same
in accordance with Art. 835 of the Code. However, with respect to
a will which was executed through violence, intimidation, undue
influence, fraud or mistake, since we cannot exactly say that the
will is void or inexistent, ratification is possible. Thus, in Ozaeta
vs. Cuartero,34 it was held that the testator’s failure to revoke or
otherwise alter the questioned will as soon as he left the house of
the person who is alleged to have unduly influenced him and moved
to his own house where he lived up to five years after execution of
the will, constitutes a silent ratification of its contents and refutes
the claim of undue influence and improper pressure, even supposing
that these circumstances were duly proved.

Section 2. — Institution of Heirs
Art. 840. Institution of heir is an act by virtue of which a testator
designates in his will the person or persons who are to succeed
him in his property and transmissible rights and obligations.1
Concept of Institution of Heirs. — The definition of
institution of heir which is found in Art. 840 of the Code is a literal
translation of Manresa’s definition. According to the eminent
commentator – “La institucion de heredero es al acto en virtud del
cual el estador designa la persona o personas que han de sucederle en
sus derechos, acciones y obligaciones.’’2
The fundamental basis of the law of testamentary succession
is the doctrine that the will of the testator, freely expressed in his
last will and testament, is, as a general rule, the supreme law which
governs the succession. Undoubtedly, in order that such will shall
have any effect, it must be manifested in a manner which is clear
and precise. Consequently, all legislations have always imposed
upon the testator the duty to designate his heirs in such a manner
as to leave no doubt with regard to his intent.3

34

99 Phil. 1041 (unrep.).

New provision.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 106.
3
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 108.
1
2

159

ARTS. 841-842

SUCCESSION

Art. 841. A will shall be valid even though it should not contain
an institution of an heir, or such institution should not comprise
the entire estate, and even though the person so instituted should
not accept the inheritance or should be incapacitated to succeed.
In such cases the testamentary dispositions made in accordance with law shall be complied with and the remainder of the
estate shall pass to the legal heirs.4
Effect of Lack of Institution. — In Roman law, it was considered ignominious to die without an heir. This attitude was of course
a natural consequence of the principle that the heir is by legal fiction
the continuation of the personality of the decedent. Consequently,
the institution of heir was considered an essential part of a will.
This antiquated rule, however, has long been discarded in Spanish
law. Under Art. 764 of the Spanish Civil Code, from which Art. 841
of our Code is derived, the rule is that a will shall be valid although
it may not contain an institution of heir. The same is true in case of
a partial institution or in case of a vacancy in the inheritance due to
repudiation or incapacity. The effect in all of these cases is that the
testamentary dispositions which are made in accordance with law
shall be complied, while the remainder shall pass to the legal heirs
in accordance with the law of intestate succession. In other words,
there is what is known as mixed succession.
Art. 842. One who has no compulsory heirs may dispose by
will all of his estate or any part of it in favor of any person having
capacity to succeed.
One who has compulsory heirs may dispose of his estate
provided he does not contravene the provisions of this Code with
regard to the legitime of said heirs.5
Freedom of Disposition. — Art. 842 of the Code is a general
provision which defines or delineates the testator’s freedom of
disposition depending upon whether or not he has compulsory
heirs.

4
5

Art. 764, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 763, Spanish Civil Code.

160

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 842

It is evident from the first paragraph of the article that if
the testator has no compulsory heirs, his freedom of disposition
is absolute in character. The whole estate is disposable. He can,
therefore, dispose of the whole of his estate or any part of it in favor
of any person, provided that such person has the capacity to succeed.
Thus, in Pecson vs. Coronel,6 the Supreme Court declared:
“The liberty to dispose of one’s estate by will when there
are no forced heirs is rendered sacred by the Civil Code in force
in the Philippines since 1889. It is so provided in the first paragraph of Article 763 (now Art. 842).
“Even ignoring the precedents of this legal precept, the
Code embodying it has been in force in the Philippines for more
than a quarter of a century, and for this reason it is not tenable
to say that the exercise of the liberty thereby granted is necessarily exceptional, where it is not shown that the inhabitants of
this country whose customs must have been taken into consideration by the legislator in adopting this legal precept, are averse
to such a liberty.”

If the testator has compulsory heirs, his freedom of disposition
is not absolute in character. This is so, because under our system
of compulsory succession, there is always a portion of the testator’s
estate known as the legitime which is reserved by operation of law
for the benefit of certain heirs who are therefore called compulsory
heirs,7 and over which the testator as a general rule can have no
testamentary control. The rule may be illustrated by a person who
has a wife and only one legitimate child. According to the law on
legitimes, the legitime of the child is one-half of the entire estate,
that of his surviving spouse is one-fourth, while the remainder is
free or disposable.8 In such a case, it is evident that if he makes a
will, he can dispose of in favor of any person with capacity to succeed
only one-fourth of his entire estate. As a matter of fact, if in addition
to the two above-mentioned compulsory heirs, the testator has one or
more acknowledged natural children, we would have a case in which
nothing would be left of the disposable free portion since according
to the law, the legitime of an acknowledged natural child is equal

45 Phil. 216.
Art . 8 86 , Civ il Co de .
8
Arts. 888, 892, Civil Code.
6
7

161

ARTS. 843-844

SUCCESSION

to one-half of the legitime of a legitimate child.9 In such a case, he
would not be able to dispose of any part of his estate in favor of any
person whom he would desire to succeed from him after his death.
It is, therefore, evident that if the testator has compulsory
heirs, his freedom of disposition shall extend only to the disposable
free portion of his estate, but not to the legal portion or legitime.
According to the law, such legal portion or legitime is reserved
for compulsory heirs. Consequently, the testator as a rule has no
testamentary control over it; neither can he as a rule impair it. This
untouchable character of the legitime is not only deducible from the
second paragraph of Art. 842, but is expressly stated in other articles
of the Code. Thus, according to Art. 904: “The testator cannot deprive
his compulsory heirs of their legitime, except in cases expressly
specified by law. Neither can he impose upon the same any burden,
encumbrance, condition, or substitution of any kind whatsoever.”
The only case in which the testator may, by his own act, deprive
a compulsory heir of his legitime is by means of disinheritance for
causes expressly stated by law,10 while the only case in which the
law recognizes a right of the testator to impose a charge upon the
legitime is when it allows the said testator to prohibit the partition
of the entire estate including the said legitime for a period which
shall not exceed twenty years.11
Art. 843. The testator shall designate the heir by his name and
surname, and when there are two persons having the same names,
he shall indicate some circumstance by which the instituted heir
may be known.
Even though the testator may have omitted the name of the
heir, should he designate him in such manner that there can be
no doubt as to who has been instituted, the institution shall be
valid.12
Art. 844. An error in the name, surname, or circumstances of
the heir shall not vitiate the institution when it is possible, in any
other manner, to know with certainty the person instituted.

Art. 895, Civil Code.
Art. 915, Civil Code.
11
Art. 1083, Civil Code.
12
Art. 772, Spanish Civil Code.
9

10

162

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 845

If among persons having the same names and surnames,
there is a similarity of circumstances in such a way that, even with
the use of other proofs, the person instituted cannot be identified,
none of them shall be an heir.13
Art. 845. Every disposition in favor of an unknown person
shall be void, unless by some event or circumstance his identity
becomes certain. However, a disposition in favor of a definite class
or group of persons shall be valid.14
Form of Institution. — The reason for the precept contained
in the first paragraph of Art. 843 can easily be inferred from the
fact that, under Art. 845 of the Code, dispositions in favor of an
unknown person shall be void, unless by some event or circumstance
his identity becomes certain. Therefore, in order to avoid such
nullity, the law recommends that the designation should be made
in the form indicated in the first paragraph of Art. 843. This form,
however, is not mandatory. The designation may be made in any
other form, so long as there will be no doubt as to the identity of the
heir or heirs instituted.15
Validity of Institution. — The provisions of Arts. 843 and 844
should be applied in relation to the provision of Art. 789 of the Code.
According to the latter article, when there is an imperfect description, or when no person or property exactly answers the description,
mistakes and omissions must be corrected, if the error appears from
the context of the will or from extrinsic evidence, excluding the oral
declarations of the testator as to his intention; and when an uncertainty arises upon the face of the will, as to the application of any of
its provisions, the testator’s intention is to be ascertained from the
words of the will, taking into consideration the circumstances under
which it was made, excluding such oral declarations. From these
provisions it is clear that the proper test in order to determine the
validity of an institution of heir is the possibility of finally ascertaining the identity of the instituted heir either by intrinsic or extrinsic
evidence. This test is specially applicable to the following cases:

Art. 773, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 750, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
15
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 135.
13
14

163

ART. 845

SUCCESSION

(1) If the name and surname of the instituted heir has been
omitted by the testator;16
(2) If there has been an error with respect to the name,
surname, or circumstances of the instituted heirs;17
(3) If the name, surname, and circumstances of the instituted
heir are the same as those of other persons ;18 and
(4)

If an unknown or uncertain person has been instituted.19

Idem; Dispositions in favor of unknown persons. —
Although there is a difference in terminology between Art. 845 and
the preceding article (Arts. 843 and 844) in the sense that, while
the first refers to testamentary dispositions in general, the others
refer merely to institutions of heirs, there is really no logical reason
why any distinction should be made with respect to their scope
or applicability. It is evident that the rules or precepts which are
contained in all of these articles are applicable to designations of
devisees and legatees as well as to institutions of heirs.
An unknown person (persona incierta) is one who is not
determined or individualized and, therefore, cannot be identified.
According to Art. 845, a disposition in favor of such person shall
be void, unless by some event or circumstance his identity becomes
certain. The article, therefore, states not only the general rule, but
also the exception. Thus, if the testator institutes as his heirs “a
group of veterans” or “some members of the bar” or “lovers of art”
— it is evident that the institution shall be void, since there would
be no possibility of ascertaining the identity of the instituted heirs.
But if he institutes as his heir the person who saved his life during
the last battle at Corregidor, or if he devises a certain house and lot
to the present chief or head of a certain labor movement in Manila,
or if he bequeaths his law library to the bar candidate who will top
the first bar examination after his death — the institution, devise or
legacy shall be valid, since it is possible to ascertain the identity of
the designated heir, devisee or legatee either by a past, present or
future event or circumstance.

Art. 843, Civil Code.
Art. 844, Civil Code.
18
Art. 844, Civil Code.
19
Art. 845, Civil Code.
16
17

164

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 846

Notwithstanding the general character of the exception, nevertheless, it may happen that the institution or disposition may not
become effective even if the person instituted may turn out to be a
certain or determinate person. This arises when the testator institutes as his heir any person designated by another person. By this
disposition there is in reality a delegation to another person of the
power to designate the instituted heir, and since this is prohibited
by the provision of Art. 785, it is null and void.20
It is, therefore, clear that before the disposition can be considered
valid, it is indispensable that the identity of the beneficiary can be
ascertained either by a past, present or future event or circumstance.
It must, however, be noted that his requisite is predicated on the
fact that the beneficiary must be in existence at the time of the
testator’s death. Otherwise, even if it would be possible to determine
his identity by some event or circumstance, the disposition would
still be ineffective on the ground of absolute incapacity.21
Idem; Dispositions in favor of definite class. — Dispositions in favor of a definite class or group of persons are of course
valid, although the particular persons comprising the specified class
or group may be unknown. The second sentence of Art. 845 which
recognizes the validity of such dispositions is complemented by the
provisions of Arts. 786 and 1030 of the present Civil Code.
Art. 846. Heirs instituted without designation of shares shall
inherit in equal parts.22
Institutions Without Designation of Shares. — The express or presumed will of the testator is the law which governs the
succession. This principle which pervades the entire law of succession is reflected in the precept which is enunciated in Art. 846. If
several heirs are instituted without designation of shares, the law
presumes that the intention or wish of the testator is that they shall
all inherit in equal shares. This rule, however, should not be interpreted in an absolute manner. On the contrary, it should be limited
only to the case where all of the heirs are of the same class or juridi6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 40.
See Art. 1025, Civil Code.
22
Art. 765, Spanish Civil Code.
20
21

165

ART. 846

SUCCESSION

cal condition, and where there are compulsory heirs among the heirs
instituted, it should be applied only to the disposable free portion.23
These limitations upon the scope of the article are logical,
because if we apply the rule in an absolute manner, the division of the
inheritance in equal shares might actually result in the impairment
of the legitimes of compulsory heirs, a result which would violate
one of the most fundamental principles of testamentary succession.
Such a consequence may be illustrated by a testator who institutes
his legitimate child, his wife and a friend as his heirs without
designating their respective shares. The child and the wife are
compulsory heirs, while the friend is a voluntary heir. To hold that
the inheritance shall be divided into three equal parts in accordance
with the literal tenor of the provision of Art. 846 would result in
the impairment of the legitime of the child which, according to the
law, is one-half of the entire inheritance. Consequently, the only
possible recourse is to satisfy the legitimes which correspond to the
compulsory heirs and then apply the rule stated in Art. 846 with
respect to the disposable free portion, which in the example given
is one-fourth of the entire inheritance. In other words, the proper
interpretation of the rule stated in the article is as follows: If the
testator has no compulsory heirs, apply the provision literally;
however, if he has compulsory heirs, first satisfy their legitime, then
apply the provision with respect to the disposable free portion.
Problem — “A” instituted “B” (his son) and his brothers
“C” and “D” as his heirs to an estate of P600,000. Distribute the
estate. Reasons. (1972 Bar Problem)
Answer — Art. 846 of the Civil Code, which declares that
heirs instituted without designation of shares shall inherit in
equal parts, is applicable. It must be noted, however, that one
of the instituted heirs (“B”) is a compulsory heir while the other
two (“C” and “D”) are voluntary heirs. All commentators in this
country agree that the rule enunciated in Art. 846 is applicable
only to the disposable free portion and not to the legitime of
compulsory heirs. Therefore, the estate of P600,000 of “A” shall
be divided as follows: “B,” being the son of the testator, shall be
given his legitime of 1/2 of the estate, or P300,000. That leaves a
disposable free portion of 1/2 of the estate, or P300,000. It is this
portion which will be divided in equal parts among the three

23

236 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 116-117.

166

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 847

instituted heirs pursuant to Art. 846 of the Civil Code. Thus, the
division will be as follows:
“B”...........................
“C”...........................
“D” ..........................

P 300,000, as compulsory heir
100,000, as voluntary heir
100,000, as voluntary heir
100,000, as voluntary heir
P 600,000

Art. 847. When the testator institutes some heirs individually
and others collectively as when he says, “I designate as my heirs
A and B, and the children of C,” those collectively designated shall
be considered as individually instituted, unless it clearly appears
that the intention of the testator was otherwise.24
Individual and Collective Institutions. — In the absence
of a more specific designation, the law presumes that those who are
collectively designated shall be considered as individually instituted
in accordance with the presumed will of the testator. Thus, if the
testatrix institutes as her universal heirs all of her sisters and
nieces, and after her death, there are several nieces concurring with
several sisters, and some of them are children of sisters who are still
living, it was held that all of such sisters and nieces are considered
as individually instituted.25
The following problem will illustrate the application of the
above article:
Problem — A died in 1980. He left a will which contains
the following institution of heirs: “I designate as my heirs my
son B, my daughter C, the children of my deceased son D, and
my friend X.” D, who died in 1969, is survived by his three legitimate children E, F and G. The net residue of A’s estate is
P180,000. How shall the distribution be made?
Answer — The provisions of Arts. 846 and 847 of the New
Civil Code are applicable to the instant case. Manresa, commenting on Art. 846, maintains that where there are compulsory heirs among the heirs instituted, the rule that the heirs
shall inherit in equal parts should be applied only to the dispos-

24
25

Art. 769, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Nable Jose vs. Uson, 27 Phil. 73.

167

ART. 848

SUCCESSION

able free portion (6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 116-117). Correlating
this with the provision of Art. 847, the distribution of the estate
shall be as follows:
First satisfy the legitime of B, C, E, F, and G. B and C
shall be entitled to P30,000 each, in their own right, while E, F
and G shall be entitled to P10,000 each, by right of representation (Arts. 888, 902, Civil Code). The disposable free portion of
P90,000 will then be divided equally among the instituted heirs
B, C, E, F, G, and X. Therefore, the shares of each will be:
B

–

P30,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir

C

–

P30,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir

E

–

P10,000, by right of representation
15,000, as voluntary heir

F

–

P10,000, by right of representation
15,000, as voluntary heir

G

–

P10,000, by right of representation
15,000, as voluntary heir

X

–

P15,000, as voluntary heir
180,000

Art. 848. If the testator should institute his brothers and sisters, and he has some of full blood and others of half blood, the
inheritance shall be distributed equally, unless a different intention appears.26
Institution of Brothers and Sisters. — Under Art. 770 of
the old Civil Code, each of the brothers and sisters of the full blood
were given twice as much as each of those of the half blood, while
under Art. 848 of the present Civil Code, there is no discrimination
whatsoever. In case of intestate succession, however, should
brothers and sisters of the full blood survive together with brothers
and sisters of the half blood, the former shall be entitled to a share
double that of the latter.27

26
27

Art. 770, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 1006, Civil Code.

168

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ARTS. 849-850

Art. 849. When the testator calls to the succession a person
and his children, they are all deemed to have been instituted simultaneously and not successively.28
Institution of a Person and His Children. — Whenever
the testator institutes as his heirs a certain person and his children,
such institution must be interpreted to mean that they are all called
to the succession simultaneously and not successively. Thus, ,if the
testator institutes “A” and his five children as his heirs with respect
to the disposable free portion of the inheritance, it is clear that such
disposable portion shall be divided equally among “A” and the five
children.
Art. 850. The statement of a false cause for the institution of
an heir shall be considered as not written, unless it appears from
the will that the testator would not have made such institution if he
had known the falsity of such cause.29
Institution Based on a False Cause. — If in the will there
is statement of a false cause for the institution of an heir, such
statement shall be considered as not written, unless it appears from
the will that the testator would not have instituted such heir if he
had known of the falsity of such cause. Consequently, if the validity
of an institution of heir is attacked on the ground that it is based on
a false cause, it is clear that the test which must be applied in order
to resolve the question is to determine from the will itself whether or
not the testator would not have made the institution had he known
of the falsity of such cause.
Before the institution of heirs may be annulled under Art. 850
of the Civil Code, the following requisites must concur: First, the
cause for the institution of heirs must be stated in the will; second,
the cause must be shown to be false; and third, it must appear from
the face of the will that the testator would not have made such
institution if he had known of the falsity of the cause. Consequently,
where the testator’s will does not state in a specific or unequivocal
manner the cause for such institution, the annulment of such
institution cannot be availed of.30
Art. 771, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 767, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
30
Austria vs. Reyes, 31 SCRA 754.
28
29

169

ART. 851-853

SUCCESSION

Art. 851. If the testator has instituted only one heir, and the
institution is limited to an aliquot part of the inheritance, legal succession takes place with respect to the remainder of the estate.
The same rule applies, if the testator has instituted several
heirs each being limited to an aliquot part, and all the parts do not
cover the whole inheritance.31
Art. 852. If it was the intention of the testator that the instituted
heirs should become sole heirs to the whole estate, or the whole
free portions, as the case may be, and each of them has been instituted to an aliquot part of the inheritance and their aliquot parts
together do not cover the whole inheritance, or the whole free portion, each part shall be increased proportionally.32
Art. 853. If each of the instituted heirs has been given an aliquot part of the inheritance, and the parts together exceed the
whole inheritance, or the whole free portion, as the case may be,
each part shall be reduced proportionally.33
Institutions in Aliquot Parts. — Arts. 851 and 852 refer
to those institutions where the testator has instituted one or more
persons as heirs to inherit in aliquot parts, but such parts are not
sufficient to cover the entire inheritance, or the entire free portion
while Art. 853 refers to those institutions where the testator has
instituted several persons as heirs to inherit in aliquot parts, but
such parts taken together exceed the entire inheritance, or the
entire free portion, as the case may be.
Idem; Rule if entire inheritance not covered. — According
to the first paragraph of Art. 851, if the testator has instituted only
one heir, and the institution is limited to an aliquot part, legal
succession takes place with respect to the remainder of the estate.
There will, therefore, be what is known as a mixed succession. Thus,
if the testator institutes A to 1/2 of the inheritance and there are
no other heirs instituted, A shall receive 1/2 of the estate upon the

New provision.
New provision.
33
New provision.
31
32

170

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 853

death of the testator, while the other half shall pass to the legal
heirs.
The same rule also applies if the testator has instituted several
heirs each being limited to an aliquot part. Thus, if the testator
institutes A to 2/5 of the inheritance, B to 1/5, and C to 1/5, there
will still be a remainder of 1/5 which shall pass to the legal heirs.
The rule, however, is different if it was the intention of the
testator that the instituted heirs should become sole heirs of the entire
estate, or the whole free portion, as the case may be. In such case,
according to Art. 852, each part shall be increased proportionally.
It is, therefore, evident that the rule stated in Art. 852 constitutes
an exception to the rule stated in the second paragraph of Art. 851.
It enunciates the principle that when there is a conflict between
the intention of the testator and his mathematical computation, the
former shall prevail. The following problem will serve to illustrate
the rule:
Problem — The testator institutes A to 1/3 of the entire
inheritance, B to 1/4, and C to 1/4, with the intention that all of
them shall become the sole heirs of the whole estate. The net remainder of the estate after the death of the testator is P120,000.
How much is the share of each of the instituted heirs?
Solution — Before we can compute the share of each of
the instituted heirs, each aliquot part to which each heir was
instituted shall have to be increased proportionately. According
to the institution, A shall receive 1/3 of P120,000, or P40,000, B,
1/4 of P120,000, or P30,000, and C, 1/4 of P120,000, or P30,000,
the aggregate amount of which is P100,000, which is less by
P20,000 than the aggregate amount available for distribution. It
is this amount of P20,000 which shall be distributed proportionately among the three heirs. The method which is used may be:
Arithmetical: Since the proportion in which A, B, and C
had been instituted is 4:3:3, respectively, therefore, A shall be
entitled to an additional 4/10 of P20,000 or P8,000, B to an additional 3/10 of P20,000, or P6,000, and C to an additional 3/10
of P20,000, or P6,000. Thus, A shall be entitled to a total amount
of P48,000, B, to a total amount of P36,000, and C, to a total
amount of P36,000.
Algebraic: The formula may be stated as follows: The increased share of an heir is equal to the aggregate amount avail-

171

ART. 853

SUCCESSION

able for distribution multiplied by the amount of the share of
the heir given by the testator divided by the aggregate amount
given to all. Thus —
P120,000 x P40,000
Share of A =
= P48,000
P100,000
Share of B =

Share of C =

P120,000 x P30,000
P100,000
P120,000 x P30,000
P100,000

=

P36,000

=

P36,000

Idem; Rule if more than inheritance covered. — If the
aliquot parts are in excess of the entire inheritance, or the free portion,
as the case may be, each part shall be reduced proportionately. The
following problem will serve to illustrate this rule:
Problem — The testator institutes as his universal heirs
A, B, C, and D. According to the institution, A shall inherit 1/2
of the entire inheritance, B, 1/3, C, 1/4, and D, 1/6. The net remainder of the entire inheritance after the death of the testator
is P120,000. How much is the share of each of the instituted
heirs?
Solution — Before we can compute the share of each of
the instituted heirs, each aliquot part to which each heir was
instituted shall have to be decreased proportionately. According
to the institution, A shall receive 1/2 of P120,000, or P60,000, B,
1/3 of P120,000, or P40,000, C, 1/4 of P120,000, or P20,000, and
D, 1/6 of P120,000, or P20,000, the aggregate amount of which is
P150,000, which is more by P30,000 than the aggregate amount,
available for distribution.
Arithmetical — Since the proportion in which the four
heirs had been instituted is 6:4:3:2, therefore, A’s share of
P60,000 shall be reduced by 6/15 of P30,000, or P12,000; B’s
share of P40,000 shall be reduced by 4/15 of P30,000, or P8,000;
C’s share of P30,000, or shall be reduced by 3/15 of P30,000, or
P6,000; and D’s share of P20,000 shall be reduced by 2/15 of
P30,000, or P4,000. Thus, A shall be entitled to only P48,000, B,
to only P32,000, C, to only P24,000, and D, to only P16,000. The
total amount will, therefore, be P120,000.
Algebraic — Using the same formula stated above the inheritance shall be distributed as follows:

172

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

Share of A =

P120,000 x P60,000

ART. 854

=

P48,000

=

P32,000

=

P24,000

=

P16,000

P150,000
Share of B =

P120,000 x P40,000
P150,000

Share of C =

P120,000 x P30,000
P150,000

Share of D =

P120,000 x P20,000
P150,000

Art. 854. The preterition or omission of one, some, or all of
the compulsory heirs in the direct line, whether living at the time
of the execution of the will or born after the death of the testator,
shall annul the institution of heir; but the devises and legacies
shall be valid insofar as they are not inofficious.
If the omitted compulsory heirs should die before the testator,
the institution shall be effectual, without prejudice to the right of
representation.34
Preterition of Heirs. — Preterition or pretermission of heirs
may be defined as the omission in the testator’s will of one, some
or all of the compulsory heirs in the direct line, whether living at
the time of the execution of the will or born after the death of the
testator. Stated in another way, it consists in the omission in the
testator’s will of the compulsory heirs in the direct line, or of anyone
or some of them, either because they are not mentioned therein, or
though mentioned they are neither instituted as heirs nor expressly
disinherited.35 Hence, the omission may be voluntary or involuntary,
intentional or unintentional, although, as the Supreme Court once
stated, “preterition, generally speaking, is due merely to mistake or
inadvertence.’’36
Preterition must not be confused with disinheritance. The
latter refers to the deprivation of a compulsory heir of his legitime

Art. 814, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 424; 14 Scaevola, 360-361.
36
Neri vs. Akutin, 72 Phil. 322; Nuguid vs. Nuguid, G.R. No. L-23445, June 23, 1966,
17 SCRA 449; Aznar vs. Duncan, G.R. L-24365, June 30, 1966, 17 SCRA 590.
34
35

173

ART. 854

SUCCESSION

for causes expressly stated by law.37 The essential difference between
the two consists in the fact that in the former the deprivation of a
compulsory heir of his legitime is tacit or implied, while in the latter
the deprivation is express.38
Requisites of Preterition. — In order that there will be a
preterition as contemplated in Art. 854 of the Code, the following
requisites must appear:
(1) The heir omitted must be a compulsory heir in the
direct line;
(2) The omission must be complete and total in character
in such a way that the omitted heir does not and has not received
anything at all from the testator by any title whatsoever; and
(3) The compulsory heir omitted should survive the
testator.
Idem; Character of omitted heir. — The first and most evident requisite of preterition is that the heir omitted must be a compulsory heir in the direct line. The interpretation that should be
given to the phrase compulsory heirs in the direct line has been the
subject of discussion among Spanish commentators since the Spanish Code was promulgated in 1889. The question is whether “compulsory heirs in the direct line” as contemplated by Art. 854 should
include members of the illegitimate family or not. More specifically,
as applied to our Code, shall the preterition of an acknowledged
natural child, or a natural child by legal fiction, or an acknowledged
illegitimate child who is not natural also result in the total annulment of the institution of heir as in the case of the preterition of a
legitimate child? Spanish authorities are divided in their answers to
this question.
According to some commentators, the preterition contemplated
by Art. 814 (now Art. 854) is limited only to the omission of legitimate descendants or ascendants in the testator’s will on the ground
that it is only these heirs who are entitled as a matter of right to
their legitime, while illegitimate children are entitled only as a matter of grace since their legitime must always be satisfied from the
free portion; consequently, if an acknowledged natural child for in-

37
38

Art. 915, Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., 424.

174

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 854

stance is omitted in the testator’s will, the only effect is to annul the
institution of heir to the extent that his legitime is prejudiced.39
Other commentators, on the other hand, believe that since Art.
814 (now Art. 854) does not make any qualification or distinction
whatsoever, it is immaterial whether the heir omitted in the testator’s
will is legitimate or illegitimate provided that he is a compulsory heir
in the direct line; consequently, the preterition of an acknowledged
natural child shall result in the total annulment of the institution
of heir.40 We believe that this view, which is supported by the great
majority of Spanish Commentators, is more sound. As a matter of
fact, this was the view which was applied by the Supreme Court in
Lajom vs. Leuterio,41 a case which was decided in 1960.
Hence, compulsory heirs in the direct line are: (a) legitimate
children and descendants, with respect to their legitimate parents
and ascendants; (b) legitimate parents and ascendants, with respect
to their legitimate children and descendants; (c) acknowledged
natural children, and natural children by legal fiction; (d) other
illegitimate children referred to in Article 287 (under the Family
Code, (c) and (d) are all classified as illegitimate children); and (e)
the father or mother of illegitimate children of the three classes
mentioned.42 It must be observed that the surviving spouse is not
included. This is rather regrettable considering the fact that under
the present Civil Code, the surviving spouse has been raised to the
same category as the other compulsory heirs. Under the Spanish
Civil Code, the preterition of the widower or widow does not annul
the institution of heir; nevertheless, he or she retains his or her
usufructuary rights as provided by law.43 Although there is no
provision in the present Code regarding the effect of the preterition
of the widower or widow, it is clear that it shall likewise result in
the annulment of the institution of heir to the extent that his or her
legitimate is prejudiced.
Problem — X died leaving a will wherein he instituted as
his heirs his three daughters, A, B and C without designating
their shares. His widow, W, is omitted without being disinherSee 14 Scaevola, 361-363.
See 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 425; 6 Sanchez Roman 1136-1137.
41
107 Phil. 651. But see Escuin vs. Escuin, 11 Phil. 322.
42
See Art. 887, Civil Code.
43
Art. 814, par. 2, Civil Code.
39
40

175

ART. 854

SUCCESSION

ited. In the will, X also bequeathed a legacy of P20,000 to A.
The net value of his estate is P240,000. How shall such estate
be distributed?
Answer — It must be observed that the omission of W in
X’s will does not constitute preterition within the meaning of
Art. 854 of the Civil Code. The reason is obvious. She is not a
compulsory heir in the direct line. Therefore, the only effect of
her omission is a partial annulment of the institution of heirs to
the extent that her legitime is prejudiced; in other words, she
is still entitled to her legitime. Thus, the legitime of A, B and C
is 1/2 of the entire estate of P240,000, or P120,000, or P40,000
each, while the legitime of W is the same as that of each of the
legitimate children, or P40,000 also. Consequently, the disposable free portion is P80,000. It is clear that the legacy of P20,000
given to A is not inofficious because it can easily be contained
in said disposable free portion. Therefore, it must be paid to her
thus leaving a balance of P60,000. This balance shall then be
divided equally among A, B and C in accordance with the testator’s will. The distribution shall, therefore, be as follows:
A .................................

P40,000, as compulsory heir
20,000, as voluntary heir
20,000, as legatee

B ................................

P 40,000, as compulsory heir
20,000, as voluntary heir

C ................................

P 40,000, as compulsory heir
20,000, as voluntary heir

W ...............................

P 40,000, as compulsory heir

How about an adopted child. — Will the omission of such
child in the testator’s will have the effect of totally annulling the
institution of heirs in accordance with Art. 854? Our answer to this
question depends upon whether an adopted child can be considered
a compulsory heir in the direct line or not. It is submitted that an
adopted child is by legal fiction considered a compulsory heir in the
direct line. This is clear from the provisions of Arts. 979 and 984
which speak of the share of the adopted child in legal or intestate
succession. These provisions fall under the subsection of Descending
Direct Line. So, from the viewpoint of statutory construction, an
adopted child is considered a member of the direct descending
line and, therefore, must be classified as a compulsory heir in the
direct line. Besides, since an adopted child is by law given all of the
successional rights of a legitimate child, it is but logical that all of
176

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 854

the protection given or afforded by the law in order to protect such
rights must also be applied to the case of an adopted child. If the
purpose of the law on preterition is to protect a compulsory heir in
the direct line from the neglect of the testator, with equal, if not
with more, reason should such purpose be applied to the adopted
child. Furthermore, if we look at the effects of preterition as a right,
although negative in character, there seems to be no reason why
such a right should not also be given to an adopted child.
Idem; Character of omission. — Before there can be any
preterition, it is also essential that the omission of the compulsory
heir must be complete and total in character so that he receives
nothing from the testator at all. Consequently, if the testator leaves
any property to the heir who is alleged to have been omitted by any
title whatsoever, there can be no preterition. This is true even when
he leaves to such compulsory heir a share which is less than his
legitime. In such case, Art. 906 of the Code applies; he can ask for
the completion of his legitime.
Aznar vs. Duncan
17 SCRA 590
Edward Chrisensen, a citizen of California with domicile
in the Philippines, died leaving a will executed on March 5,
1951, wherein he declared that he has no living descendant or
ascendant except a natural daughter Lucy Duncan; that he is
leaving the residue of his estate to said Lucy Duncan; and that
he is bequeathing the amount of P3,600.00 to Helen Garcia to
whom he is not related in any way. The will was admitted to
probate on February 28, 1954. In the decision allowing the will
the court declared that Helen Garcia was a natural child of the
deceased. Subsequently, on October 29, 1964, in the partition
proceedings, an order was issued approving a project of partition wherein the estate was divided equally between Lucy Duncan, whom the testator had expressly recognized in his will as
his natural daughter, and Helen Garcia, who had been judicially
declared as such after his death. The said order was based on
the proposition that Helen Garcia had been preterited in the
will thus resulting in the annulment of the institution of Lucy
Duncan as heir; hence the estate passed to both of them as if
the deceased had died intestate. Lucy Duncan appealed on the
sole question of whether the estate, after deducting the legacies, should pertain to her and to Helen Garcia in equal shares,
or whether the inheritance of Lucy Duncan as instituted heirs
should be merely reduced to the extent necessary to cover the

177

ART. 854

SUCCESSION

legitime of Helen Garcia to 1/4 of the entire estate. She contends
that the case should be governed by Art. 906 of the Civil Code.
Helen Garcia, on the other hand, contends that the case should
be governed by Art. 854 of the Civil Code. Speaking through
Justice Makalintal, the Supreme Court held:
“Appellant contends that this is not a case of preterition,
but is governed by Article 906 of the Civil Code, which says: ‘Any
compulsory heir to whom the testator has left by any title less
than the legitime belonging to him may demand that the same
be fully satisfied.’ The question may be posed: In order that the
right of a forced heir may be limited only to the completion of
his legitime (instead of the annulment of the institution of heirs)
is it necessary that what has been left to him in the will by any
title as by legacy, be granted to him in his capacity as heir, that
is, titulo heredero? In other words, should he be recognized or
referred to in the will as heir? This question is pertinent because
in the will of the deceased Edward Chrisensen, Helen Garcia
is not mentioned as heir — indeed her status as such is denied
— but she is given a legacy of P3,600.00.
“While the classical view, pursuant to the Roman law, give
an affirmative answer to the question, according to both Manresa (6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 436) and Sanchez Roman (Tomo VI,
p. 937), that view was changed by Article 645 of the Proyecto de
Codigo Civil de 1851 later on copied in Article 906 of our Code.
Manresa cites particularly three decisions of the Supreme Court
of Spain dated January 16, 1895, May 25, 1917, and April 23,
1932, respectively. In each one of these cases, the testator left
to one who was a forced heir a legacy less than the legitime, but
without referring to the legatee as an heir or even as a relative,
and willed the rest of the estate to other persons. It was held
that Article 815 (now Art. 906) applied, and the heir could not
ask that the institution of heirs be annulled entirely, but only
that the legitime be completed. (Manresa, pp. 438, 441.)
“The foregoing solution is indeed more in consonance with
the expressed wishes of the testator in the present case as may
be gathered very clearly from the provisions of his will. He refused to acknowledge Helen Garcia as his natural daughter, and
limited her share to a legacy of P3,600.00. The fact that she
was subsequently declared judicially to possess such status is
no reason to assume that had the judicial declaration come during his lifetime his subjective attitude towards her would have
undergone any change and that he would have willed her estate
equally to her and to Lucy Duncan, who alone was expressly
recognized by him.

178

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 854

“Wherefore, the order of the trial court x x x is hereby set
aside; and the case is remanded with instructions to partition
the hereditary estate anew as indicated in this decision, that is,
by giving to oppositor-appellee Helen Garcia no more than the
portion corresponding to her as her legitime, equivalent to onefourth of the hereditary estate.”
Problem — A has two compulsory heirs in the direct line
— B, a legitimate child, and C, an acknowledged natural child.
During his lifetime, A donated a parcel of land, worth P10,000,
to C. Before his death, he executed a will wherein he instituted
as sole heir B, omitting C altogether. The net residue or remainder of his estate is P50,000. Shall the omission of C in the will
result in the annulment of the institution of B in accordance
with the provisions of Art. 854?
Answer — It is submitted that in this case there is no preterition within the meaning of Art. 854 of the Civil Code. It is
true that there is a total omission of the acknowledged natural
child in the testator’s will, and apparently the rule regarding
preterition should, therefore, be applied. But then, we must consider the fact that a donation inter vivos is actually given to a
compulsory heir as an advance on his inheritance. That is why
in the partition of the estate of the donor upon the death of the
latter, it must be collated and subsequently, it must be charged
against the legitime of such compulsory heir. Consequently,
there is no omission in this case which is complete and total in
character. Hence, if there is an impairment of the legitime of
the acknowledged natural child because the value of the property donated is less than the legitime to which he is entitled by
operation of law, his remedy lies in the right granted in Art. 906
of the Civil Code. He can ask for the completion of his legitime.
In the words of Manresa — “If Art. 906 is not applicable in such
case, we do not know what article applies.’’44 Thus, in the above

44
See 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 424-245. Actually, this problem is rather controversial. The majority of Spanish commentators believe that there is no preterition.
But in a case decided by the Supremo Tribunal of Spain, where the testator instituted
his wife as sole heir, omitting his acknowledged natural child altogether, although during
his lifetime, he had made some donations to such child, it was held that there is a preterition within the meaning of Art. 854. Sentencia of June 17, 1908. In two cases, Escuin
vs. Escuin, 11 Phil. 332, and Eleazar vs. Eleazar, 67 Phil. 497, the Supreme Court
ruled that the effect of the omission of a compulsory heir in the direct line is to annul
the institution of heirs insofar as the omitted heir’s legitime is affected. This doctrine,
however, must be deemed to have been superseded by that promulgated by the same
Court in Neri vs. Akutin, 72 Phil. 322, Lajom vs. Leuterio; 107 Phil. 651; and Nuguid
vs. Nuguid, G.R. No. L-23445, June 23, 1966, 17 SCRA 449.

179

ART. 854

SUCCESSION

problem, after collating the P10,000 donation inter vivos given
to C to the net value of the estate of A it is clear that the legitime
of B is P30,000, while the legitime of C is P15,000 (Arts. 888,
895, New Civil Code). Consequently, C can still demand for an
additional P5,000 in order to complete his legitime. The balance
of the estate shall be given to B.

Idem: Survival of omitted heir. — It is also an essential
condition that the compulsory heir who is omitted in the testator’s
will should survive the testator.
What will happen if the omitted compulsory heir dies before
the testator? In such case, according to the second paragraph of Art.
854, the institution shall be effectual, but without prejudice to the
right of representation when it properly takes place. Hence, when
there is a surviving representative of the deceased compulsory heir
who has been omitted in the testator’s will, such as a child, the effect
is that such child shall succeed to the legitime which would have
gone to the heir omitted.
Effects of Preterition. — According to Art. 854, the preterition of a compulsory heir in the direct line shall have the effect of
annulling the institution of heir, but the devises and legacies shall
be valid insofar as they are not inofficious.
Neri vs. Akutin
72 Phil. 322
This is a case where the testator in his will left all his
property by universal title to the children by his second marriage, the herein respondents, with preterition of the children by
his first marriage. The Supreme Court annulled the institution
of heirs and declared a total intestacy. A motion for reconsideration was subsequently filed by the respondents on the ground,
among others, that even assuming that there has been a preterition, the effect would not be the annulment of the institution
of heirs, but simply the reduction of the bequest made to them.
Denying the motion for reconsideration, the Supreme Court,
speaking through Justice Moran, held:
“The following example will make the question clearer:
The testator has two legitimate sons, A and B, and in the will
he leaves all his property to A, with total preterition of B. Upon
these facts, shall we annul entirely the institution of heir in favor of A and declare a total intestacy or shall we merely refuse

180

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 854

the bequest left to A, giving him two-thirds of betterments, plus
one-half of the other third as strict legitime, and awarding B
only the remaining one-half of the strict legitime? If we do the
first, we apply Article 814 (now Art. 854); if the second, we apply
Article 851 or 817 (now Art. 918 or 907). But Article 851 (now
Art. 918) applies only in cases of unfounded disinheritance and
all are agreed that the present case is not one of disinheritance
but of preterition. Article 817 (now Art. 907) is merely a general
rule inapplicable to specific cases provided by law, such as that
of preterition or disinheritance.
“Manresa says that in case of preterition (Art. 814, now
Art. 854), the nullity of the institution of heirs is total, whereas,
in case of disinheritance (Art. 851, now Art. 918), the nullity
is partial, that is, in so far as the institution affects the legitime of the disinherited heirs. He further makes it clear that in
cases of preterition, the property bequeathed by universal title
to the instituted heirs should not be merely reduced according to
Art. 817 (now Art. 907), but instead, intestate succession should
be opened in connection therewith under Article 814 (now Art.
854). Sanchez Roman is of the same opinion.
“Of course, the annulment of the institution of heirs in
cases of preterition does not always carry with it the ineffectiveness of the whole will. Neither Manresa nor Sanchez Roman
nor this Court has ever said so. If, aside from the institution of
heirs, there are in the will provisions leaving to the heirs so instituted or to other persons some specific properties in the form
of legacies, such testamentary provisions shall be effective and
the legacies and mejoras shall be respected in so far as they are
not inofficious or excessive, according to Article 814 (now Art.
854). In the instant case, however, no legacies or mejoras are
provided in the will, the whole property of the deceased having
been left by universal title to the children of the second marriage. The effect, therefore, of annulling the institution of heirs
will be necessarily the opening of a total intestacy.
“It is clear, therefore, that Article 814 (now Art. 354) refers to two different things which are two different objects of its
two different provisions. One of these objects cannot be made to
merge in the other without mutilating the whole article with all
its multifarious connections with a great number of provisions
spread throughout the Civil Code on the matter of succession. It
should be borne in mind, further, that although Article 814 (now
Art. 854) contains two different provisions, its special purpose
is to establish a specific rule concerning a specific testamentary
provision, namely, the institution of heirs in a case of preter-

181

ART. 854

SUCCESSION

ition. Its other provisions regarding the validity of legacies and
betterment if not inofficious is a mere reiteration of the general
rule contained in other provision (Arts. 815 and 817, now Arts.
906 and 907), and signifies merely that it also applies in cases
of preterition. As regards testamentary dispositions in general,
the general rule is that all ‘testamentary dispositions which diminish the legitime of the forced heirs shall be reduced on petition of the same in so far as they are inofficious or excessive.’
(Art. 817, now Art. 907). But this general rule does not apply to
the specific instance of a testamentary disposition containing
an institution of heirs in a case of preterition which is made the
main and specific subject of Article 814 (now Art. 854). In such
instances, according to Article 814 (now Art. 854), the testamentary disposition containing the institution of heirs should not
only be reduced but annulled in its entirety and all the forced
heirs, including the omitted ones, are entitled to inherit in accordance with the law of intestate succession.”
Nuguid vs. Nuguid
17 SCRA 449
Rosario Nuguid died in 1962, single, without descendants,
legitimate or illegitimate. Surviving her were her legitimate
parents and six brothers and sisters. She left a holographic
will containing only one testamentary disposition by virtue of
which she left all of her properties to a sister, Remedios Nuguid,
omitting her parents entirely. When the will was presented for
probate by Remedios, the latter registered their opposition and
subsequently moved to dismiss the petition. The probate court
granted the motion holding that the will is a complete nullity
and will perforce create total intestacy. A motion to reconsider
having been denied, Remedios appealed to the Supreme Court.
The Court, speaking through Justice Sanchez, held:
“Right at the outset, a procedural aspect has engaged our
attention. The case is for the probate of a will. The court’s area
of inquiry is limited — to an examination of, and resolution on,
the extrinsic validity of the will. Said court at this stage of the
proceedings is not called upon to rule on the intrinsic validity of
the provisions of the will.
“A peculiar situation is here thrust upon us. The parties
shunted aside the question of whether or not the will should be
allowed probate. For them, the meat of the case is the intrinsic
validity of the will. Is the will intrinsically a nullity? We pause
to reflect. If the case were to be remanded for probate of the will,

182

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 854

nothing will be gained. The litigation will be protracted. In the
event of probate or if the court rejects the will, probability exists
that the case will come up again before us on the same issue of
the intrinsic validity of nullity of the will. Result: waste of time,
effort, expense, plus added anxiety. These are the considerations
that induce us to a belief that we might as well meet head-on the
issue of the validity of the provisions of the will in question.
“The deceased left no descendants, legitimate or illegitimate. But she left forced heirs in the direct ascending line — her
parents, now oppositors. And the will completely omits both of
them. They thus received nothing by the testament; tacitly, they
were deprived of their legitime; neither were they expressly disinherited. This is a clear case of preterition. Such preterition in
the words of Manresa anulara siempre la institucion de heredero, dando caracter absoluto a este ordinamiento, referring to the
mandate of Article 814, now 854 of the Civil Code (6 Manresa,
7th Ed., 424). The one-sentence will here institutes petitioner
as the sole universal heir — nothing more. No specific legacies
or bequests are therein provided. It is in this posture that we
say that the nullity is complete. Article 854 offers no leaving for
inferential interpretation. Giving it an expansive meaning will
tear up by the roots the fabric of the statute.
“We should not be led astray by the statement in Article
854 that, annulment notwithstanding, the devises and legacies
shall be valid insofar as they are not inofficious. Legacies and
devises merit consideration only when they are so expressly
given as such in a will. Nothing in Article 854 suggests that the
mere institution of a universal heir in a will — void because of
preterition — would give the heir so instituted a share in the
inheritance. As to him the will is inexistent. There must be, in
addition to such institution, a testamentary disposition granting him bequests or legacies apart and separate from the nullified institution of heir. As aforesaid, there is no other provision in the will before us except the institution of petitioner as
universal heir. That institution, by itself, is null and void. And,
intestate succession ensues.”
Problem — Jandon is twice a widower. He has three children by his first marriage, and two children by his second marriage. In his will, Jandon institutes as his exclusive heirs the
children of his second marriage. What is the effect on the will of
the preterition of Jandon’s children by the first marriage? Upon
Jandon’s death, how will the hereditary estate be divided? (1974
Bar Problem)

183

ARTS. 855-856

SUCCESSION

Answer — The preterition of Jandon’s children by the first
marriage in his will shall annul entirely the institution of heirs
as ordained by Art. 854 of the Civil Code. All of the three requisites of preterition or pretermission are present. The omitted
heirs are compulsory heirs in the direct line; the omission is total and complete; and the omitted heirs have survived the testator. Assuming then that there are no legacies and devises in
Jandon’s will and that the only testamentary disposition thereof
is the institution of the children of the second marriage, since
such institution is void, the will itself, as far as the distribution
of the hereditary estate is concerned, becomes useless. Total intestacy results. (Nuguid v. Nuguid, 17 SCRA 449).
The estate, therefore, shall be divided among the three
children of the first marriage and the two children of the second
marriage in accordance with the rules of intestate succession.
Each of the five shall be entitled to one-fifth (1/5) of the entire
(Art. 980, Civil Code).

Art. 855. The share of a child or descendant omitted in a
will must first be taken from the part of the estate not disposed
of by the will, if any; if that is not sufficient, so much as may be
necessary must be taken proportionally from the shares of the
other compulsory heirs.
Article Applied. — The above article is out of place. It should
be returned to where it belongs — as a continuation of Art. 1104 of
the Civil Code.
Essentially, there is a great difference between the effects of
the preterition of a compulsory heir in the direct line in the testator’s
will and the effects of the preterition of a compulsory heir in the
partition of the testator’s estate. In the former, if the testamentary
dispositions in the testator’s will consist entirely of institutions of
heirs, the effect of preterition as contemplated in Art. 854 of the
Civil Code would be total intestacy. If there are legacies and devises,
only those which are inofficious will be reduced. In either case, the
above article cannot be applied.
Art. 856. A voluntary heir who dies before the testator transmits nothing to his heirs.
A compulsory heir who dies before the testator, a person
incapacitated to succeed, and one who renounces the inheritance,
184

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Institution of Heirs

ART. 856

shall transmit no right to his own heirs except in cases expressly
provided for in this Code.45
Effect of Predecease. — Under the law of testamentary succession, the general rule is that an heir who dies before the testator shall transmit no right to his own heirs. A distinction, however,
must be made between the case of a voluntary heir and the case of
a compulsory heir.
The rule is absolute with respect to a voluntary heir. It must
be remembered that a voluntary heir is an heir who is called to the
whole or to an aliquot part of the free portion of the inheritance by
virtue of a will.46 Since the right of representation, by virtue of which
the representative is raised to the place and the degree of the person
represented in case of either predecease or incapacity of the latter,47
is a right which pertains only to the legitime of compulsory heirs, it
necessarily follows that when a person who has been instituted as
a voluntary heir dies before the testator, he can transmit no right
whatsoever to his own heirs. The same is true in case a person has
been designated as a devisee or a legatee with respect to a determinate
property. Since a devise or legacy is a charge upon the free portion
of the inheritance, it necessarily follows that when the designated
devisee or legatee dies before the testator, no right whatsoever is
transmitted to the heirs of such devisee or legatee.48
It is different in the case of a compulsory heir. This is evident
from the provision of the second paragraph of Art. 856. The
exception referred to is of course the right of representation. It must
be noted, however, that what is transmitted to the representatives
of the compulsory heir is his right to the legitime and not to the
free portion in case he has also been instituted by the testator
to the whole or to an aliquot part of such free portion. This is so,
because of the principle that, in testamentary succession, the right
of representation pertains only to the legitime and not to the free
portion.

Art. 766, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
See comments under Art. 782, Civil Code.
47
Art. 970, Civil Code.
48
See Cuison vs. Villanueva, 90 Phil. 850.
45
46

185

ART. 856

SUCCESSION

The above rules may be illustrated by the following problems:
Problem No. 1 — A, a very wealthy man, executed a will
wherein he instituted as his only heirs his three brothers, B, C
and D without designating their shares. Before A died, both C
and D were killed in a vehicular accident. C is survived by a son,
E, while D is survived by two daughters, F and G. A died two
days later without changing his will, survived only by B and the
children of C and D. The net value of his estate is P6,000,000.
How shall such estate be divided?
Answer — B alone is entitled to the entire estate. It must
be noted that both C and D are voluntary heirs; they are not
compulsory heirs. Consequently, they cannot transmit any right
to their own heirs (Art. 856, Civil Code). In other words, their
children cannot inherit from the testator by right of representation. It would have been different had A died intestate. In such
a case, the children of C and D would then represent them in
the succession (Arts. 972, 975, Civil Code). As it is, since A died
testate and since both of the requisites prescribed by law for
accretion to take place in testamentary succession are present,
the shares of C and D, which were rendered vacant by reason of
predecense, shall now pass to their co-heir B by right of accretion. (Arts. 1015, et seq., Civil Code).
Problem No. 2 — In his will, widower Kano instituted his
only child Luis and a friend Mario as his heirs. Mario died ahead
of Kano. If Kano dies without changing his will, would the children of Mario step into the shoes of their father and inherit from
Kano? (1974 Bar Problem)
Answer — The children of Mario cannot step into the shoes
of their father and inherit from Kano; in other words, they cannot inherit from Kano by right of representation.
The following reasons are decisive:
(a) In testamentary succession, only a compulsory heir
may be represented. Mario is not a compulsory heir; he is merely a voluntary heir whose share is chargeable against the free
portion. Under the law, a voluntary heir who dies before the
testator transmits nothing to his heirs (Art. 856, Civil Code).
(b) The above case is one involving accretion and not representation. It must be observed that had Mario survived the
testator, Luis would have been entitled to his legitime of onehalf (1/2) of the hereditary estate in his capacity as compulsory

186

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 856

heir and one-half (1/2) of the one-half (1/2) disposable free portion in his capacity as voluntary heir; Mario, on the other hand,
would have been entitled also to one-half (1/2) of the one-half
(1/2) disposable free portion as voluntary heir. But then, the
latter died before the testator. Therefore, the provisions of the
Civil Code on accretion (Art. 1015, et seq.) are applicable and
not the provisions on representation (Art. 970, et seq.). Since the
requisites of accretion in testamentary succession are present,
Mario’s share shall now accrue to Luis.

Effect of Incapacity. — Incapacity has the same effects
as predecease. A voluntary heir who is incapacitated to succeed
from the testator shall transmit no right whatsoever to his own
heirs. A compulsory heir, on the other hand, may be represented,
but only with respect to his legitime.49 The same is true in case of
disinheritance.50
Effect of Repudiation. — The effects of repudiation, on the
other hand, are different from those of predecease or incapacity.
Whether voluntary or compulsory, the heir who repudiates his
inheritance cannot transmit any right to his own heirs.51 This rule
is absolute.
It is, therefore, apparent that in case of predecease, incapacity
or repudiation, the logical result in a vacancy in the inheritance
which may be total or partial depending upon the circumstances of
each particular case. Art. 856 of the Code merely gives a general idea
of the effects of such vacancy. There is no question, however, that the
existence of such a vacancy is repugnant to the idea of succession.
How this vacancy is filled up either by substitution, representation,
accretion, or intestate succession will be taken up under subsequent
provisions.

Art. 1035, Civil Code.
Art. 923, Civil Code.
51
Art. 977, Civil Code.
49
50

187

ART. 857

SUCCESSION

Section 3. — Substitution of Heirs
Art. 857. Substitution is the appointment of another heir so
that he may enter into the inheritance in default of the heir originally instituted.1
Concept of Substitution of Heirs. — The testator may not
only designate the heirs, devisees or legatees whom he desires to
enter into the enjoyment of the inheritance after his death, but he is
also permitted by law to make a second or subsequent designation
in case the heirs, devisees or legatees originally appointed should
die before him or should not want or cannot accept the inheritance.
This power of making a new designation is known as substitution
of heirs.2 In the Code it is defined as the appointment of another
heir so that he may enter into the inheritance in default of the heir
originally instituted.3 This definition, however, is not broad enough
to cover fideicommissary substitutions. Hence, it would be more
accurate to say that substitution is the appointment of another heir
so that he may enter into the inheritance in default of or subsequent
to the heir originally instituted.
In reality, substitution of heirs is nothing more than a subsidiary institution of a second or subsequent heir, devisee or legatee,
subordinated to the principal or original institution and dependent
upon some event which is more or less uncertain; in other words, it
is a conditional institution.4
Originally, in Roman law, it was of fundamental importance
that there must always be an heir to accept the inheritance because
of the legal fiction that the heir is a continuation of the personality
of the decedent. It was considered ignominious to die intestate. In
order to forestall such an eventuality, the testator almost always
availed himself of the remedy of appointing substitutes so that
there would always be an heir who would accept and receive
the inheritance. Although the institution of an heir is no longer
necessary for the validity of a will, and dying intestate is no longer
considered a disgrace, substitution of heirs still subsists under
New provision.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 139.
3
Art. 857, Civil Code.
4
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 140-141.
1
2

188

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 858

our laws as a recognition of the principle of freedom of disposition
which, with certain limitations, is the supreme law in testamentary
succession.5
General Limitation. — If the heir for whom a substitute is
appointed is a compulsory heir, the rule is that the substitution
cannot affect the legitime of such heir. Since the right to appoint a
substitute for the heir instituted is based on the testator’s freedom of
disposition, the same limitation which is imposed upon such freedom
of disposition must also be imposed upon such right to appoint a
substitute. This is clear from the provisions of Arts. 842, 864, 872,
and 904.
Art. 858. Substitution of heirs may be:
(1)

Simple or common;

(2)

Brief or compendious;

(3)

Reciprocal; or

(4)

Fideicommissary.6

Kinds of Substitution. — Under the Civil Code of the Philippines, there are only four classes of substitutions. Strictly speaking,
however, the only distinct types of substitution are simple or common substitution and fideicommissary substitution. The others are
merely variations of the first.
Simple or common (vulgar) substitution is that which takes
place when the testator designates one or more persons to substitute
the heir or heirs instituted in case such heir or heirs should die
before him, or should not wish, or should be incapacitated to accept
the inheritance.7 When there are two or more persons designated by
the testator to substitute for only one heir, the substitution is called
brief, but when there is only one person designated to substitute
for two or more heirs, it is called compendious.8 When two or more
persons are not only instituted as heirs, but are also designated
mutually as substitutes for each other, the substitution is called
4 Castan, 6th Ed., pp. 451-452.
New provision.
7
Art. 859, Civil Code.
8
Art. 860, Civil Code.
5
6

189

ART. 859

SUCCESSION

reciprocal.9 Fideicommissary substitution, on the other hand, is
that which takes place when the fiduciary or first heir instituted is
entrusted with the obligation to preserve and to transmit to a second
heir the whole or part of the inheritance, provided such substitution
does not go beyond one degree from the heir originally instituted,
and provided further, that the fiduciary or first heir and the second
heir are living at the time of the death of the testator.10
Under the old Code, there were six classes of substitutions of
heirs. They were known as vulgar or common, pupilar, ejemplar,
fideicomisaria, brevilocua o compendiosa, and reciproca. All of these
classes of substitutions are retained under the new Civil Code with
the exception of the pupilar and ejemplar. The pupilar was a type
of substitution by which parents and other ascendants may appoint
substitutes to take the place of their descendants of both sexes under
eighteen years of age in case the latter dies before attaining such
age.11 The ejemplar was one by which any ascendant may appoint
a substitute for his descendant over eighteen years of age who
has been legally declared to be incapacitated on account of mental
alienation.12 According to the Code Commission, these two classes of
substitution were not retained in the New Civil Code because they
are out of use and impracticable. This is evidenced by the fact that
there has been no known record that any parent or ascendant in this
country has ever made use of these two provisions of the Spanish
Code.13
Art. 859. The testator may designate one or more persons
to substitute the heir or heirs instituted in case such heir or heirs
should die before him, or should not wish, or should be incapacitated to accept the inheritance.
A simple substitution, without a statement of the cases to
which it refers, shall comprise the three mentioned in the preceding paragraph, unless the testator has otherwise provided.14

Art. 861, Civil Code.
Art. 863, Civil Code.
11
Art. 775, Spanish Civil Code.
12
Art. 776, Spanish Civil Code.
13
Report of the Code Commission, p. 110.
14
Art. 744, Spanish Civil Code.
9

10

190

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ARTS. 860-862

Art. 860. Two or more persons may be instituted for one; and
one person for two or more heirs.15
Art. 861. If heirs instituted in unequal shares should be reciprocally substituted, the substitute shall acquire the share of the
heir who dies, renounces, or is incapacitated, unless it clearly appears that the intention of the testator was otherwise. If there are
more than one substitute, they shall have the same share in the
substitution as in the institution.16
Art. 862. The substitute shall be subject to the same charges
and conditions imposed upon the Instituted heir, unless the testator has expressly provided the contrary, or the charges or conditions are personally applicable only to the heir instituted.17
Simple or Common Substitution. — Simple or common
substitution is defined as the designation made by the testator of one
or more persons to substitute the heir or heirs instituted in case such
heir or heirs should die before him, or should not wish, or should be
incapacitated to accept the inheritance. The true basis of this type
of substitution, whether simple, brief or compendious, or reciprocal,
rests, according to Manresa, not merely upon convenience, but upon
the principle that the testator should have the freedom to reward
those individuals, who, although they may not legally occupy the
first place in his heart, yet they are more deserving of his liberality
than those to whom the inheritance would pass if substitution is
not allowed.18 It is, therefore, clear that the purpose of this type of
substitution is to prevent the inheritance from passing by operation
of law to those to whom the same would pass either by right of
representation, or by right of accretion, or by right of intestate
succession, were it not for the substitution.
When Substitution Takes Place. — There are three cases
or instances when simple or common substitution or any of its
variations, such as brief, compendious, or reciprocal substitution
may take place: first, in case the heir instituted should die before
the testator; second, in case he should be incapacitated to succeed
from the testator; and third, in case he should not wish to accept the
Art. 778, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 779, Spanish Civil Code.
17
Art. 780, Spanish Civil Code.
18
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 144-145.
15
16

191

ART. 862

SUCCESSION

inheritance. If there is no statement of the case or cases to which the
substitution refers, the presumption is that it shall comprise all of
the three above-mentioned cases.19
Number of Substitutes. — There is no limitation upon the
number of persons who may be designated as substitutes, just as there
is no limitation upon the number of persons who may be instituted
as heirs. If there are two or more persons who are designated as
substitutes for only one heir; the substitution is brief (breuiloeua);
if there is only one person who is designated as substitute for two
or more heirs, it is compendious (compendiosa).20 In either case, the
substitution may take place if the instituted heir or heirs should die
before the testator, or should not wish, or should be incapacitated to
accept the inheritance.
Shares of Substitutes. — When two or more persons are
instituted by the testator as heirs and they are also designated
mutually or reciprocally as substitutes for each other, the substitution
is reciprocal (reciproca). Like the other types of vulgar or common
substitution, it may also take place in case anyone of the heirs dies
before the testator, or repudiates his share of the inheritance, or is
incapacitated to succeed from the testator.
If there are only two instituted heirs and they are designated
mutually as substitutes for each other, the substitute shall acquire
the entire share of the heir who dies, renounces, or is incapacitated,
even if the shares of both are unequal.21 Thus, if A is instituted to 2/3
of the entire inheritance and B is instituted to 1/3, and the former
dies before the testator, or is incapacitated to inherit, or repudiates
his inheritance, the result is that the latter shall acquire the 2/3
portion which is rendered vacant as a substitute and the remaining
1/3 as an instituted heir.
If there are three or more instituted heirs and they are designated mutually as substitutes for each other, the substitutes shall
have the same share in the substitution as in the institution.22

Art. 859, Civil Code.
Art. 860, Civil Code.
21
Art. 861, Civil Code.
22
Art. 861, Civil Code.
19
20

192

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 863

Problem — The testator instituted A to 1/2 of the entire
inheritance, B to 1/4, C to 1/6, and D to 1/12, and, at the same
time, designated each and everyone of them as a substitute of
the others. The net remainder of the estate is P36,000. B, however, repudiated his share. What will happen to this vacant
share?
Solution — It is evident that as a result of B’s repudiation,
1/4 of the inheritance, or P9,000, is rendered vacant. This vacant
share shall pass to A, C, and D in proportion to their respective
shares in the institution. Reducing such shares to their lowest
common denominator, the share of A in the vacant portion becomes 6/12, the share of C becomes 2/12, while the share of D
is 1/12. The proportion of their respective shares is, therefore,
6:2:1. As substitutes, A is entitled to 6/9 of P9,000, or P6,000,
C is entitled to 2/9 of P9,000, or P2,000, and D is entitled to 1/9
of P9,000, or P1,000. As instituted heirs, A is entitled to 1/2 of
P36,000 or P18,000, C is entitled to 1/6 of P36,000, or P6,000,
and D is entitled to 1/12 of P36,000, or P3,000. Hence, A shall
receive a total amount of P24,000, C, P8,000, and D, P4,000.

Effect of Substitution. — Once the substitution has taken
place, the substitute shall not only take over the share that would
have passed to the instituted heir, but he shall be subject to the
same charges and conditions imposed upon such instituted heir.
There are, however, two exceptions to the second rule: first, when
the testator has expressly provided the contrary; and second, when
the charges or conditions are personally applicable only to the heir
instituted.23 Thus, if the testator has imposed upon his nephew,
whom he had instituted as heir to the entire free portion of his
estate, the condition that he shall get married to a certain girl, and a
niece of the testator is substituted for the nephew, it is evident that
the condition is personally applicable only to such nephew.
Art. 863. A fideicommissary substitution by virtue of which
the fiduciary or first heir instituted is entrusted with the obligation
to preserve and to transmit to a second heir the whole or part of
the inheritance, shall be valid and shall take effect, provided such
substitution does not go beyond one degree from the heir originally

23

Art. 862, Civil Code.

193

ARTS. 864-866

SUCCESSION

instituted, and provided further, that the fiduciary or first heir and
the second heir are living at the time of death of the testator.24
Art. 864. A fideicommissary substitution can never burden
the legitime.25
Art. 865. Every fideicommissary substitution must be
expressly made in order that it may be valid.
The fiduciary shall be obliged to deliver the inheritance to the
second heir, without other deductions than those which arise from
legitimate expenses, credits and improvements, save in the case
where the testator has provided otherwise.26
Art. 866. The second heir shall acquire a right to the succession from the time of the testator’s death, even though he should
die before the fiduciary. The right of the second heir shall pass to
his heirs.27
Fideicommissary Substitution. — Art. 781 of the Spanish
Civil Code, from which Art. 863 of the New Civil Code is derived, is
as follows:
“Fideicommissary substitutions, by virtue of which the
heir is charged with the preservation and transmission to a
third party of the whole or part of the inheritance, shall be valid
and shall be effective, provided they do not go beyond the second
degree, or they are made in favor of persons living at the time of
the death of the testator.”

Comparing the two provisions, it is evident that there are two principal changes, both of which refer to the two limitations imposed
upon the fideicommissary substitution. In the first place, under the
new Code, it is essential that the two limitations imposed upon the
fideicommissary substitution must concur, while under the old Code
the presence of one or the other is sufficient. In the second place, the
rule under the new Code is that the substitution must not go beyond
one degree from the heir originally instituted, while the rule under

Art. 781, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 782, Spanish Civil Code.
26
Art. 783, Spanish Civil Code.
27
Art. 784, Spanish Civil Code.
24
25

194

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 866

the old Code is that it must not go beyond the second degree. Commenting on these changes, the Commission states:
“Fideicommissary substitution as provided by Article 781
of the Spanish Civil Code is retained but amended in this Project.
This kind of substitution has been considered necessary for the
prosperity and prestige of the family bearing in mind the lack
of intelligence, weakness of character, vanity and prodigality of
the descendants to whom the property may go. It has been contended that the power to appoint a fideicommissary substitute is
a complement of the freedom of disposition which gives powerful
stimulus to the accumulation of wealth, and thus maintains the
tradition and the social standing of the family.
“It is unquestionable that the provisions of this article
of the Spanish Civil Code prevents the free circulation of the
property because the testator may institute heirs and appoint
substitutes under diversified terms and conditions which may
render the ownership of property very unstable — an instance
of suspended ownership. Aside from the fact that the property
involved may be locked up or entailed in the same family for
many years, it seems that the original purpose of this substitution is feudalistic and is not in accord with the modern concept
of ownership which puts the welfare of society over and above
that of a particular family.
“As amended in this Code, fideicommissary substitutions
cannot go beyond one degree for the heir originally instituted,
and provided the first and second heirs are living at the time of
the death of the testator. With this change, the property cannot
stay in the family for the same length of time authorized in the
provision of Article 781 of the Spanish Civil Code.
“This modified fideicommissary substitution, together
with the simple, brief and reciprocal substitutions (Articles 859,
860, 861) retained, the proposed Civil Code does not unreasonably impair the freedom of disposition of the property by the
testator.’’28

In spite of the above changes, the nature and requisites of
fideicommissary substitution are still the same.
Fideicommissary or indirect substitution as it is sometimes
called may be defined as the substitution which takes place when28

Report of the Code Commission, pp. 110-111.

195

ART. 866

SUCCESSION

ever the testator institutes a person as heir, entrusting him with
the obligation to preserve and to transmit to a second heir the whole
or a part of the inheritance. This substitution exists with the concurrence of three persons: the testator who orders the substitution,
sometimes known as the fideicomitente; the first heir charged with
the preservation and the transmission of the inheritance, known as
the heredero fiduciario or fiduciary; and the second heir to whom the
inheritance is transmitted, known as the heredero fideicomisario or
fideicommissary.29
This type of substitution should not be confused with the
Roman fideicomiso. The latter is used to designate an indirect
method recognized in the Roman praetorian law by virtue of
which the person to whom the property was given in accordance
with the testator’s will, acting as agent of the testator, disposes
of its according to the wishes or instructions of the said testator.
According to Manresa, the duality of heirs is the characteristic note
which differentiates the fideicommissary substitution from the
fideicomiso romano. In the former, the fiduciary is a true heir and,
as such, enjoys the inheritance. On the contrary, in the fideicomiso
romano, the fiduciary is only an agent of the testator, charged with
turning over the properties to the true heir. Consequently, in the
fideicommissary substitution there are two acts of liberality; in the
fideicomisum there is but one let of liberality and only one instituted
heir.30
Neither should fideicommissary substitution be confused with
a trust. The essential difference between the two lies in the fact
that, in the first, both the fiduciary and the fideicommissary heirs
are true heirs of the testator, which cannot be said of the trustee. As
a consequence, the fiduciary heir in fideicommissary substitutions is
entitled to the enjoyment of the property, while the trustee in trusts
is not.31
Requisites. — In order that there is a valid fideicommissary
substitution, the following requisites must concur:
(1) There must be a first heir primarily called to the enjoyment
of the estate.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 169, 173.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 173.
31
Perez vs. Garchitorena, 54 Phil. 431.
29
30

196

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

(2)

ART. 866

There must be a second heir.

(3) There must be an obligation clearly imposed upon the first
heir to preserve the estate and to transmit it to the second heir.32
To the above requisites, a fourth is sometimes added that the
second heir or fideicommissary should be entitled to the estate from
the time the testator dies, since he is to inherit from the latter and
not from the fiduciary. This is, however, not a requisite, but merely
a consequence of the substitution.33
Limitations. — There are four limitations which the Code
has imposed upon fideicommissary substitutions. They are: first, the
substitution must not go beyond one degree from the heir originally
instituted;34 second, the fiduciary and the fideicommissary must be
living at the time of the death of the testator;35 third, the substitution
must not burden the legitime of compulsory heirs;36 and fourth, the
substitution must be made expressly.37
Idem; First Limitation. — The first limitation imposed
upon fideicommissary substitutions is that “the substitution must
not go beyond one degree from the heir originally instituted.” This
limitation is much more restricted than that which is imposed in the
Spanish Civil Code which states that the substitution must not go
beyond the second degree.38
How shall the word “degree” be interpreted? It is a pity that the
Code Commission made no attempt to resolve this question when it
retained the terminology used in the Spanish Code. As it stands, we
can only fall back upon Spanish jurisprudence in order to interpret
the phrase “does not go beyond one degree from the heir originally
instituted.”
According to some Spanish commentators, “degree” means
“degree of relationship.”39 Hence, according to this view, which we

Ibid.
Ibid.
34
Art. 863, Civil Code.
35
Ibid.
36
Art. 864, Civil Code.
37
Art. 865, Civil Code.
38
Art. 781, Spanish Civil Code.
39
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 182.
32
33

197

ART. 866

SUCCESSION

might as well call the traditional view, when the law says that the
substitution must not go beyond one degree from the heir originally
instituted, what is meant is that the fideicommissary substitute
must not be beyond one degree of relationship from the fiduciary
heir. Consequently, only the child or parent of the latter can be
appointed as fideicommissary heir.
According to other Spanish commentators, “degree” (grado) is
the equivalent of designation or transmission (llamamiento). Hence,
according to this view, which we might as well call the modern view,
when the law says that the substitution must not go beyond one
degree from he heir originally instituted, what is meant is that the
substitution must not extend beyond one degree of designation from
the heir originally instituted.40 Consequently, any person, whether
natural or juridical, or any entity not disqualified by law to inherit
from the testator can be appointed as fideicomissary heir. What
is, therefore, prohibited by the law to inherit from the testator can
be appointed as fideicomissary heir. What is, therefore, prohibited
by the law under this view is a case where three or more persons
including the fiduciary heir would be entitled to the successive
enjoyment of the estate.
Which of these two views is correct? Undoubtedly, when the
Code Commission prepared the project of the New Civil Code, the
members adhered to, the traditional view. This can be implied
from its report when it described fideicommissary substitution as
“an instance of suspended ownership, aside from the fact that the
property involved is locked up or entailed in the same family for
many years.” As a matter of fact, this is the view which is advocated
by some eminent commentators on the New Civil Code, such as Dr.
Tolentino and Dr. Padilla.41 We believe, however, that the modern
view is more sound for the following reasons:
(1) It is more in conformity with public policy which is
designed to increase the circulation or socialization of wealth.
(2) The law itself says that the “substitution” (it does not use
the word “substitute”) must not go beyond one degree from the heir
originally instituted. If we accept the traditional view, the law would
Ibid.
See 3 Tolentino, Civil Code, 1956 Ed., pp. 190-191; 2 Padilla Civil Code, 1956
Ed., p. 645.
40
41

198

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 866

read as follows: “provided that the substitution does not go beyond
one degree of relationship from the heir originally instituted,” which
would not make any sense at all, where as if we accept the modern
view the law would read as follows “provided that the substitution
does not go beyond one degree of transfer from the heir originally
instituted,” which would certainly make sense.
(3) Besides, construing No. 3 of Art. 867 of the Code in relation to Art. 863, it is clear that the only way by which the first
limitation prescribed in the latter article can possibly be violated by
the testamentary disposition referred to in the former would be to
interpret the phrase “one degree” as “one degree of transfer” and not
as “one degree of relationship.”
(4) Finally, although this is merely persuasive in character,
the modern view has been upheld by the Supreme Tribunal of Spain
in decisions promulgated in 1940 and 1949.42
Idem; Second Limitation. — Besides the rule that the substitution must not go beyond one degree from the heir originally
instituted, it is also essential that the fiduciary and the fideicommissary must be living at the time of the death of the testator. This rule
is in conformity with the requirement that there must be a duality of
heirs or a double institution of heirs in the substitution. Since both
the fiduciary and the fideicommissary are true heirs of the testator,
it is essential that “in order to be capacitated to inherit” both of them
“must be living at the moment the succession opens.”43
Idem; Third limitation. — The rule stated in Art. 864 is a
reiteration of the principle that the legitime of compulsory heirs
cannot be impaired. As heretofore noted, the same principle is
stated in other provisions of the Code, such as Arts. 842, 872, and
904. Thus, if the testator institutes his own son as the first heir
or fiduciary imposing upon him the obligation to preserve and to
transmit to the second heir or fideicommissary the whole or part of
the inheritance, the substitution shall be understood to refer only to
the disposable free portion of such inheritance.
Idem; Fourth limitation. — According to the first paragraph
of Art. 865, it is essential for the validity of a fideicommissary

42
43

Sentencias, June 23, 1940, March 6, 1944, and Oct. 29, 1949.
Art. 1025, Civil Code.

199

ART. 866

SUCCESSION

substitution that it must be expressly made. Although this provision
does not specifically state how the substitution can be made expressly,
it can be clearly inferred from the provision of No. 1 of Art. 867 that
there are two ways whereby the substitution may be expressly made.
The first is by giving it the name of a fideicomissary substitution and
the second is by imposing upon the fiduciary the absolute obligation
to preserve and to deliver the property to a second heir. Thus, if the
testator institutes two heirs and he calls one the fiduciary heir and
the other the fideicommissary substitute, or if he imposes upon the
former the absolute obligation to preserve the estate for a stated
period and, after the expiration of the period, to transmit it to
the latter, it is evident that the substitution is a fideicommissary
substitution. However, if the testator merely designates a second
heir to succeed in default of the first heir, or merely provides that
the second heir shall succeed in case of the death of the first heir,
there is only a simple or common substitution. The same is true if
the testator institutes two heirs and it is provided that in case of the
death of one or of both, the portion rendered vacant shall be assigned
to the legal heirs or to other persons. In all of these cases, there can
be no fideicommissary substitution, because the substitution has
not been made expressly.44
Crisologo vs. Singson
4 SCRA 491
Leona Singson died with a will wherein she devised onehalf of a big parcel of land to her three brothers, Evaristo,
Manuel and Dionisio, and the other one-half to a grandniece,
Consolacion Florentino, but subject to the condition that upon
Consolacion’s death, whether before or after that of the testatrix,
said one-half of the property devised to her shall be delivered
to Evaristo, Manuel and Dionisio, or their heirs should anyone
of them die before Leona and Consolacion. After the will was
admitted to. probate, Consolacion demanded for the partition
of the property. Evaristo, Manuel and Dionisio, however, contended that since she is only a usufructuary she cannot demand
for the partition of the property. Is this contention tenable?
Held: This contention is untenable. Art. 785 (now Art. 865)
of the Civil Code provides that a fideicommissary substitution
44
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 174; Crisologo vs. Singson, G.R. No. L-13826, Feb. 28,
1962, 4 SCRA 491.

200

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 866

shall have no effect unless it is made expressly either by giving
it such name or by imposing upon the first heir the absolute
obligation to deliver the inheritance to the second heir. The testamentary clause under consideration does not call the institution a fideicommissary substitution nor does it contain a clear
statement that Consolacion enjoys only a usufructuary right the
naked ownership being vested in the brothers of the testatrix.
The will therefore, establishes a simple or common substitution,
the necessary result of which is that, upon the death of the testatrix, Consolacion became the owner of an undivided half of the
property. She can, therefore, demand for partition.

Rights of Fiduciary. — The Code does not expressly state
what is the nature of the right of the first heir or fiduciary over
the property or inheritance pending its transmission or delivery
to the second heir or fideicommissary. Undoubtedly, he cannot be
a mere agent of the fideicomitente or a mere administrator of the
property. He is the “first heir,” although charged with the obligation
“to preserve and to transmit” the property to a second heir. As such,
he acquires upon the death of the fideicomitente all of the rights of a
usufructuary until the moment of delivery to the fideicommissary. In
other words, pending the transmission or delivery, he possesses the
beneficial ownership of the property, although the naked ownership
is vested in the fideicommissary.45
Obligations of Fiduciary. — It is evident from the provisions
of Art. 863 that there are two obligations of the first heir or fiduciary.
The first is to preserve the property or inheritance and the second
is to transmit the said property or inheritance to the second heir
or fideicommissary. In order that the fideicommissary substitution
shall be valid, it is essential that such obligation must be clearly
imposed.46 In other words, it is required that there must be an order
or charge upon the first heir to preserve and transmit to a third
person or entity the entire inheritance or a part thereof.47
Idem; Preservation of inheritance. — Although the first heir
or fiduciary is a true heir of the testator, his rights as such over the
property which is transmitted to him upon the death of the testator

Ibid., pp. 178-179.
Perez vs. Garchitorena, 54 Phil. 431.
47
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 173.
45
46

201

ART. 866

SUCCESSION

is necessarily limited by his obligation to preserve the said property.
The obligation to preserve excludes the right to dispose the property
either by an act inter vivos or an act mortis causa. As Scaevola says,
“the fiduciary heir has all the qualities of a usufructuary, but he also
has those of an absolute owner, without the power of alienation?48
However, he may alienate his right of usufruct over the property.
Corollary to the obligation, of the fiduciary heir to preserve
is the obligation to make an inventory. Art. 865, par. 2, impliedly
recognizes this obligation, since it would be impossible for the
fiduciary to make the necessary deductions for legitimate expenses,
credits and improvements once the property is delivered to the
fideicommissary unless there had been a previous inventory.49
Idem; Transmission of inheritance. — The Code is silent
with regard to the time when the property or inheritance shall be
transmitted by the fiduciary to the fideicomissary. According to
Spanish commentators, the reason for this is the fact that the same
is subject to the testator’s freedom of disposition. Consequently,
the testator can make the substitution purely, with a term, or even
conditionally. If he designates a day for the transmission or delivery
by limiting the period in which the fiduciary heir may enjoy the
property or inheritance, such designation shall be respected. If he
does not fix a period for the transmission or delivery, it is presumed
that he leaves the matter to the discretion of the fiduciary. And if
there is doubt or litigation regarding the time for such transmission
or delivery, it is presumed that it will be made after the death of such
fiduciary. When the substitution is conditional, the fideicommissary
has only a mere hope or expectancy pending the fulfillment of
the condition, but once the condition is fulfilled, the obligation to
transmit or deliver the property arises.50
Idem; — Right to deductions. — “Legitimate expenses” as
used in the second paragraph of Art. 865, refer to those which were
made for the acquisition and preservation of the property or inheritance. “Improvements,” on the other hand, refer to necessary as well
as to useful expenses. Other expenses, such as those for pure luxury
or mere pleasure, are excluded. The amount of the deductions to
Ibid., p. 194.
6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., p. 702.
50
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 181-182.
48
49

202

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 866

which the fiduciary is entitled, however, is not the actual amount
of the expenses, but the increase in value of the property or inheritance. Consequently, the property is really preserved.51
Rights of Fideicommissary. — The provisions of Art. 866
of the Code decides once and for all the question as to whether the
fideicommissary is an heir of the fiduciary or of the fideicomitente.
Under this article, the second heir or fideicommissary inherits,
not from the first heir or fiduciary, but from the testator or
fideicomitente. As a matter of fact, in a decision of the Spanish
Supreme Tribunal,52 the provision of this article was included as a
requisite of fideicommissary substitutions. The Supreme Court of the
Philippines in Perez vs. Garchitorena,53 however, rightly observed
that the fact that the fideicommissary is entitled to the estate from
the time the testator dies, since he is to inherit from the latter and
not from the fiduciary, is a natural consequence of a fideicommissary
substitution rather than a requisite.
What is the nature a the right of the fideicommissary heir
pending the delivery or transmission of the property or inheritance?
It is evident from the provision of Art. 866 that he acquires a right to
the inheritance from the moment of the death of the testator. It must
be noted, however, that this right is subject or without prejudice
to the corresponding right of the fiduciary heir. Stated in another
way, if the fiduciary is entitled to all of the rights of a usufructuary,
the fideicommissary is also entitled to all of the rights of a naked
owner. Thus, if the testator designates A and B as the fiduciary and
fideicommissary heirs, respectively, of his entire state, imposing the
obligation upon A to preserve and to transmit the entire estate to
B after the expiration of ten years, there is no question that the
latter shall be entitled to the entire estate from the moment of the
death of the testator. If he dies before the expiration of the period
and before the death of the fiduciary, his right to the estate shall be
transmitted to his own heirs.
Problem — X died in 1960 leaving a will wherein he devised a house and lot, now valued at P2,000,000, to his friend,
A, as fiduciary heir and to B, the eldest son of A, as fideicommis-

6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., pp. 201-202; 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 195.
Sentencia, Nov. 18, 1918.
53
54 Phil. 481.
51
52

203

ART. 867

SUCCESSION

sary substitute or second heir. B died in 1975, survived by two
legitimate children, E and F. In 1980, A died intestate survived
by: (a) his two sons, C and D, and (b) his two grandchildren,
E and F. C and D now claim that the house and lot (subject
matter of the fideicommissary substitution) should be divided
in accordance with, the rules of intestacy; in other words, C is
entitled to 1/3 of the property; D, to 1/3; and E and F, also to 1/3
by right of representation. E and F, on the other hand, contend
that they are entitled to the property to the exclusion of all others. Decide.
Answer — E and F are correct. It must be observed that B,
as fideicommissary substitute or second heir, acquired a right to
the subject property upon the death of the testator, X. This is ordained by Art. 866 of the Civil Code. When he died in 1975, this
right passed to his children, E and F. This is also ordained by
Art. 866 of the Civil Code. Therefore, E and F are now entitled
to the subject property to the exclusion of all others.

When the fideicommissary substitution is conditional, however,
the fideicommissary heir has only a mere hope or expectancy.
Consequently, if the fideicommissary dies before the condition has
been fulfilled, he acquires no right to the object of the fideicomisum,
and, as a consequence, he transmits no right whatsoever to his own
heirs.54
Art. 867. The following shall not take effect:
(1) Fideicommissary substitutions which are not made in
an express manner, either by giving them this name, or imposing,
upon the fiduciary the absolute obligations to deliver the property
to a second heir;
(2) Provisions which contain a perpetual prohibition to
alienate, and even a temporary one, beyond the limit fixed in Article 863;
(3) Those which impose upon the heir the charge of paying
to various persons successively, beyond the limit prescribed in
Article 863, a certain Income or pension;
(4) Those which leave to a person the whole or part of the
hereditary property in order that he may apply or invest the same
54

Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 181-182.

204

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 868

according to secret instructions communicated to him by the testator.55
Art. 868. The nullity of the fideicommissary substitution does
not prejudice the validity of the institution of the heirs first designated; the fideicommissary clause shall simply be considered as
not written.56
Void Substitutions. — The four rules which are contained
in Art. 867 are intended to implement the limitations upon
fideicommissary substitutions which are prescribed in Art. 863 as
well as the requirement which is stated in the first paragraph of Art.
865. These rules are necessary because, evidently, without sanction
or implementation, it would be relatively easy for the testator to
attain by indirect means those ends or objects which such limitations
or requirements are intended to prevent.
The first rule has already been discussed in a previous section.
It is clear that, besides being a logical corollary to the rule stated
in the first paragraph of Art. 865, it is also a confirmation of the
principle that in fideicommissary substitutions there must always
be an obligation clearly imposed upon the first heir or fiduciary to
preserve and to transmit the property or inheritance to the second
heir or fideicommissary.57
The second rule is evidently designed to prevent the perpetual
or temporary entailment by the testator of his property. Unfortunately, the phraseology of the law is rather confusing. Provisions
which contain a perpetual prohibition to alienate, and even a temporary one, beyond the limit fixed in Art. 863 are void. What is the
limitation referred to? That the substitution must not go beyond one
degree from the heir originally instituted? Violation of this limitation would be impossible in prohibitions to alienate. That both the
first heir and the second heir must be living at the time of the death
of the testator? Violation of this limitation would also be impossible
in prohibitions to alienate. The only limitation which can possibly be
violated is that provided for in Art. 870 of the Code. The prohibition

Art. 785, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 786, Spanish Civil Code.
57
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 206.
55
56

205

ART. 868

SUCCESSION

to alienate is good only for twenty years. Beyond that, it is void. It is
submitted that this is what is really meant by the law. Thus, if the
testator had appointed A as the fiduciary heir and B as the fideicommissary substitute, and in the will, there is a provision prohibiting
the alienation of the estate for a period of forty years, it is clear that
there is no violation or infringement of any of the limitations prescribed in Art. 863. It is, however, evident that there is a violation
of the limitation prescribed in Art. 870. Consequently, if the testator
died in 1960 and A, the fiduciary heir, died in 1965, the prohibition
imposed by the testator would still be good up to 1980 in conformity
with the rule stated in Art. 870. B, the fideicomissary substitute,
will still be bound by the prohibition to alienate up to 1980. It must
be observed, however, that if the testator died in 1950, although
the prohibition to alienate ceased to apply in 1970 in conformity
with the rule stated in Art. 870, A, the fiduciary heir, could not yet
alienate the property. This is so, because of another mandate of the
testator — that he must preserve and transmit the property to B,
the fideicomissary heir. Once the property is transmitted to B, it
becomes free property.
The third rule seeks to implement the limitations prescribed in
Art. 863 by declaring as ineffective those dispositions which would
render such limitations illusory. In this case, there is in reality no
substitution but an institution of an heir with a charge; however,
the Code applies by analogy to the beneficiaries the same limitations
which are applied to fideicommissary substitutions.58
The fourth rule has for its object the prevention of the transmission of property by secret instructions so that it may not be applied for purposes which are illegal or illicit or in order that it may
not pass to those who are incapacitated to inherit from the testator.
Here, there is no fideicomissary substitution since there is no duality of heirs; in reality, there is a simple institution of heirs, but the
inheritance is not for the benefit of the instituted heir since it will
be applied or invested according to the secret instructions which had
been communicated to such heir by the testator. In such case, the
institution of heir is valid, although the instructions are void.59

58
59

Ibid., pp. 208-209.
Ibid., p. 209.

206

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Substitution of Heirs

ART. 869

It must be noted that according to Art. 786 of the Code, the
testator may entrust to a third person the distribution of specific
property or sums of money that he may leave in general to specified
classes or causes, and also the designation of the persons, institutions or establishments to which such property or sums of money
are to be given or applied. Is there no conflict between this rule and
the rule stated in No. 4 of Art. 867? According to Manresa, there is
no conflict. When the testator has already determined the persons
to whom the property shall go, such as the poor, relatives, establishments, and so forth, and merely empowers another person to
make the distribution among such poor, relatives or establishments,
the provision of Art. 786 shall apply. When the testator does not
determine, but instead institutes an heir with a charge upon his
conscience regarding the destination, application or investment of
the property, without saying precisely to what or in whose favor
such property shall be given or applied, the act does not fall within
the purview of Art. 786, but enters the sphere of Art. 867. The law
considers that there is a substitution in such case since the property
shall pass from a first heir to a second heir, but inasmuch as the
second heir is not known, it declares the substitution to be without
effect.60
Effect of Void Fideicommissary Substitutions. — According to Art. 868, the nullity of the fideicomissary substitution does not
prejudice the validity of the institution of the heirs first designated;
the fideicomissary clause shall simply be considered as not written.
This rule is of course logical considering that the fideicomissary substitution is the subsidiary institution, while the first institution of
heirs is the principal institution.
Art. 869. A provision whereby the testator leaves to a person
the whole or part of the inheritance, and to another the usufruct,
shall be valid. If he gives the usufruct to various persons, not simultaneously, but successively, the provisions of Article 863 shall
apply.61
Disposition of Usufruct to Various Persons. — The rule
stated in the first sentence of Art. 869 is a logical consequence of

60
61

Ibid., p. 214.
Art. 787, Spanish Civil Code.

207

ART. 870

SUCCESSION

the principle that the owner of a thing has the power to dispose of
not only the whole but also any part of his right of ownership over
the thing. With regard to the rule stated in the second sentence,
although the rules regarding fideicomissary substitution are
applicable, in reality, there is no fideicommissary substitution, but
merely a simple institution of heir combined with a legacy.62
Art. 870. The dispositions of the testator declaring all or part
of the estate inalienable for more than twenty years are void.63
Disposition Declaring Estate Inalienable. — Art. 870 is
a new provision. According to the Code Commission, this provision
is added in order “to give more impetus to the socialization of the
ownership of property, and to prevent the perpetuation of large
holdings which give rise to agrarian troubles.”64 Thus, if the testator
states in his will that the property bequeathed or devised shall not
be alienated for a period of fifty years, under this provision, the
prohibition shall be valid only for twenty years, but with respect to the
excess it is null and void. If the prohibition to alienate is perpetual,
there is no reason why the entire prohibition should be nullified. In
order to effectuate the testatorial intent, it shall be valid but only for
twenty years. And if it so happens that in addition to the prohibition
to alienate there is a fideicomissary substitution expressly made,
such prohibition shall not only be limited to twenty years but it shall
have to be complemented by another mandate of the testator — the
obligation of the first heir to preserve the property for the benefit of
the second heir. Consequently, there can be no conflict between the
provision of this article and that of No. 2 of Art. 867.

6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., pp. 702-703.
New provision.
64
Report of the Code Commission, p. 111.
62
63

208

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 871

Section 4 — Conditional Testamentary Dispositions
Art. 871. The institution of an heir may be made conditionally,
or for a certain purpose or cause.1
Freedom of Disposition. — The provision of Art. 871 is a
restatement of the testator’s freedom of disposition. Although the
article speaks only of institution of heirs, there is no reason why the
provision cannot be applied to any kind of testamentary disposition.
Consequently, whether the testamentary disposition is an institution
of heir, or a devise or legacy, under this article, the testator is free to
impose any condition, or mode, or term.2
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions. — A testamentary
disposition is conditional when its effectivity is subordinated to the
fulfillment or nonfulfillment of a future and uncertain fact or event.
This future and uncertain fact or event upon the fulfillment of which
the testamentary disposition is made to depend is what is known as
a condition.3
Before a testamentary disposition is considered conditional,
it is necessary that the condition must fairly appear from the
language used in the will.4 If it does not appear in the will itself, or
in a document executed with the same formalities as a will, it is not
binding. In such case the testamentary disposition is pure, and not
conditional.5 Thus, in Morente vs. De la Santa,6 where the testatrix
merely orders her husband, who is the principal beneficiary in her
will, not to marry again after her death, without attaching such order
to the legacies and devises, or without stating that failure to comply
with the order shall result in the nullity of the legacies and devices,
and subsequently, four months after her death, the husband married
again, it was held that such legacies and devises are not conditional,
since the condition does not fairly appear from the language used
in the will. The result, however, would be different if the condition

Art. 790, Spanish Civil. Code, in modified form.
Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 226.
3
This is based on the general definition of condition as a future and uncertain
fact or event upon the fulfillment of which a juridical act is made to depend. (Ibid.).
4
Morente vs. De la Santa, 9 Phil. 387.
5
13 Scaevola 595-596.
6
9 Phil. 387.
1
2

209

ARTS. 872-873

SUCCESSION

not to marry again is attached to the testamentary disposition or if
the testator declared that failure to comply with the condition will
nullify the testamentary disposition. Thus, in Broce vs. Marcallana,7
where the testatrix, in her will, expressly directed her husband not
to get married again, after her death, or if he desires to get married
again, he must choose any of her relatives within the sixth degree,
otherwise, he shall lose his right to the properties bequeathed or
devised to him, and subsequently, after her death, the husband
got married again, but not to any of her relatives, it was held that
the legacies and devises are conditional, and as a consequence of
the violation of the condition, the husband loses his right to the
properties given to him without prejudice to his legitime.
Art. 872. The testator cannot impose any charge, condition,
or substitution whatsoever upon the legitimes prescribed in this
Code. Should he do so, the same shall be considered as not
imposed.8
Conditions Which Impair Legitime. — The rule stated
in Art. 872 merely reiterates the principle of the untouchability of
the legitime of compulsory heirs.9 There is only one instance under
our law where the testator is allowed to impose a charge upon the
legitime of compulsory heirs and that is when the testator declares
that the hereditary estate shall not be partitioned for a period which
shall not exceed twenty years. According to Art. 1083 of the Code,
this power of the testator to prohibit the division of the estate applies
even to the legitime of compulsory heirs.
It must also be observed that a condition imposed upon the
legitime of a compulsory heir is a condition which is contrary to law.
Consequently, even looking at it from the viewpoint of Art. 873, the
same shall be considered as not imposed.
Art. 873. Impossible conditions and those contrary to law or
good customs shall be considered as not imposed and shall in no
manner prejudice the heir, even if the testator should otherwise
provide.10
CA, G.R. No. 10896-R, June 21, 1954.
Art. 816, Spanish Civil Code.
9
See Art. 904, Civil Code
10
Art. 792, Spanish Civil Code.
7
8

210

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 873

Impossible Conditions. — If the condition is impossible in
the sense that it is not possible of realization because it is contrary
to either, physical, juridical or moral laws, it shall be considered as
not imposed. However, the institution of heir or the devise or legacy
is not affected. There is a presumption in this case that the condition
is due to a mistake or oversight, or merely a whim or caprice of the
testator. Consequently, it must be disregarded as a matter of justice
to the instituted heirs, devisees or legatees.11
What time shall be considered in determining whether the
condition is impossible or not? According to Sanchez Roman, there is
only one moment to consider and that is the time when the condition
is to be fulfilled.12
The difference between the effect of an impossible condition
when it is attached to a testamentary disposition and its effect when
it is attached to a civil obligation must be noted. According to the
first paragraph of Art. 1183 of the Civil Code: “Impossible conditions,
those contrary to good customs or public policy and those prohibited
by law shall annul the obligation which depends upon them.” It is
evident that under Art. 873, the condition is void but the disposition
is valid, while under Art. 1183, the conditional obligation itself is
void. Thus, if the testator bequeaths to a certain woman P10,000
if she will consent to be the mistress of a certain person, the condition is void, but the legacy is valid. However, if A obligates himself
to give P10,000 to B if the latter consents to be his mistress for six
months, the obligation is a complete nullity. The reason for the difference lies in the fact that under the first article, the testamentary
disposition, strictly speaking, does not depend upon the fulfillment
of the condition for its perfection but upon the death of the testator,
while under the second article, the obligation depends for its perfection upon the condition which is impossible or which is contrary to
law or good customs.
The principles which we have just noted are illustrated by
the case of Acciano vs. Brimo.13 In this case, the testator, a Turkish
subject, executed a will which contains a provision that the estate
shall be distributed in accordance with the laws of the Philippines.

6 Sanchez Roman. 2nd Ed., p. 606.
Ibid., p. 607.
13
50 Phil. 867. See also Bellis vs. Bellis, 20 SCRA 358.
11
12

211

ART. 873

SUCCESSION

It also contains a provision that if anyone of the legatees should
disregard the order, whatever disposition is found in the will in
favor of such legatee shall be annulled and cancelled altogether. One
of the legatees, a brother of the testator, questioned the validity of
the order on the ground that the designation of legatees is subject
to a condition which is contrary to law because it contravenes the
provisions of the second paragraph of what is now Art. 16 of the Civil
Code which states that it is the national law of the person whose
succession is under consideration which shall govern the intrinsic
validity of testamentary provisions. The Supreme Court, speaking
through Justice Romualdez, held:
“The institution of legatees in this will is conditional and
the condition is that the instituted legatees must respect the
testator’s will to distribute his property, not in accordance with
the laws of his nationality, but in accordance with the laws of
the Philippines.
“If this condition as it is expressed were legal and valid,
any oppositor who fails to comply with it, as the herein oppositor
who, by his attitude in these proceedings, has not respected the
will of the testator, as expressed, is prevented from receiving,
his legacy.
“The fact, is, however, that the said condition is void, being contrary to law, for Article 792 (now Art. 873 of the Civil
Code) provides the following:
“Impossible conditions, and those contrary to law or good
morals shall be considered as not imposed and shall not prejudice the heir or legatee in any manner whatsoever, even though
the testator otherwise provides.’
“And said condition is contrary to law because it expressly
ignores the testator’s national law, when according to Article 10
(now Art. 16) of the Civil Code, such national law of the testator
is the one to govern his testamentary dispositions.
“Said condition then, in the light of the legal provision
above cited, is considered unwritten, and the institution of legatee in said will is unconditional and, consequently, valid and
effective even as to the herein oppositor.”

There is, however, an interesting question which up to now
has remained unresolved in this jurisdiction. Suppose that the
testator in his will bequeaths or devises a certain property to a
212

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 873

certain beneficiary but subject to the condition that if the designated
legatee or devisee opposes the probate of the will, he will then forfeit
the legacy or devise, is much a condition valid or is it contrary to
public policy? More specifically, suppose that the testator dies, and
the designated legatee or devisee interposes his opposition to the
probate of the, and subsequently, after hearing, the probate court
issues an order allowing the will, has the legatee or devisee forfeited
his right under the “no-contest and forfeiture” clause found in the
will? There are conflicting theories. We are more inclined to adhere
to the view that under the doctrine of the testator’s freedom of
disposition, such a clause or condition is valid. Ultimately, however,
everything will depend upon whether the beneficiary had acted in
good faith in opposing the probate of the will or not. If he had acted
in good faith, he does not forfeit the legacy or devise; if he had acted
in bad faith, he forfeits the legacy or devise.
Santos vs. Buenaventura
18 SCRA 47
The records show that when the 1966 will of the late
Maxima Santos Vda. de Blas, which revoked her 1853 will, was
presented for probate, Flora Blas de Buenaventura, one of the
devisees, interposed her opposition thereto on the grounds that
undue and improper pressure and influence was exerted upon
the testatrix in the execution thereof; that the testatrix’ signature was secured through fraud; and that at the time of the execution of the will, the testatrix was mentally incapable of making a will. Subsequently, however, she withdrew her opposition.
The circumstances which led to said withdrawal are as follows:
In order to pay for stenographic notes, she had to sell her house
for P5,000.00. Thereafter, Rosalina Santos, the biggest beneficiary under the will, gave a party at the Manila Hotel aimed
at settling the case amicably. The lawyer of Rosalina was able
to convince Flora to withdraw her opposition. When the order
admitting the will to probate became final and executory, Flora
filed a motion praying for delivery of the fishpond devised to her.
Rosalina, however, opposed the motion on the ground that said
devise has been forfeited in favor of the residuary heirs pursuant
to the “no-contest and forfeiture” clause in the will wherein it is
stated that should any of the heirs, devisees or legatees contest
or oppose its probate, the latter shall lose his or her right to receive any inheritance or benefit under it, which shall be forfeited
in favor of the other heirs, devisees and legatees. Sustaining the

213

ART. 873

SUCCESSION

view of Rosalina, the trial court denied the motion of Flora. A
motion for reconsideration was filed. The court also denied the
motion. Flora appealed to the Court of Appeals, which certified
the appeal to the Supreme Court for determination of questions
purely of law. Issues: (1) Did Flora’s actuations amount to a violation of the “no-contest and forfeiture” clause of the will? (2) Is
the “no-contest and forfeiture” provision of the will valid?
Speaking through Justice J. Bengzon, the Supreme Court
held:
“Anent the second issue, the parties herein, relying mostly
upon Spanish and Anglo-American authorities, advance conflicting theories. Petitioner-appellee argues that the “no-contest and
forefeiture” clause is a valid, legal and efficacious testamentary
condition. Against this position, however, the devisee-appellant
maintains that such provision in a will is null and void because
it is contrary to public policy.
“It is, however, the first issue that we will now discuss.
For this purpose, the point to determine initially is whether or
not appellant’s filing of her opposition was justified under the
particular circumstances of the case; and then, whether or not a
timely withdrawal of said opposition had precluded violation of
the “no-contest and forfeiture clause”.
“The court a quo’s conclusion is that “there is no justification for her to oppose or contest the probate of said will” because
“from the evidence given by her and by her witnesses during the
pendency of the probate of the will xxx, it appears that Flora
Blas was aware of the true facts surrounding the execution of
the will and of the mental state of mind of the said testatrix at
the time of the execution of the will in question, and yet she has
charged her benefactor, the late Maxima Santos, as not enjoying
sound mind when the latter executed her will on September 22,
1956”, and that “there is no proof to show that the said Flora
Blas was in any manner related by blood to Maxima Santos Vda.
de Blas so that her contest of the will cannot benefit her.”
“We disagree with the above conclusion of the lower court,
which is not the inference borne out by the facts and the evidence — both testimonial and documentary — adduced in the
case.
“Appellant knew about the existence of another will executed earlier in 1953 in which she stood to receive more — much
more — than what is devised to her in the 1956 will. Since 1953
up to the death of the testatrix, appellant did not fall out of the

214

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 873

good graces of the deceased. Their relationship stayed as close
as ever. She did not give any cause to alienate the deceased’s affections. Why, then, the supposed change of heart?
“She was addressed as Flora Buendia in the will, yet she
has been using the name Flora Blas as far as she could remember, apparently with the knowledge and consent of the deceased.
This is supported by her school records from grade school up
to first year pharmacy. Admittedly, it was the deceased who
reared and spent for the education of the appellant, and therefore she must have known that the latter was using the family
name Blas. If, indeed, the testatrix was not agreeable to such an
arrangement, why did she not take steps to correct the same?
We can only conclude that appellant’s use of the family name
Blas was with the acquiescence of the testatrix. Why should she
change her mind after all the years and speak of appellant in
her will as Flora Buendia instead of Flora Blas?
“There was also the coincidence that the three attesting
witnesses to the will, all brothers, are likewise the lawyers of
the executrix (who will receive the biggest single share under
the will) and compadres of the assistant executrix, while the
notary public is also a compadre of one of the attesting brothers-lawyers.
“Furthermore, the nurse who attended to the deceased on
September 22, 1956 — the date when the will was supposedly
typed and signed by that testarix in her room at the Manila Doctors Hospital — told the appellant that there was no one inside
the testatrix’s room when she went to administer medications
to the old woman at the precise time when the attesting witnesses and the notary public testified they were inside the said
room. The nurse admitted this likewise under oath (Tsn., June
10, 1957, p. 23).
“But the most important single factor that should engender reasonable doubt as to the physical and mental capacity of
a person to execute a will, was the condition of Maxima Blas
as gleaned from the records of the case. She was an old woman
more than 86 years old who suffered from various ailments like
rheumatoid arthritis, catarrh of the eyes, jaundice, cirrhosis of
the liver, anemia, edema of the lower legs and fracture in the
vertebrae. From August 1, 1956 to September 23, 1956 she received seven blood transfusions, as follows: one on August 1;
two on September 22 (the alleged date of the execution of the
will), with barely three hours intervening; one each on September 24, 25, 26 and 29, 1956. She was also given dextrose vinoc-

215

ART. 873

SUCCESSION

lysis on September 22, because she could not take food through
the mouth; and on September 23, 1956 she started to bleed by
mouth, compelling her doctor to cancel her trip to the United
States scheduled for September 25, 1956. Several documents
executed by her before the alleged date of execution of the will
were no longer signed but merely thumbmarked by her, whereas the will appeared to have been signed.
“It is difficult for us to imagine that one situated and equally faced with the above enumerated facts and circumstances as
the appellant was, should keep her peace. She had her doubts,
and to resolve them she had to conduct inquiries and investigations. Her findings all the more strengthened her belief that
there was something untoward about the execution of the will.
Thus, in her desire to known the truth and to protect her rights,
she opposed the probate of the will.
“After all, had the contest been continued and the will held
invalid on any of the grounds provided by law for the disallowance of a will, she would have contributed in no small measure
to the cause of the truth which the courts have been in a position
to apply the proper legal provisions which are for the greater
interests of the testatrix — since all of them are ordained to the
idea that the truth of her last thoughts may be duly assured and
guaranteed.
“Above all, the factor that preponderates in favor of appellant is that, after realizing her mistake in contesting the will —
a mistake committed in good faith because grounded on strong
doubts — she withdrew her opposition and joined the appellee
in the latter’s petition for the probate of the will. She must not
now be penalized for rectifying her error. After all, the intentions of the testatrix had been fulfilled, her will had been admitted and allowed probate within a reasonably short period, and
the disposition of her property can now be effected.
“It should be pointed out that, contrary to the translation
accorded to Paragraph Fourteen of the will, the testatrix enjoins
not a mere contest opposition to its probate, but a contest or
opposition to the probate of the will and the carrying out of its
provisions. This is so because the questioned clause speaks of
“pagpapatibay at pagbibigay-bisa” instead of “pagpapatibay o
pag-bibigay-bisa.” This furnishes a significant index into the intention of the testatrix, namely, that she was more concerned in
insuring the carrying out of her testamentary provisions than in
precluding any contest or opposition to it. By the withdrawal of
the contest which appellant brought in good faith, no prejudice

216

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 874

has been done into the intention of the testatrix. The disposition
of her will can now be safely carried out.
‘The most that can be said, if at all, is that Flora Blas’
actuations were also impelled by some desire to gain. But who
among the heirs can assume a posture of innocence and cast the
first stone? None of them can safely claim that he is not thus
similarly motivated.
“From the foregoing premises it cannot be said that Flora’s
actuations impaired the true intention of the testatrix in regard
to the “no-contest and forfeiture” clause of the will. Flora’s act of
withdrawing her opposition before she had rested her case contributed to the speedy probation of the will. Since the withdrawal came before Flora bad rested her case, it precluded the defeat
of the probate upon the strength of Flora’s evidence. Through
said withdrawal, Flora conformed to the testatrix’s wish that
her dispositions of her properties under the will be carried out.
It follows that, taken as a whole, Flora’s actuations subserved
rather than violated the testatrix’s intention.
There is, therefore, no further need to discuss the second
issue in this jurisdiction, since, at any rate, said clause was not
violated in this case.
“Wherefore, the appealed orders dated April 30, 1958 and
March 7, 1959 are hereby reversed, and this case is remanded
to the court a quo with the instruction that appellant’s devise
under the will be forthwith delivered to her. No costs. So ordered.”

Art. 874. An absolute condition not to contract a first or subsequent marriage shall be considered as not written unless such
condition has been imposed on the widow or widower by the deceased spouse, or by the latter’s ascendants or descendants.
Nevertheless, the right of usufruct, or an allowance or some
personal prestation may be devised or bequeathed to any person
for the time during which he or she should remain unmarried or in
widowhood.14
Absolute Conditions Not to Contract Marriage. — A condition which is frequently imposed by a testator upon an instituted

14

Art. 793, Spanish Civil Code.

217

ART. 874

SUCCESSION

heir, or upon a devisee or legatee is the condition not to contract a
first or a subsequent marriage. Undoubtedly, this condition is contrary to morals and public policy because it would deprive a person
of one of his inherent or inalienable rights — the right to choose his
own status. As a consequence, the Code in Art. 874 considers it as
not imposed.
Idem; Condition not to contract first marriage. — According to the first paragraph of Art. 874, an absolute condition not to
contract a first marriage shall be considered as not written. Subject
to the rule provided for in the second paragraph, this rule is absolute
in character. As in the case of impossible conditions, the validity
of the institution of heirs or of the devise or legacy is not affected,
although the condition is void. Thus, if a person institutes one of
his daughters as heir to the free portion of his estate subject to the
condition that she will never get married, the institution is valid,
but the condition is void. In other words, the institution shall be
considered as pure and not conditional.
Idem; Condition not to contract subsequent marriage.
— In the case of an absolute condition not to contract a subsequent
marriage, the rule is subject to several exceptions, besides the
general exception provided for in the second paragraph of Art. 874.
The exceptions are: (1) when it is imposed by the deceased spouse
himself; (2) when it is imposed by the ascendants of the deceased
spouse; and (3) when it is imposed by the descendants of the deceased
spouse.15 Thus, if the testator institutes his wife, as heir, or appoints
her as a devisee or legatee, he may validly impose upon her the
absolute condition not to contract a subsequent marriage. The same
is true if a person institutes his daughter-in-law, who was formerly
married to a deceased son, or his stepmother, who is the widow of
his deceased father.
Evidently, the basis of these exceptions is love which transcends
even death itself. Besides, according to Manresa to allow the property
of the deceased spouse or of his or her ascendants or descendants
to be enjoyed by the person who has taken his or her place in the
survivor’s heart would be an offense against his or her memory.16

15
16

Art. 874, par, 1, Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 237.

218

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 874

According to Scaevola, the descendants referred to in Art. 874
are the descendants of the deceased spouse had by a prior marriage,
not the common descendants of the deceased and the surviving
spouse.17 Dr. Tolentino, however, dissents from Scaevolas’s opinion.
He says:
“We believe, however, that no distinction should be made
because the law makes no such distinction. Whether the descendant is exclusively of the deceased spouse or begotten with
the widow or widower is immaterial; the reason for upholding
the prohibition is the same in either case. It is clear, however,
that the ascendants or the descendants of the surviving spouse,
had from a prior marriage, cannot impose the prohibition, because they are not ascendants or descendants of the deceased
spouse.’’18

We believe that the above view of Dr. Tolentino is more logical.
Idem; Nature of condition when validly imposed. — The
absolute condition not to contract marriage when validly imposed is
resolutory in character. Art. 874 is concerned with heirs, devisees
or legatees, who are entitled to the inheritance, devise or legacy
upon the death of the testator, but lose their right thereto upon the
fulfillment of the condition if validly imposed.19 Consequently, if
the testator institutes his wife as heir subject to the condition that
she will never marry again, she immediately acquires a right to the
inheritance upon the death of the testator, but if she violates the
condition by contracting a second marriage, she loses her right to
the said inheritance. Her legitime, however, is not affected.
Speaking of absolute conditions not to contract marriage when
validly imposed, the following case is an interesting example:
Villaflor-Villanueva vs. Juico
4 SCRA 550
The testator, Nicolas Villaflor, died in 1908 with a will
wherein he left most of his properties to his wife, Fausta Nepo-

13 Scaevola, 622-624.
3 Tolentino, Civil Code, 1956 Ed., pp. 206-207.
19
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 238.
17
18

219

ART. 874

SUCCESSION

muceno, and his brother Fausto Villaflor. In addition, he also
left the “use and possession” of certain specified properties to
his wife “while alive” subject to the condition that she does not
remarry; otherwise, said properties shall pass to a grandniece,
Leonor Villaflor. The widow, never remarried. She died in 1956.
Who is now entitled to these properties — the estate of the widow or Leonor Villaflor?
Held: The plain intent of the testator was to invest his
widow with only a usufruct or life tenure in the properties, subject to the further condition that if she remarried, her rights
would thereupon cease, even during her lifetime. That the widow was meant to have no more than a life interest in the properties, even if she did not remarry at all, is evident from the
expression used in the will, “use and possession while she lives”.
If the testator had intended to impose as sole condition the nonremarriage of his widow, the words “use and possession while
she lives” would have been unnecessary, since the widow could
only remarry during her lifetime. It follows, therefore, that the
testator’s grandniece, Leonor Villaflor, is entitled to these properties upon the widow’s death, even if the widow never remarried in her lifetime.20

Relative Conditions Regarding Marriage. — It must be
noted that the general rule stated in Art. 874 is applicable only
when the prohibition to contract a first or subsequent marriage is
absolute in character. Consequently, if the prohibition is relative
with respect to persons, time or place, the rule does not apply;
in other words, the prohibition or condition is valid. Thus, if the
testator institutes A as his heir subject to the condition that she
will not get married until she reaches the age of twenty-five, the
condition not to marry is relative in character; hence, it is valid.
The same is true if the testator bequeaths P10,000 to B subject to
the condition that she will not get married to anybody belonging to
a certain party or a certain sect. There are cases, however, when a

20
Would it not be more logical to say that the testator’s intention is that Leonor Villaflor shall be entitled to the properties only if the condition is violated? Would it not then
necessary follow that since the condition had not been violated, the properties shall not be
adjudicated to the legal heirs of the testator? After all, Leonor Villaflor was never designated as heir or devisee independently from the widow. She was designated, it is true, but
subject to the suspensive condition that the widow should remarry. It is, therefore, submitted that No. 3 of Art. 960 of the Civil Code should have been applied. Thus, the properties
should have been adjudicated to the legal heirs of the testator.

220

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ARTS. 875-876

relative prohibition to marry becomes in effect absolute in character
rendering it practically impossible for the heir, devisee or legatee
to get married at all. In such cases, the rule stated in Art. 873 is
applicable.
It must also be noted that the provisions of Art. 874 is not
applicable to a condition to get married. Although such a condition
will also have the effect of preventing a person from choosing his
own status, nevertheless it must be considered valid since the law
does not prohibit it. This is the accepted rule in Spanish Law.21
In synthesis, Art. 874, in an implicit manner, authorizes the
following conditions: (1) A generic condition to contract marriage;
(2) a specific condition to contract marriage with a determinate
person; and (3) a specific condition not to contract marriage with a
determinate person.22
Art. 875. Any disposition made upon the condition that the
heir shall make some provision in his will in favor of the testator
or of any other person shall be void.23
Conditions Captatoria. — The condition that the heir shall
make some provision in his will in favor of the testator or of any
other person is what is known as a condition captatoria. Hence, if
the testator makes a testamentary disposition in his will subject
to such a condition, it is known as disposicion captatoria. Unlike
the conditions contemplated by Arts. 873 and 874, the effect of a
condition captatoria is according to Art. 875, to nullify the disposition
itself. The reason for the precept is that testamentary succession is
an act of liberality, not a contractual agreement. Besides, to permit
it would impair the heir’s freedom of testamentary disposition with
respect to his own property as well as allow the testator to dispose of
the property of another after the latter’s death.24
Art. 876. Any purely potestative condition imposed upon an
heir must be fulfilled by him as soon as he learns of the testator’s
death.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 238; 6 Sanchez Roman 608; 13 Scaevola 626.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed , p. 238.
23
Art. 794, Spanish Civil Code.
24
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 241.
21
22

221

ARTS. 877-879

SUCCESSION

This rule shall not apply when the condition, already complied
with, cannot be fulfilled again.25
Art. 877. If the condition is casual or mixed, it shall be
sufficient if it happens or be fulfilled at any time before or after the
death of the testator, unless he has provided otherwise.
Should it have existed or should it have been fulfilled at the
time the will was executed and the testator was unaware thereof, it
shall be deemed as complied with.
If he had knowledge thereof, the condition shall be considered
fulfilled only when it is of such a nature that it can no longer exist
or be complied with again.26
Art. 878. A disposition with a suspensive term does not prevent
the instituted heir from acquiring his rights and transmitting them
to his heirs even before the arrival of the term.27
Art. 879. If the potestative condition imposed upon the heir
is negative, or consists in not doing or not giving something,
he shall comply by giving a security that he will not do or give
that which has been prohibited by the testator, and that in case
of contravention he will return whatever he may have received,
together with its fruits and interests.28
Potestative, Casual, and Mixed Conditions. — As regards
the cause upon which their fulfillment depends, conditions may be
purely potestative, casual or mixed. A purely potestative condition
is one whose fulfillment depends exclusively upon the will of the
heir, devisee or legatee. Thus, if A is instituted as heir if he shall
study law in a certain college, or if B is appointed as a devisee or
legatee if she shall not get married before reaching the age of twentyfive, the condition in both cases is purely potestative. A casual
condition is one whose fulfillment depends exclusively upon chance
and/or upon the will of a third person. Thus, if a certain person is
appointed as a devisee or legatee with respect to certain properties
if the testator’s race horse shall win the Senior Grand Derby, the

Art. 795, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 796, Spanish Civil Code.
27
Art. 799, Spanish Civil Code.
28
Art. 800, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
25
26

222

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 879

condition is casual because its fulfillment depends upon chance. If
the testator bequeaths his law library to a certain friend, provided
his son does not become a lawyer within five years after his death,
the condition is also casual, because its fulfillment depends upon the
will of a third person. A mixed condition, on the other hand, is one
whose fulfillment depends jointly upon the will of the heir, devisee
or legatee and upon chance and/or the will of a third person. Thus,
if the testator bequeaths P10,000 to A subject to the condition that
A shall get married to B within five years after the testator’s death,
the condition is mixed because its fulfillment depends partly upon
the will of the legatee, partly upon the will of a third person, and
partly upon chance.
Idem; Time of fulfillment. — If the condition is purely potestative, the general rule is that the heir must fulfill it as soon as
he learns of the testator’s death. This rule, however, is not applicable when the condition already complied with, cannot be fulfilled
again.29 Evidently, these rules are applicable only when the potestative conditions is of a positive, not a negative, character.
On the other hand, if the condition is casual or mixed, the rule
is that it shall be sufficient if it happens or be fulfilled at any time
before or after the death of the testator, unless he has provided
otherwise.30 There are two secondary rules, however, which we must
remember in relation to this rule. They are:
(1) If the condition had already been fulfilled at the time of
the execution of the will and the testator was unaware thereof, it
shall be deemed to have been complied with.31 Thus, if the condition
imposed upon the instituted heir A is that he must get married to
B, and at the time of the execution of the will the two were already
married without the testator’s knowledge, the condition shall be
deemed to have been complied with.
(2) If the condition has already been fulfilled at the time of
the execution of the will and the testator had knowledge thereof,
the condition shall, as a rule, still have to be complied with, unless
it is of such a nature that it can no longer exist or be complied with

Art. 876, Civil Code.
Art. 877, par. 1, Civil Code.
31
Art. 877, par. 2, Civil Code.
29
30

223

ART. 879

SUCCESSION

again.32 This exception is illustrated by the case of an heir who is
instituted subject to the condition that he must first get married
when, as a matter of fact, the testator is well aware at the time of
the execution of the will that he was already married. It is evident
in this case that the condition is of such a nature that it cannot be
complied with; consequently, it is considered fulfilled. However, if
the heir becomes a widower before the death of the testator, then
the general rule will still have to apply; in other words, in order to
be entitled to the inheritance, he must get married again.
It will be observed that there is a fundamental difference
between a potestative condition and a casual or mixed condition with
respect to the time of fulfillment of the event which constitutes the
condition. A potestative condition imposed upon an heir, devisee or
legatee must be fulfilled by him as soon as he learns of the testator’s
death; a casual or mixed condition may be fulfilled before or after
the testator’s death. The reason for this difference lies in the special
nature of both kinds of condition. By its very nature, a potestative
condition should be complied with after the death of the testator,
because until then the will on which it depends may be modified or
even revoked. In other words, until the testator dies, there is really
no condition with which the heir, devisee or legatee could comply, or
as Sanchez Roman puts it, the conditional testamentary disposition
is merely in potentia. It is different in the case of a casual or mixed
condition. Since its fulfillment is independent of or only partly
dependent upon the will of the heir, devisee or legatee, it is sufficient
that it happens or be fulfilled at anytime before or after the death
of the testator. It is, therefore, immaterial to the testator when
the condition is fulfilled, unless knowing that said condition has
already been complied with, he should again demand the fulfillment
thereof.33
Idem; Rule in negative potestative conditions. — Art. 879
refers to potestative conditions which are negative in character. In
other words, it refers to those potestative conditions which consist
in not doing or not giving something, as distinguished from positive
conditions which consist in doing or giving something. According to
Manresa, if the potestative condition is negative in character, there

32
33

Art. 877, par. 3, Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 247; 6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., p. 618.

224

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 880

is neither reason nor motive for delaying the delivery of the property
to the heir, devisee or legatee since the effectivity of the right of
such heir, devisee or legatee does not have to depend upon any act
of the latter nor upon the fulfillment of any other requisite. In other
words, the right of the heir, devisee or legatee does not have to be
held in suspense as in the case of the heir, devisee or legatee whose
right is subject to a positive condition; he acquires his right as a
matter of course without any limitation other than that of not doing
or not giving something.34 For this reason, the Code authorizes the
immediate delivery of the property to the heir, devisee or legatee.
However, in order that such heir, devisee or legatee shall not perform
or give that which is prohibited, he is required to give a security or
bond, which in Roman law was known as “caucion muciana.” In case
the mandate or order of the testator is violated, the heir, devisee or
legatee shall return whatever he may have received, together with
its fruits and interests. In case he cannot, the security shall have
to answer for the deficiency. Until the condition is violated he shall
continue in the possession and enjoyment of the property.
Who can demand for the constitution of the bond or security?
Even if the article does not say so, it is clear that this bond or security
is constituted in favor of those to whom the property would pass in
the event that the testator’s mandate is not complied with. Hence,
it is but logical that these same persons must have the right to
demand for the constitution of the bond or security.35 Consequently,
they can compel the heir, devisee or legatee to file the required bond
or security, and if such heir, devisee or legatee fails to do so, then
he shall be placed in the same position as an heir, devisee or legatee
instituted or appointed under a suspensive condition, in which case,
according to the second paragraph of Art. 880, the estate shall be
placed under administration until the security is given or until it is
certain that it will be impossible to perform that which is prohibited
by the testator.
Art. 880. If the heir be instituted under a suspensive condition
or term, the estate shall be placed under administration until the
condition is fulfilled, or until it becomes certain that it cannot be
fulfilled, or until the arrival of the term.
34
35

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 261.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 262.

225

ART. 881

SUCCESSION

The same shall be done if the heir does not give the security
required in the preceding article.36
Art. 881. The appointment of the administrator of the estate
mentioned in the preceding article, as well as the manner of the
administration and the rights and obligations of the administrator
shall be governed by the Rules of Court.37
Suspensive and Resolutory Conditions. — As regards
their effects, a condition may be either suspensive or resolutory.
A suspensive condition may be defined as a condition upon the
fulfillment of which successional rights arising from an institution of
heir or from a devise or legacy are acquired. A resolutory condition,
on the other hand, may be defined as a condition upon the fulfillment
of which rights already acquired by virtue of an institution of heir
or of a devise or legacy are extinguished or lost. In the first, the
effectivity of the institution of heir, devise or legacy depends upon
the fulfillment of the condition, while in the second the testamentary
disposition is already effective but subject to the threat of extinction.
Thus, if A is instituted as heir if he gets married, and B is appointed
as legatee with respect to certain properties if he passes the bar
examination in his first attempt, the condition in both cases is
suspensive in character. In order that A and B will be entitled to
claim their rights arising from the institution of heir and from the
legacy, it is essential that the condition shall be complied with. The
effect of a resolutory condition, on the other hand, is diametrically
opposed to that of a suspensive condition. Thus, if a widow had been
designated as heir by the deceased spouse subject to the conditions
that she will not get married again, the condition is resolutory in
character. Upon the death of the testator, she acquires her rights
as heir immediately. However, if the condition is fulfilled, i.e., if she
contracts a second marriage, her rights are extinguished.
It is, therefore, clear that when the institution of heir or the
devise or legacy is subject to a suspensive condition, such condition
has the effect of suspending not only the demandability of the right,
but the right itself. Consequently, what is acquired by the heir,
devisee or legatee is only a mere hope or expectancy. It is, however,

36
37

Art. 801, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 804, Spanish Civil Code.

226

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ART. 882

a hope or expectancy that is protected by the law. This is evident
from the provisions of Arts. 880 and 881 of the Code.
Thus, if A is instituted as heir subject to the condition that
he shall get married to B within a period of five years from the
time of the death of the testator, the condition is suspensive in
character. Pending its fulfillment, the estate, after the death of the
testator, shall be placed under administration in accordance with
the provision of Art. 880. Hence, an administrator who will take
charge of the estate shall have to be appointed. This appointment of
the administrator, as well as the manner of administration and the
rights and obligations of the said administrator shall be governed
by Rules 78 to 90 of the New Rules of Court. The administration
shall last until the condition is fulfilled or it becomes certain that it
cannot be fulfilled. If B gets married to some person other than A,
it is logical that the administration shall be terminated. The estate
shall, therefore, pass to those who are legally entitled to the same,
such as the legal heirs.
As noted above, when the institution of heir or the devise or
legacy is subject to a resolutory condition, the rights of the heir,
devisee or legatee are acquired immediately upon the death of the
testator. These rights, however, are subject to the threat of extinction.
If the event which constitutes the resolutory condition happens or
is fulfilled, such rights are extinguished or lost. The inheritance or
the devise or legacy shall, therefore, pass to those who are legally
entitled to the same, as for instance, the legal heirs.38
Art. 882. The statement of the object of the institution, or
the application of the property left by the testator, or the charge
imposed by him, shall not be considered as a condition unless it
appears that such was his intention.
That which has been left in this manner may be claimed at
once provided that the instituted heir or his heirs give security
for compliance with the wishes of the testator and for the return
of anything he or they may receive, together with its fruits and
interests, if he or they should disregard this obligation.39

38
39

See Art. 1179, et seq., Civil Code.
Art. 797, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

227

ART. 882

SUCCESSION

Institution Modal. — A mode may be defined as the statement
of the object of the institution, or the application of the property left
by the testator, or the charge imposed by him. Consequently, if the
testator attaches to an institution of heir, or to a devise or legacy a
statement of (1) the object of the institution of heir or of the devise or
legacy, or (2) the application of the inheritance, devise or legacy, or
(3) a charge upon the heir, devisee or legatee, the institution or the
devise or legacy is modal, not conditional, in character.40
A mode, therefore, should not be confused with a condition.
While a condition suspends, but does not obligate, a mode obligates,
but does not suspend.41 Thus, if A is instituted as heir if he passes
the bar examination in his first attempt, it is evident that the
institution in his first attempt, it is evident that the institution is
conditional, since the right of the heir, as well as its demandability,
is suspended until he passes the bar examination. If, on the other
hand, B is given as legacy P10,000 with a charge of applying onehalf of the amount for masses, prayers and other pious words, the
legacy is not conditional; it is merely subject to a mode or obligation.
There are cases, however, where it is difficult to distinguish one from
the other. In case of doubt, the institution, devise or legacy must be
considered as modal.42
Idem; Fulfillment or compliance. — The person or persons
who are entitled to demand compliance with the mode or obligation
are those who are directly interested in the obligation. If no person
is directly interested in its fulfillment, or the identity of the person
interested cannot be determined, the obligation is a mere advise or
recommendation of the testator without any coercive force. In other
words, it becomes a mere imperfect obligation of the heir, devisee or
legatee.43
When may the inheritance or property be claimed by the heir,
devisee or legatee? According to Art. 882, the delivery or payment
of the inheritance, devise or legacy can be claimed immediately.
However, it is a necessary condition before delivery or payment is
Art. 882, Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 248. Another distinction given by the illustrious commentator is with regard to the expression used — “si” para expresar la condicion “ut”
para el modo. (p. 224).
42
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p_ 224; see Chiang Joc-Soy vs. Vano, 8 Phil. 119.
43
6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., pp. 620-621.
40
41

228

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Conditional Testamentary Dispositions

ARTS. 883-884

to be made that the instituted heir, or the devisee or legatee, or the
heirs of such heir, devisee or legatee shall file a bond as security for
the performance or fulfillment of the obligation. In case of failure to
comply with the mode or obligation, the heir, devisee or legatee shall
be compelled to return whatever he may have received by virtue of
the institution or of the devise or legacy, together with its fruits or
interests. In case he cannot, the bond or security can be made to
answer for any deficiency.
Art. 883. When without the fault of the heir, an institution
referred to in the preceding article cannot take effect in the exact
mariner stated by the testator, it shall be complied with in a manner
most analogous to and in conformity with his wishes.
If the person interested in the condition should prevent its
fulfillment, without the fault of the heir, the condition shall be
deemed to have been complied with.44
Manner of Fulfillment or Compliance. — The provision of
Art. 883 as arranged is defective. Apparently, the first paragraph is
applicable only to instituciones sub modo, while the second paragraph
is applicable only to conditional testamentary dispositions. It is,
however, submitted that both paragraphs are applicable whether
the institution of heirs, devise or legacy is modal or conditional in
character.
A distinction must be made with respect to the application of
the doctrine of constructive fulfillment as enunciated in the first
paragraph when applied to conditional testamentary dispositions.
If the condition is casual, the doctrine is evidently not applicable
since the fulfillment of the event which constitutes the condition is
independent of the will of the heir, devisee or legatee. However, if
the condition is potestative or mixed, the doctrine is applicable.45
Art. 884. Conditions imposed by the testator upon the
heirs shall be governed by the rules established for conditional
obligations in all matters not provided for by this Section.46

Art. 798, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
6 Sanchez Roman, 2nd Ed., pp. 618-619.
46
Art. 791, Spanish Civil Code.
44
45

229

ART. 885

SUCCESSION

Art. 885. The designation of the day or time when the effects of
the institution of an heir shall commence or cease shall be valid.
In both cases, the legal heir shall be considered as called to
the succession until the arrival of the period or its expiration. But
in the first case he shall not enter into possession of the property
until after having given sufficient security, with the intervention of
the instituted heir.47
Testamentary Dispositions With a Term. — Testamentary
dispositions with a term or period are those demandability or
extinguishment are subject to the expiration of a term or period.
Consequently, a term or period, as applied to testamentary dispositions, may be defined as an interval of time, which, exerting
an influence upon a testamentary disposition as a consequence of
a juridical act, either suspends its demandability or produces its
extinguishment.
A term or period may be either suspensive (ex die) or resolutory
(in diem). It is suspensive when the rights of the instituted heir,
devisee or legatee to the inheritance, devise or legacy are suspended
until the arrival of the date or time designated by the testator; it is
resolutory when such rights are immediately demandable, although
they are extinguished upon the arrival of the date or time designated
by the testator.48
Idem; Rule if term is suspensive. — If the institution of heir
or the devise or legacy is subject to a suspensive term, the term shall
suspend the effects of the institution or of the devise or legacy. In
other words, the heir, devisee or legatee can demand for the delivery
of the inheritance, devise or legacy only upon the expiration of the
term or period. Stated in another way, the right of the heir, devisee
or legatee is acquired at the time of the death of the testator, but the
demandability of the right itself is suspended until the arrival of the
date or time designated by the testator. Thus, if a parcel of land is
devised to A, but it is stated in the will that the said land shall be
delivered to him only after the expiration of a term or period of five
years to be counted from the time of the death of the testator, there
is no question that A shall acquire a right to the land immediately

47
48

Art. 805, Spanish Civil Code.
Arts. 885, 1193, Civil Code.

230

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 885

upon the death of the testator; however, he can demand for its
delivery only upon the expiration of the designated term or period.
Pending the arrival of the date or time designated by the
testator, the inheritance, devise or legacy shall be given to the legal
or intestate heirs of the said testator in conformity with the rule
stated in the first sentence of the second paragraph of Art. 885.
However, these legal heirs shall not enter into the possession of the
property without giving sufficient security, with the intervention of
the instituted heir or of the devisee or legatee. It must be noted that
this provision directly conflicts with the provision of Art. 880. As Mr.
Justice J.B.L. Reyes has so succinctly stated:
“Art. 880 conflicts with Art. 885. Under Art. 880, if the
heir be instituted under a suspensive condition ‘or term’ the estate is placed under administration; under Art. 885, par. 2, the
legal (i.e., intestate) heir is considered called ‘until the arrival of
the period.’ Now, who will it be? The administrator or the legal
heir?
‘In its prototype, Art. 805 of the Code of 1889 (now Art.
880), the rule was limited to suspensive conditions only, because
suspensive periods were governed by Art. 805 (now Art. 885).
Some unknown genius in the Code Commission inserted ‘or
term’ in Art. 880, and created a contradiction where there was
none. Consequently, the words ‘or term’ in line 2, and ‘or until
the arrival of the term’ in lines 4 and 5 (at the end of the first
paragraph), of Art. 880 must be eliminated.’’49

There is, however, one instance where it is possible to apply the
provision of Art. 880. If the legal heirs cannot file the required bond
or security, then the inheritance or property shall have to be placed
under administration.
Idem; Id. — Transmissibility of rights. — If the instituted
heir or the devisee or legatee should die before the expiration of
the suspensive term or period, his right to the inheritance, devise
or legacy shall be transmitted to his own heirs. This principle is
now enshrined in Art. 878. It must be noted, however, that in order
that this rule shall be applicable, the heir, devisee or legatee should

49
49 Observations on the New Civil Code, Lawyer’s Journal, pp. 555-558, Nov.
30, 1950.

231

ART. 886

SUCCESSION

have died after the death of the testator, but before the expiration
of the term or period. This rule is of course in conformity with the
principle that if the institution of heir or the devise or legacy is with
a suspensive term, what is suspended by the term or period is not
the acquisition of the right to the inheritance, devise or legacy, but
merely the demandability of the right itself.
Idem; Rule if term is resolutory. — If the institution of
heir or the devise or legacy is subject to a resolutory term, the heir,
devisee or legatee can demand immediately for the delivery of the
inheritance, devise or legacy. However, after the expiration of the
designated term or period, his rights thereto are terminated. As a
consequence, the inheritance, devise or legacy shall pass to the legal
heirs of the testator. Thus, if a parcel of land is devised to X, but it
is stated in the will that he shall enjoy the land only for a period
of five years after the death of the testator, the devise is subject
to a resolutory term. Upon the expiration of the term of five years
after the death of the testator, the property shall pass to the legal
heirs of the said testator in accordance with the rules of intestate
succession.

Section 5. — Legitime
Art. 886. Legitime is that part of the testator’s property which
he cannot dispose of because the law has reserved it for certain
heirs who are, therefore, called compulsory heirs.1
Concept of Legitime. — Under the Spanish Civil Code as
well as under our Code, the legitime is defined as that part of the
testator’s property which he cannot dispose of because the law has
reserved it for certain heirs who are, therefore, called compulsory
heirs.2 From this definition, it is clear that a part or portion of the
hereditary estate is to a certain extent withdrawn from the patrimony
of the testator so that he can no longer dispose of it by any gratuitous
title, although he can still enjoy it. According to Manresa, this is the
distinctive nature or characteristic of the system of legitime.3 This
Art. 806, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 886, Civil Code.
3
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 291-292.
1
2

232

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 886

limited withdrawal from the testator’s patrimony is due to the fact
that the legitime is already reserved by operation of law for certain
heirs who are, therefore called compulsory heirs. Thus, the Supreme
Court, describing the interest which a son has in the estate of his
father, once stated:
“It is undeniable that a necessary or forced heir, according
to the system of legitimes, has, by provision of law, from the time
of his birth, a vested right to acquire the inheritance from his
ascendants after their death and such a vested right is inherent
with his legitimate filiation to which belong the obligations and
rights of the author of his being. The son and the father are in
some respects co-owners of the property of the latter.”4

The avowed purpose of the system of legitime is of course
to protect compulsory heirs. It is always possible that a man or a
woman may forget his or her parental, filial or conjugal obligations.
The law, by reserving a part or portion of the testator’s estate for the
benefit of compulsory heirs, is thus able to protect such heirs from
his or her anger or neglect.
As it is, the system of legitime, as adopted in the New Civil Code,
is still fundamentally the same as that found in the Spanish Code.
There are, however, certain changes. Among the most important
changes are the following: (1) The legitime of the surviving spouse
has been converted from usufruct into full ownership; (2) illegitimate
children other than acknowledged natural have been given a regular
legitime. Children of void marriages are considered natural children
by legal fiction and receive the same legitime as acknowledged
natural children. And other illegitimate children are each entitled
to a share equal to four-fifths of that of an acknowledged natural
child (Under the Family Code, however, all illegitimate children are
simply referred to as illegitimate children. Furthermore, the legitime
of each illegitimate child is one-half the legitime of a legitimate
child); and (3) the “mejora” or betterment has been abolished, but
the free portion has been increased to one-half, so that the testator
may give part or all of it to his legitimate children or descendants,
or to his spouse, or to third persons.5

4
5

Rocha vs. Tuason, 39 Phil. 976.
Report of the Code Commission, p. 54.

233

ART. 887

SUCCESSION

Kinds of Legitime. — Under our system of compulsory
succession, the legitime of compulsory heirs may be either fixed or
variable. It is fixed if the aliquot part of the testator’s estate to which
a certain class of compulsory heirs is entitled by operation of law is
always the same whether they survive alone or with other classes of
compulsory heirs; it is variable if the aliquot part changes depending
upon whether they survive alone or with other classes of compulsory
heirs. Thus, the legitime of legitimate children or descendants and
legitimate parents or ascendants is always one-half of the testator’s
estate, while that of the other classes of compulsory heirs depends
upon whether they survive as a class or they concur with other
classes of compulsory heirs.
Art. 887. The following are compulsory heirs:
(1) Legitimate children and descendants, with respect to
their legitimate parents and ascendants;
(2) In default of the foregoing, legitimate parents and ascendants, with respect to their legitimate children and descendants;
(3)

The widow or widower;

(4) Acknowledged natural children and natural children by
legal fiction;
(5)

Other illegitimate children referred to in Article 287.

Compulsory heirs mentioned in Nos. 3, 4 and 5 are not excluded by those in Nos. 1 and 2; neither do they exclude one another.
In all cases of illegitimate children, their filiation must be duly
proved.
The father or mother of illegitimate children of the three
classes mentioned, shall inherit from them in the manner and to
the extent established by this Code.6
Compulsory Heirs. — In general, compulsory heirs are those
heirs for whom the law has reserved that part of the testator’s estate

6

Art. 867, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

234

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 887

known as the legitime.7 As such, testator cannot disregard them.
These heirs are enumerated in Art. 887 of the Code.
Thus, if the testator is a legitimate person, his compulsory
heirs under Art. 887 of the Civil Code are the following:
(1)
(2)
dants;
(3)

Legitimate children and descendants;
In default of the foregoing, legitimate parents and ascenThe widow or widower;

(4) Acknowledged natural children and natural children by
legal fiction; and
(5)

Acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural.

(Please see comments on illegitimate children for nos. 4 and 5
of this enumeration.)
On the other hand, if the testator is an illegitimate person, his
compulsory heirs are the following:
(1)

Legitimate children and descendants;

(2) Acknowledged natural children and natural children by
legal fiction;
(3)

Acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural;

(4)

In default of all the foregoing, parents by nature; and

(5)

The widow or widower.

(Please see comments on illegitimate children for nos. 2 and 3
of this enumeration.)
Kinds of Compulsory Heirs. — The compulsory heirs as
enumerated in Art. 887 may be classified into primary compulsory
heirs and secondary compulsory heirs. Primary compulsory heirs
are those who are always entitled to their legitime as provided by
law regardless of the class of compulsory heirs with which they may
concur, while secondary compulsory heirs are those who may be
excluded by other compulsory heirs. The first includes all kinds of

7

See Art. 886, Civil Code.

235

ART. 887

SUCCESSION

compulsory heirs with the exception of parents or ascendants, while
the second embraces only parents or ascendants.
Idem; Legitimate children or descendants. — This class
includes legitimate children or descendants proper,8 legitimated
children or descendants,9 and adopted children.10 As a rule, adopted
children are entitled to the same successional rights as legitimate
children.11 There are, however, two well-known exceptions. Thus, if
the adopter is survived by his legitimate parents or ascendants and by
his adopted child, the latter shall not have more successional rights
than an acknowledged natural child.12 Furthermore, if the adopter
dies before his legitimate parent or ascendant, or is incapacitated
to inherit from such parent or ascendant, or is disinherited by
such parent or ascendant, unlike a legitimate child, the adopted
child cannot inherit by right of representation from the parent or
ascendant. The basis of this exception is evident. Adoption merely
creates a relationship similar to that of legitimate paternity and
filiation between adopter and adopted child. It does not create any
relationship between the adopted child and the legitimate relatives
of the adopter.
Idem; Widow or widower. — Under the old law, the widow
or widower was entitled merely to a usufructuary right; under the
present law, she or he is now entitled to all of the rights of a primary
compulsory heir. However, if there is a decree of legal separation,
the guilty spouse can no longer be considered as a compulsory heir
of the innocent spouse, since one of the effects of the decree is to
disqualify the former from inheriting from the latter.13
The surviving spouse cannot claim to be a compulsory heir of
her or his parent-in-law under Art. 887(3). The aforesaid provision
refers to the estate of the deceased spouse in which case the surviving
spouse (widow or widower) is a compulsory heir. It does not apply to
the estate of a parent-in-law.

Art. 264, Civil Code.
Art. 272, Civil Code.
10
See Art. 39, Child and Youth Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603).
11
Ibid.
12
Ibid.
13
Arts.106, 892, Civil Code.
8
9

236

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 887

Idem; illegitimate children. — Under the New Civil Code
there are three kinds of illegitimate children who are classified
as primary compulsory heirs. They are: (1) acknowledged natural
children; (2) natural children by legal fiction; and (3) acknowledged
illegitimate children who are not natural.14
The first includes all natural children who may have been
acknowledged either voluntarily15 or by a final judgment of a
competent court.16 Consequently, a natural child who has not been
acknowledged is not a compulsory heir. In other words, in relation to
his presumed parent, he has no successional right whatsoever. This is
the settled rule in this jurisdiction.17 It is, however, possible that even
when the testator is already dead, a natural child not acknowledged
may still participate in the inheritance by maintaining a complex
action to compel recognition and at the same time to obtain relief in
the character of heir.18 But such an action would be possible only in
those exceptional cases provided by law.19
The second includes all of those children born or conceived of
void marriage as well as those conceived of voidable marriages after
the decree of annulment. By express provision of law, such children
shall have the same status, rights and obligations as acknowledged
natural children.20 Consequently, they are also primary compulsory
heirs. Since their status is conferred upon them by operation of law,
recognition by the testator is not necessary. However, according to
Art. 887 of the Code, proof of filiation is still required.21
The third includes all illegitimate children other than natural
children in accordance with Art. 269 and other than natural children

14
Prior to the effectivity of the Family Code, the term ‘spurious children’ is still
used, although it is not exactly accurate because the other kinds of spurious children
recognised under the old Code are no longer recognized under the new. That is why
the law calls such children “other illegitimate children referred to in Art. 287’’ (Art.
887) and the Supreme Court, in recent cases, calls them illegitimate children not
natural.”
15
Art. 278, Civil Code.
16
Arts. 283, 284, Civil Code.
17
Canales vs. Arrogante, 91 Phil 6.
18
Briz vs. Briz, 43 Phil. 763; Lopez vs. Lopez, 68 Phil. 227; Escoval vs. Escoval, 48
Off. Gaz. 615; Coquia vs. Coquia, (CA), 50 Off. Gaz. 3701.
19
Art. 285, Civil Code.
20
Art. 89, Civil Code.
21
Art. 887, Civil Code.

237

ART. 887

SUCCESSION

by legal fiction. In other words, they are those children born outside
of wedlock of parents who, at the time the conception of the former,
were disqualified by some impediment to marry each other. Under
the law, this class of illegitimate children shall be entitled to support
and such successional rights as are granted in the Civil Code. These
rights, however, are predicated on the fact that there must be either
voluntary or compulsory recognition by the putative parent. This
now is well-settled in this jurisdiction.22
Contrary to the provisions of the New Civil Code, the Family
Code provisions limit the classification of children to only the legitimate and the illegitimate children. Thus, the further classification of illegitimate children to (1) acknowledged natural children; (2)
natural children by legal fiction; and (3) acknowledged illegitimate
children who are not natural; was thereby eliminated. Now, all illegitimate children are simply referred to as illegitimate children.
Under the Family Code, illegitimate children, like legitimate
children, are given their status as such from the moment of birth.
Hence, there is no need for illegitimate children to file the action for
recognition if they have been recognized by their parents by any of
the evidences enumerated in Art. 172 of the Family Code. Where
the illegitimate children are required to establish their illegitimate
filiation, they can do so in the same way and by the said evidences.
As stated in the case of Edna Padilla Mangulabnan as guardian ad
litem for minor Alfie Angelo Acero vs. the Honorable Intermediate
Appellate Court and Ambrosio Tan Chen Acerto (G.R. No. 71994,
May 31, 1990) and the case of Victoria U. Baluyut, Ma. Theresa U.
Baluyut and Ma. Flordeliza U. Baluyut, all minors, represented by
their mother and guardian ad litem, Norma Urbano vs. Felicidad S.
Baluyut and Hon. Court of Appeals (G.R. No. L-33659, June 14, 1990),
filiation may be proved by the voluntary or compulsory recognition
of the illegitimate child. Recognition is voluntary when made by the
putative parent in the record of birth, a will, a statement before a
court of record or in any authentic writing (Art. 278, Civil Code).
(Under the Family Code, however, private instruments signed by
the putative parent is acceptable to establish the child’s filiation.
22
Paulino vs. Paulino, 3 SCRA 730; Rep. of the Philippines vs. Workmen’s Compensation Commission, 13 SCRA 272; Noble vs. Noble, 18 SCRA 1104; Divinagracia vs.
Rovira, 72 SCRA 307. See also Vda. de Clemena vs. Clemena, 24 SCRA 720.

238

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 887

Such documents need not be limited to authentic public document as
required by Art. 265 of the New Civil Code) Filiation may be proved
by compulsory recognition under Art. 283 of the Civil Code or when
by court action, the child brings out his recognition.
The following children are illegitimate under Art. 165 of the
Family Code:
(1) Children born of couples who are not legally married, or
of common-law marriages;
(2)

Children born of bigamous or polygamous marriages;

(3) Children born of adulterous relations between the
parents;
(4) Children born of couples below 18 years old, whether they
are married (but which marriage is void) or not;
(5) Children born of other void marriages under Art. 35 of the
Family Code. This excludes marriages solemnized by any person not
legally authorized to perform marriages but such marriages were
contracted with either or both parties believing in good faith that
the solemnizing officer had the legal authority to do so;
(6) Children born of incestuous marriages under Art. 37 of
the Family Code;
(7) Children born of marriages void for reasons of public
policy under Art. 38 of the Family Code.
However, children of marriages void under (i) Art. 36 of the
Family Code (because either of the parties to the marriage was
psychologically incapacitated to comply with the essential marital
obligations of marriage); and (ii) Art. 53 of the Family Code (because
either of the former spouses who marries again fails to comply with
such requirements as recording in the appropriate civil registry and
registry of property the judgment of annulment of marriage, the
partition and distribution of the properties of the spouses, and the
delivery of the children’s presumptive legitime), are legitimate.
Ideas; Parents or ascendants. — Legitimate parents or
ascendants are classified as secondary compulsory heirs because of
the fact that under our law, they cannot inherit from their child or
descendant if they concur with legitimate children or descendants of
the latter. It must be noted, however, that while they can be excluded
239

ART. 887

SUCCESSION

by the presence of legitimate children or descendants, they cannot
be excluded by the presence of adopted children. This is so, because
of the provision of No. 4 of Art 39 of the Child and Youth Welfare
Code (P.D. No. 603), which has superseded Art. 343 of the New Civil
Code, and which states that if the adopter is survived by legitimate
parents or ascendants and by the adopted child, the latter shall not
have more successional rights than an acknowledged natural child.
Illegitimate parents are also classified as secondary, compulsory heirs because of the fact that under our law, they cannot inherit
from their illegitimate child if they concur with children or descendants of the latter, whether legitimate or illegitimate. Thus, if the
testator, who is an illegitimate child, is survived by his children and
his illegitimate parents, the latter are excluded altogether from the
succession by the presence of the former regardless of their legitimacy or illegitimacy.23
If the testator happens to be an adopted person, may the
adopter also be classified as a secondary compulsory heir? So long
as the adopted person is survived by his parents by nature, whether
legitimate or illegitimate, the adopter cannot be classified as a
secondary compulsory heir. There is, however, an instance where he
may be classified as such. According to the last paragraph of No. 4 of
Art. 39 of the Child and Youth Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603):
“The adopter shall not be a legal heir of the adopted person, whose parents by nature shall inherit from him, except that
if the latter are both dead, the adopting parent or parents take
the place of the natural parents in the line of succession.”

Although the law uses the term “legal heir,” nevertheless, because of
the qualifying phrase “whether testate or intestate” at the end of the
provision, it is evident that it also refers to compulsory heirs.
(Note: The abovequoted provision of the Child and Youth
Welfare Code is an example of very bad codification. Suppose
that the testator is an adopted person, and he is survived by
his legitimate grandparents and the adopter, what will happen
then? Shall the grandparents be excluded? Unfortunately, the
law is explicit, too explicit as a matter of fact. The adopter shall

23

Art. 903, Civil Code.

240

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 888

take the place of the deceased parents of the testator in the line
of succession. That means that the grandparents shall be excluded. Only the adopter shall be classified as a compulsory heir
of the adopted. He shall, therefore, be entitled to a legitime of
one-half (1/2) of the entire estate of the adopted. This is clearly
unjust.)

Under Art. 190 of the Family Code, when parents (legitimate
or illegitimate), or the legitimate ascendants of the adopted concur
with the adopters, they shall divide the entire estate, that is, onehalf to be inherited by the parents or ascendants and the other half
by the adopters.
Problem — Don died after executing a Last Will and Testament leaving his estate valued at P12 Million to his commonlaw wife Roshelle. He is survived by his brother, Ronnie and his
half-sister Michelle.
1. Was Don’s testamentary disposition of his estate in
accordance with the law on succession? Explain your answer.
2. Assuming further that he died intestate, survived by
his father Juan, his brother Ronie, his half-sister Michelle and
his legitimate son Jayson. How will you distribute his estate?
Explain.
Answer – 1. Yes. Don’s testamentary disposition of his estate is in accordance with the law on succession. Don has no
compulsory heirs not having ascendants, descendants nor a
spouse (Art. 887, NCC). Brothers and sisters are not compulsory
heirs. Thus, he can bequeath his entire estate to anyone who is
not otherwise incapacitated to inherit from him. A common-law
wife is not incapacitated under the law as Don is not married to
anyone.
2. Jayson will still be entitled to the entire P12 Million
as the father, brother and sister will be exluded by a legitimate
son of the decedent (Art. 887, NCC). This follows the principle
that the descendants exclude the ascendants from inheritance.
(Suggested Answers to the 2006 Bar Examination Questions,
PALS)

Art. 888. The legitime of legitimate children and descendants
consists of one-half of the hereditary estate of the father and of
the mother.
241

ART. 888

SUCCESSION

The latter may freely dispose of the remaining half, subject to
the rights of illegitimate children and of the surviving spouse as
hereinafter provided.24
Legitime of Legitimate Descendants. — Under our present
Code, the legitime of legitimate children and descendants consists
of one-half of the hereditary estate of their legitimate parents or
ascendants, while the other half is at the latter’s free disposal. This
half for free disposal may be given by the testator to his legitimate
children or descendants or to any other person not disqualified by
law to inherit from him, and subject to the rights of the surviving
spouse and illegitimate children.25 This arrangement of the testator’s
hereditary estate is very different from that found in the old Code.
Under the Spanish Code, the legitime of legitimate children and
descendants consists of two-thirds of the hereditary estate of their
legitimate parents or ascendants, the latter being allowed to dispose
of one of the two-thirds parts in order to give it as a mejora or
betterment to one or more of their children or descendants.26 Hence,
the legitime of legitimate children and descendants is divided into
two parts — the strict legitime and the mejora or betterment. The
strict legitime is one-third of the estate of the testator, while the
mejora is likewise one-third. Taken together, they comprise what
is known as the long legitime. The remaining one-third is at the
testator’s free disposal. Under this arrangement the testator has
no control over one-third of his estate, limited control over another
third, and absolute control over the remainder. It will thus be seen
that this arrangement has been completely revamped in the New
Civil Code. The mejora or betterment, which is a distinctive feature
of the law of succession under the Spanish Code, has been eliminated
entirely, although the equivalents of the strict legitime and the free
portion have been increased correspondingly. This elimination of the
mejora, according to the Code Commission, is due to the following
reasons:

Art. 808, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 888, Civil Code. As it is, the one-half free portion is not really free because
it is subject to the rights of the surviving spouse and illegitimate children. A distinction, therefore, must be made between the free portion and the disposable (free)
portion. The latter is that which remains after satisfying the legitimes of the surviving
spouse and the illegitimate children.
26
Arts. 808, 823, Spanish Civil Code.
24
25

242

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 889

(1) The supposed equalization of natural inequalities among
children through the system of the “mejora” is in many cases but
imaginary, because parents often act upon other bases, such as
rewarding the better qualities of character of one of the children.
(2) Such reward may be effected by the father or mother by
disposing of part or all of the free half.
(3) The testator should have greater freedom to dispose of
his estate by will. Under the Spanish Code, the free portion is only
one-third of the estate. The testator should be allowed greater scope
to decide for himself how far he shall pay his debts of gratitude to
persons other than his children and descendants.27
Idem; Rules of division. — Although Art. 888 does not
provide any rule by which legitimate children and descendants may
divide the legitime in case there are several of them of different
degrees concurring in the succession, it is clear that the rule of
proximity enunciated in Art. 962 of the Code is the rule that shall
apply. According to this article, in every inheritance, the relative
nearest in degree excludes the more distant ones, saving the right
of representation when it properly takes place. Thus, if the testator
is survived by (1) his children, A and B, and (2) his grandchildren,
C and D, children of B, it is evident that C and D are excluded by
the presence of their father, B, since they are more remote from the
testator. But if he is survived by (1) his children, A and B, (2) his
grandchildren, D and E, children of B, and (3) his grandchildren,
F and G, children of C, who died before him, the result is different.
Although, D and E are excluded by the presence of their father. B, F
and G are not excluded, because they shall represent their deceased
father, C, with regard to the legitime to which C would have been
entitled had he been living at the time of the death of the testator.28
Art. 889. The legitime of legitimate parents or descendants
consists of one-half of the hereditary estate of their children and
descendants.
The children or descendants may freely dispose of the
other half, subject to the rights of illegitimate children and of the
surviving spouse as hereinafter provided.29
Report of the Code Commission, pp. 114-115.
Art. 962, Civil Code.
29
Art. 859, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
27
28

243

ART. 890

SUCCESSION

Art. 890. The legitime reserved for the legitimate parents shall
be divided between them equally; if one of the parents should have
died, the whole shall pass to the survivor.
If the testator leaves neither father nor mother, but is survived
by ascendants of equal degree of the paternal and maternal lines,
the legitime shall be divided equally between both lines. If the
ascendants should be of different degrees, it shall pertain entirely
to the ones nearest in degree of either lines.30
Legitime of Legitimate Ascendants. — In default of
legitimate children or descendants, the legitime of legitimate parents
or ascendants consists of one-half of the hereditary estate of their
children or descendants, while the other half is for free disposal.
This half for free disposal may be given by testator to his legitimate
parents or ascendants or, if he so desires, to any other person not
disqualified by law to inherit from him, but subject to the rights of
the surviving spouse and illegitimate children.31
Again, it must be noted that legitimate parents or ascendants
are excluded from the succession if they concur with legitimate or
legitimated children or descendants. This is, however, not true if
they concur with an adopted child of the testator because of the
rule stated in Art. 343 of the Code to the effect that if the adopter
is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants and by an adopted
child, the latter shall not have more successional rights than an
acknowledged natural child. This constitutes an exception to the
general rule that an adopted child shall have the same successional
rights as a legitimate child.32 The reason for this, according to the
Code Commission, is that it would be unjust to exclude the adopter’s
parents or ascendants from the inheritance in favor of the adopted
child.33 Consequently, applying the rule stated in Art. 343, if the
testator is survived by his legitimate parents and an adopted child,
the legitime of the former shall consist of one-half of the hereditary
estate,34 while the legitime of the latter shall consist of one-fourth to

Art. 810, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 889, Civil Code.
32
Art. 341, Civil Code.
33
Report of the Code Commission, p. 92.
34
Art. 889, Civil Code.
30
31

244

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 890

be taken from the free portion thus leaving one-fourth of the entire
estate at the testator’s free disposal.35
Idem; Rules of Division. — The different rules of division
of the hereditary estate among legitimate parents or ascendants, if
several concur in the succession, may be restated as follows, using
as illustration the diagram below:
PGGF

PGF

PGM

MGM

F

MGM

M

TESTATOR
P80,000
(1) If the testator is survived by both parents, the legitime
shall be divided between them equally.36 Thus, if the testator is
survived by his parents, F and M, and the net remainder of his estate
is P80,000, their legitime consists of one-half of such net remainder,
or P40,000, which shall be divided between them equally.
(2) If one of the parents should have died before the testator,
the entire legitime shall pass to the survivor.37 Thus, if F died before
the testator, the entire legitime of P40,000 shall pass to M to the
exclusion of all the other ascendants.

Art. 896, Civil Code.
Art. 890, Civil Code.
37
Ibid.
35
36

245

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

(3) If both parents should have died before the testator and the
survivors are ascendants of the same degree, one-half of the legitime
shall pass to the ascendants of the maternal line.38 Thus, if F and
M, died before the testator and the only survivors are the paternal
grandparents, PGF and PGM, and the maternal grandparents, MGF
and MGM, the legitime of P40,000 shall be divided in such a way
that 1/2, or P20,000, shall pass to PGF and PGM which they shall
divide equally, while the other 1/2, or P20,000, shall pass to MGF
and MGM which they shall also divide equally. If the only survivors
are PGM, MGF, and MGM, the legitime shall be divided in such a
way that 1/2, or P20,000, shall pass to PGM alone, while the other
1/2, or P20,000, shall pass to MGF and MGM which they shall divide
equally.
(4) If both of the parents should have died before the testator
and the survivors are ascendants of different degrees, the legitime
shall pertain entirely to those nearest in degree of either line.39 Thus,
if F and M died before the testator and the only survivors are the
maternal grandmother, MGM, and the paternal great grandfather,
PGGF, the former shall be entitled to the entire legitime to the
exclusion of the latter.
Art. 891. The ascendant who inherits from his descendant
any property which the latter may have acquired by gratuitous
title from another ascendant, or a brother or sister, is obliged to
reserve such property as he may have acquired by operation of
law for the benefit of relatives who are within the third degree and
who belong to the line from which said property came.40
Reserva Troncal; Concept. — Reserva troncal or lineal may
be defined as the reservation by virtue of which an ascendant who
inherits from his descendant any property which the latter may have
acquired by gratuitous title from another ascendant, or a brother or
sister, is obliged to reserve such property as he may have acquired
by operation of law for the benefit of relatives who are within the
third degree and who belong to the line from which said property

Ibid.
Ibid.
40
Art. 811, Spanish Civil Code.
38
39

246

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

came.41 By its very nature, this reserva constitutes an exception to
the system of legitime as well as to the order of intestate succession
as recognized and regulated in our Code. Hence, commentators have
aptly described it as a reserva extraordinaria.
Historical Background. — Reserva troncal is the only
reserva which is recognized in the New Civil Code. However, in the
original project of the Code as drafted by the Code Commission the
provision of what is now Art. 891 was not included. As a matter of
fact, under the original plan all of the different kinds of reservas,
such as the reserva troncal under Art. 811 of the Spanish Code, the
reversion legal under Art. 81242 and the reserva viudal under Art.
986,43 had been eliminated altogether in conformity with one of the
underlying objectives of the law on succession, which is to prevent
property from being entailed.44 Nevertheless, during the discussion
of the project the provision of what is now Art. 891 was inserted by
congressional action. What is unfortunate, however, is the fact that
the supplementary provisions of Arts. 977 and 978 of the Spanish
Civil Code which regulate the rights and obligations of the reservista
and reservatario were not also inserted.
Purpose. — From the very name of the reserva itself, it is
apparent that the purpose of reserva troncal or lineal is to prevent
persons who are strangers to the family from acquiring, by some
chance or accident, property which otherwise would have remained
with the said family.45 This explains why the law requires that the
ascendant who is obliged to make the reservation should reserve the

Art. 891, Civil Code.
Ascendants succeed, to the exclusion of all other persons, to things given by them
to such if their children or descendants as have died without issue, when the same things
donated form part of the estate. Should they have been alienated, they shall succeed to
any right of action which the donee may have had with respect to them, and to the price
obtained therefor should they have been sold, or to the property by which they were substituted, if they were bartered or exchanged. (Art. 842, Spanish Civil Code).
43
Beside the reservation imposed by Article 811, any widower or widow who contracts a second marriage shall be obliged to reserve for the children and descendants of the
former marriage the ownership of all the property he or she may have acquired from the
deceased spouse by will, intestate succession, gift, or by any other gratuitous title, but
not his or her half of the profits of the conjugal partnership. (Art. 968, Spanish Civil
Code).
44
Report of the Code Commission, pp. 116-117.
45
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 319.
41
42

247

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

property for the benefit of relatives who are within the third degree
and who belong to the line from which the said property came.46
Requisites. — In order that there will be a reservation of the
property in accordance with the provision of Art. 891, the following
requisites must concur:
(1) The property should have been acquired by operation
of law by an ascendant from his descendant upon the death of the
latter;
(2) The property should have been previously acquired by
gratuitous title by the descendant from another ascendant or from a
brother or sister; and
(3) The descendant should have died without any legitimate
issue in the direct descending line who could inherit from him.
A fourth requisite is sometimes added — that there must be
relatives of the descendant who are within the third degree and who
belong to the line from which the property came. As a matter of fact,
it was so held by the Supreme Court, citing Dr. Padilla, in Chua vs.
CFI of Negros, Occidental (78 SCRA 412). It is submitted, however,
that this is not a requisite, but merely a resolutory condition to which
the reserva is subject. As stated by Morell, “the ascendant acquires
the property with a condition subsequent, to wit: whether or not
there exist at the time of his death relatives within the third degree
of the descendant in the line from whence the property proceeds. If
such relatives exist, they acquire ownership of the property at the
death of the ascendant. If they do not exist the ascendant can freely
dispose thereof.’’47

Art. 891, Civil Code.
Morell, Estudios Sobre Bienes Reservables, pp. 304-305, quoted in Edroso vs. Sablan,
25 Phil. 295, and in Nono vs. Nequia, 93 Ma 120.
46
47

248

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

The above requisites may be illustrated by the following
example:
GF

ORIGIN

A
B
RESERVATARIOS

F

M
RESERVISTA

P
PROPOSITUS
Before his death in 1950, GF donated a parcel of land to his
grandson, P, the only child of his deceased son, F. P died intestate in
1960 without any heir in the direct descending line, as a consequence
of which the land passed to his mother, M, in accordance with the
laws of intestate succession. Is the property reservable? It is evident
that the property in this particular case is reservable, because
all of the requisites for reservation are present. In the first place,
M, who is the ascendant reservista, had acquired the property by
operation of law from her descendant, P; in the second place, P, who
is the descendant-propositus, had previously acquired the property
by gratuitous title from another ascendant, his grandfather, GF,
who is the origin of the said property; and in the third place, the
descendant had died without any legitimate issue in the direct
descending line who could inherit from him. Consequently, from
the time of the death of the descendant-propositus, P, in 1960, the
ascendant, M, who acquired the property, is obliged to reserve it for
the benefit of relatives of the propositus who are within the third
degree and who belong to the line from which the said property came.
This reservable character of the property will, as a rule, terminate
upon the death of the ascendant-reservista. Thus, if we extend the
example by presupposing that M died in 1977, A and B, uncles of the
propositus, P, in the paternal line, can claim the property as their
own in accordance with the provision of Art. 891 of the Code.
Nature. — Although some commentators hold that the right of
the ascendant-reservista in the reservable property during the pendency or lifetime of the reserves is similar to that of the fiduciary in
249

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

fideicommissary substitutions48 and others maintain that it is exactly the same as that of a usufructuary, the ultimate or naked title being vested in the person in whose favor the reserva is established,49
the weight of authority, and this has been adopted in this jurisdiction, is to the effect that the ascendant-reservista acquires the ownership of the property subject to the resolutory condition that there
must exist relatives of the descendant-propositus who are within the
third degree and who belong to the line from which the said property came. If the condition is fulfilled, that is, if such relatives exist
after his death, the property passes, in accordance with this special
order of succession, to such relatives. But if the condition is not fulfilled, the property is released and will be adjudicated in accordance
with the regular order of succession.50 On the other hand, during
the whole period between the constitution of the reserva and the
extinction thereof, the reservatarios or relatives of the descendantpropositus within the third degree have only an expectation to the
property, an expectation which cannot be transmitted to their own
heirs, unless these heirs are also within the third degree.51 However,
upon the fulfillment of the condition to which the reserva is subject
this expectation is converted automatically and by operation of law
into an absolute right of ownership so that the property ceases altogether to be a part of the estate of the ascendant-reservista.52 Consequently, it cannot be held liable for the payment of debts of the
ascendant which are chargeable against his estate.
Edroso vs. Sablan
25 Phil. 255
The two parcels of land, which constitute the subject matter of this appeal, were inherited by Marcelina Edroso from her
son, Pedro Sablan, who died unmarried and without issue in
1902. The records show that these lands had been inherited by
Pedro from his father, Victorian Sablan, who died in 1882. After
the death of Pedro, Marcelina Edroso applied for registration of

14 Scaevola, 259-260; 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 321-324.
Alcubilla, cited in 6 Sanchez Roman 977; 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 321-324.
50
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 321-324; 6 Sanchez Roman 1934; Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil.
295; Lunsod vs. Ortega, 46 Phil. 664; Director of Lands vs. Aguas, 63 Phil. 279; Nono
vs. Nequia, 93 Phil. 120.
51
52 Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil. 295; 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 323-324; Morell, Estudios Sobre Bienes Reservables, pp. 304-305.
52
Cobardo vs. Villanueva, 44 Phil. 190; Cano vs. Director of Lands, 105 Phil. 1.
48
49

250

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

these disputed lands, but the application was opposed by two
paternal uncles of Pedro Sablan on the ground that said lands
are reservable in accordance with the provision of Art. 811 (now
Art. 891) of the Civil Code and, therefore, cannot be registered
in the applicant’s name, since she is merely a usufructuary. The
Supreme Court, however, held:
“The ascendant who inherits from a descendant, whether
by the latter’s wish or by operation of law, acquires the inheritance by virtue of a title perfectly transferring absolute ownership. All the attributes of the right of ownership belong to him
exclusively — use, enjoyment, disposal and recovery. This absolute ownership, which is inherent in the hereditary title, is not
altered, in the least, if there be no relatives within the third degree in the line whence the property proceeds or they die before
the ascendant heir who is the possessor and absolute owner of
the property. If there should be relatives within the third degree who belong to the line whence the property proceed, then
a limitation to that absolute ownership would arise. The nature
and scope of this limitation must be determined with exactness
in order not to vitiate rights that the law wishes to be effective.
The opinion which makes this limitation consist in reducing the
ascendant heir to the condition of a mere usufructuary, depriving him of the right of disposal and recovery, does not seem to
have any support in the law. There is marked difference between
the case where a man’s wish institutes two persons as his heirs,
one as usufructuary and the other as owner of his property, and
the case of the ascendant in Article 811 (now Art. 891). In the
first case there is not the slightest doubt that the title to the
hereditary property resides in the hereditary owner and only
he can dispose of and recover it, while the usufructuary can in
no way perform any act of disposal of the hereditary property
except that he may dispose of the right of usufruct in accordance
with the provision of Article 489 (now Art. 572) of the Civil Code,
because he totally lacks the fee simple. But the ascendant who
holds the property required by Article 811 (now Art. 891) to be
reserved, can dispose of the property itself, and recover it from
anyone who may unjustly detain it, while the person in whose
favor the right is required to be reserved in either case cannot
perform any act whatsoever of disposal or of recovery.
“The ascendant acquires the property with a condition
subsequent, to wit: whether or not there exist at the time of his
death relatives within the third degree of the descendant in the
line whence the property proceeds. If such relatives exist, they
acquire ownership of the property at the death of the ascendant.
If they do not exist, the ascendant can freely dispose thereof. If

251

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

this is true, since the possessor of property subject to conditions
subsequent can alienate and encumber it, the ascendant may
alienate the property required by law to be reserved, but he will
alienate what he has and nothing more because no one can give
what does not belong to him, and the acquirer will therefore receive a limited and revocable title. The relatives within the third
degree will in turn have an expectation to the property while the
ascendant lives, an expectation that cannot be transmitted to
their heirs, unless these are also within the third degree. After
the person who is required by law to reserve the right has died,
the relatives may rescind the alienation of the realty required by
law to be reserved and they will acquire it and all the rest that
has the same character in complete ownership in fee simple,
because the condition and the usufruct have been terminated by
the death of the usufructuary.” (Morell, Estudios Sobre Bienes
Reservables, 304, 305).
“The conclusion is that the person required by Article 811
(now Art. 891) to reserve the right has, beyond any doubt at all,
the rights of use and usufruct. He has, moreover, for the reasons
set forth, the legal title and dominion, although under a condition subsequent. Clearly he has, under an express provision of
the law, the right to dispose of the property reserved, and to
dispose of is to alienate, although under a condition. He has the
right to recover it, because he is the one who possesses or should
possess it and have title to it, although a limited and revocable
one. In a word, the legal title and dominion, even though under
a condition, reside in him while he lives. After the right required
by law to be reserved has been assured, he can do anything that
a genuine owner can do.
“Therefore, we reverse the judgment appealed from and in
lieu thereof decide and declare that the applicant is entitled to
register in her own name the two parcels of land which are the
subject matter of the application, recording in the registration
the right required by Article 811 (now Art. 891) to be reserved
to either or both of the opponents, Pablo Sablan and Basilio
Sablan, should they survive her, without special finding as to
costs.”

Personal Element. — Reserva troncal presupposes a great
complexity of personal elements. They are as follows:
(1) The ascendant, brother or sister, otherwise known as the
origin of the property, from whom the descendant-propositus had
acquired the property by gratuitous title;
252

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

(2) The descendant-propositus from whom the ascendantreservista in turn had acquired the property by operation of law;
(3) The ascendant-reservista who is obliged to reserve the
property; and
(4) The relatives of the propositus, otherwise known as the
reservatarios, who are within the third degree and who belong to
the line from which the property came and for whose benefit the
reservation is constituted.53
It is, however, an indispensable requirement that all of
these personal elements must be joined by the bonds of legitimate
relationship. In other words, reserva troncal is possible only in the
legitimate family.54
Nieva vs. Alcala
4 Phil. 915
The property here in question was inherited by operation
of law by Francisco de Ocampo from his son Alfeo de Ocampo,
who, in turn, had inherited it, in the same manner, from his
mother Juliana Nieva, the natural mother of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff is the natural sister of Alfeo de Ocampo, and she belongs to the same line from which the property in question came.
Was Francisco de Ocampo obliged by law to reserve said property for the benefit all the plaintiff, and illegitimate relatives
within the third degree of Alfeo de Ocampo? If he was, then,
upon his death, the plaintiff and not his son the defendant Jose
de Ocampo, was entitled to the said property; if he was not, the
plaintiffs’ action must fail. Answering the question in the negative, the Supreme Court, held:
“This question, so far as our investigation shows, has not
been decided before by any court or tribunal. However, eminent
commentators of the Spanish Civil Code, who have devoted
their lives to the study and solution of the intricate and difficult
problems that may arise under the provisions of the Code, have
dealt with the very question now before us and are unanimous
in the opinion that the provisions of Article 811 (now Art. 891)

53
De Buen, Encyclopedia Juridica Española, Vol. 17, p. 349, quoted in Director of Lands
vs. Aguas, 63 Phil. 279; See Aglibot vs. Manalac, G.R. No. L-14530, April 25, 1962, 4 SCRA
1030.
54
Nieva vs. Alcala, 41 Phil. 915; Director of Lands vs. Aguas, 63 Phil. 279.

253

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

apply only to legitimate relatives. One of such commentators,
undoubtedly the best known of them all, is Manresa. We believe
we can do not better than to adopt his reasons and conclusions,
in deciding the question before us. In determining the persons
who are obliged to reserve under Article 811 (now Art. 891), he
says:
“‘Is every ascendant, whether legitimate or not, obliged to
reserve? Should the natural father or grandfather reserve the
properties proceeding from the mother or other natural ascendant? Article 811 (now Art. 891) does not distinguish. Nevertheless, the article in referring to the ascendant in an indeterminate manner shows that it imposes the obligation to reserve
only upon the legitimate ascendants.
“‘Let us not overlook for the moment the question whether
the Code recognizes or does not recognize the existence of the
natural family, or whether it admits only the bond established
by the acknowledgment between the father or mother who acknowledged and the acknowledged children. However it may
be, it may be stated as an indisputable truth that in said Code,
the legitimate relationship forms the general rule and natural
relationship the exception; which is the reason why, as may be
easily seen, the law in many articles speaks only of children or
parents, of ascendants or descendants, and in them reference is
of course made to those who are legitimate; and when it desires
to make a provision applicable only to natural relationship, it
does not say father or mother, but natural father or natural
mother; it does not say child, but natural child; it does not speak
of ascendants, brothers or parents in the abstract, but of natural
ascendants, natural brothers or natural parents.
“‘Articles 809 (now Art. 889) and 810 (now Art. 890) themselves speak only of ascendants. Can it in any way be maintained
that they refer to legitimate as well as to natural ascendants?
They evidently establish the legitime of the legitimate ascendants included as forced heirs in number 2 of Article 807 (now
Art. 887). And Article 811 (now Art. 891) continues to treat of
this same legitime. Therefore, the place which Article 811 (now
Art. 891) occupies in the Code is proof that it refers to legitimate
ascendants.”55

55
To the same effect; Centeno vs. Centeno, 52 Phil. 322; Director of Lands vs.
Aguas, 63 Phil. 279.

254

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

Idem; Origin of property. — The law requires that the person
from whom the descendant-propositus acquired the property should
be an ascendant, brother or sister. Thus, in the case of Celedonia
Solivio vs. The Honorable Court of Appeals and Concordia Javellana
Villanueva (G.R. No. 83484, February 12, 1990), the Court held
that the property of the deceased, Esteban Javellana, Jr., is not
reservable property, for Esteban, Jr. was not an ascendant, but the
descendant of his mother, Salustia Solivio, from whom he inherited
the properties in question. Therefore, he did not hold his inheritance
subject to a reservation in favor of his aunt, Celedonia Solivio, who
is his relative within the third degree on his mother’s side. The
reserva troncal applies to properties inherited by an ascendant from
a descendant who inherited it from another ascendant or a brother or
a sister. It does not apply to property inherited by a descendant from
his ascendant, the reverse of the situation covered by Art. 891.
Consequently, it is not necessary to investigate the ultimate
source or origin of the property beyond such ascendant brother or
sister in order to determine its lineal character. It does not, therefore,
matter if such ascendant, brother or sister may have acquired it
from a stranger or from some other relative. What is material is
that the propositus should have acquired it from anyone of them by
gratuitous title.
From what had been stated, it necessarily follows that at the
time of its acquisition by the propositus, the property should have
belonged to the ascendant, brother or sister as the case may be. The
significance of this principle may be illustrated by the following
examples:
(1) A father insured his life with a certain insurance company
with his daughter as beneficiary. After his death, the value of the
insurance policy was collected by the daughter, who died shortly
afterwards. The amount collected passed to her mother by operation
of law. Is this amount reservable? This question should be resolved
in the negative, since the amount collected did not belong to an
ascendant, brother or sister, but to the insurance company.56
(2) A father bought a whole unit of sweepstakes ticket which
he gave to one of his children. The ticket won one of the top prizes.

56

2 Ramos 59, citing Alcubilla.

255

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

Subsequently, the child died and the amount collected passed by
operation of law to his mother. Is the amount reservable? Again,
this question must be resolved in the negative, since the amount
collected was not acquired from an ascendant, brother or sister, but
from the society or office in charge of the sweepstakes.
Idem; Descendant-propositus. — The second person
involved in the reserva is the descendant-propositus from whom the
property is directly acquired by the ascendant-reservista.
It is of course essential in order that the property shall be
reservable that the propositus should have acquired it by gratuitous
title from an ascendant or from a brother or sister. “Acquisition
by gratuitous title” merely means that the recipient should not
have given anything in return for the property; in other words, the
transmission by the ascendant, brother or sister should have been an
act of pure liberality, without imposing any obligation whatsoever
upon the beneficiary. This is possible only in donations and in testate
and intestate succession.57
Chua vs. CFI of Negros Occidental
78 SCBA 412
Jose Frias Chua died intestate in 1929, survived by his
widow Consolacion de la Torre and three legitimate children
Lorenzo, Ignacio and Juanito. The records show that Lorenzo
and Ignacio are children of Jose by a first marriage, while Juanito is his child by his second marriage to Consolacion. In the
intestate proceeding for the settlement of Jose’s estate, one-half
(1/2) of a valuable lot was adjudicated to Consolacion, while the
other one-half (1/2) was adjudicated to Juanito. In 1952, Juanito
died intestate without any issue, survived by his mother Consolacion. In 1966, the latter also died intestate. Subsequently,
Ignacio and two children of Lorenzo, who predeceased Consolacion, filed a complaint against the estate of Consolacion praying
that the one-half (1/2) portion of the lot under question which
formerly belonged to Juanito but which passed to Consolacion
upon the latter’s death, be declared as a reservable property under Art. 891 of the Civil Code. Private respondents (defendants),
however, contend that the property is not reservable and that
even assuming that it is, petitioners’ (plaintiffs’) right of action
57
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 360; Cobardo vs. Villanueva, 44 Phil. 189-190. Chua vs.
CFI, 78 SCRA 412.

256

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

has already prescribed. Speaking through Justice Martin, the
Supreme Court held:
“The pertinent provision on reserva troncal under the New
Civil Code provides:
“ART. 891. The ascendant who inherits from
his descendant any property which the latter may
have acquired by gratuitous title from another ascendant, or a brother or sister, is obliged to reserve
such property as he may have acquired by operation
of law for the benefit of relatives who are within the
third degree and belong to the line from which said
property came.”
Pursuant to the foregoing provision, in order that a property may be impressed with a reservable character the following
requisites must exist, to wit: (1) that the property was acquired
by a descendant from an ascendant or from a brother or sister
by gratuitous title; (2) that said descendant died without an issue; (3) that the property is inherited by another ascendant by
operation of law; and (4) that there are relatives within the third
degree belonging to the line from which said property came. In
the case before Us, all of the foregoing requisites are present.
Thus, as borne out by the records, Juanito Frias Chua of the
second marriage died intestate in 1952; he died without leaving any issue; his pro-indiviso of 1/2 share of Lot No. 399 was
acquired by his mother, Consolacion de la Torre, by operation
of law. When Consolacion de la Torre died, Juanito Frias Chua
who died intestate had relatives within the third degree. These
relatives are Ignacio Frias Chua and Dominador Chua and Remedios Chua, the supposed legitimate children of the deceased
Lorenzo Frias Chua, who are the petitioners herein.
“The crux of the problem in the instant petition is focused
on the first requisite of reserva troncal — whether the property
in question was acquired by Juanito Frias Chua from his father,
Jose Frias Chua, gratuitously or not. In resolving this point, the
respondent Court said:
“It appears from Exh. “3”, which is part of Exh.
“D”, that the property in question was not acquired
by Consolacion de la Torre and Juanito Frias Chua
gratuitously but for a consideration, namely, that
the legatees were to pay the interest and cost and
other fees resulting from Civil Case No. 5300 of this
Court. As such it is undeniable that the lot in ques-

257

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

tion is not subject to a reserva troncal, under Art.
891 of the New Civil Code, and as such the plaintiffs
complaint must fail.”
We are not prepared to sustain the respondent Court’s conclusion that the lot in question is not subject to a reserva troncal
under Art. 891 of the New Civil Code. As explained by Manresa,
which this Court quoted with approval in Cabardo v. Villanueva, 44 Phil. 186, “The transmission is gratuitous or by gratuitous title when the recipient does not give anything in return.”
It matters not whether the property transmitted be or be not
subject to any prior charges; what is essential is that the transmission must be made gratuitously, or by an act of mere liberality of the person making it, without imposing any obligation
on the part of the recipient; and that the person receiving the
property gives or does nothing in return; or, as ably put by an
eminent Filipino commentator, “the essential thing is that the
person who transmits it does so gratuitously, from pure generosity, without requiring from the transferee any prestation.” It is
evident from the record that the transmission of the property in
question to Juanito Frias Chua of the second marriage upon the
death of his father Jose Frias Chua was by means of a hereditary succession and therefore gratuitous. It is true that there is
the other (Exh. “D”) of the probate Court in Intestate Proceeding
No. 4816 which states in express terms:
“2. — Se adjudicada por el presente a favor de
Consolacion de la Torre, viuda, mayor de edad, y de
de su hijo, Juanito Frias Chua, menor de edad, todos
residentes de San Enrique, Negros Occidental, I.F.,
como herederos del finado Jose Frias Chua Choo, estas propiedades:
La parcela de terreno conocida por Lote No.
399 del Catastro de la Carlota, Negros Occidental,
de 191.954 metros cuadrados y cubierto por el Certificado de Titulo No. 11759, en partes equales proindivisor; por con la obligacion de pagar a las Standard Oil Co. of New York la deuda de P3,971.20,
sus intereses, costas y demas gastos resultantes del
asunto civil No. 5300 de este Jusgado.”
But the obligation of paying the Standard Oil Co. of New
York the amount of P3,971.20 is imposed upon Consolacion de
la Torre and Juanito Frias Chua not personally by the deceased
Jose Frias Chua in his last will and testament but by an order
of the court in the Intestate Proceeding No. 4816 dated January

258

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

15, 1931. As long as the transmission of the property to the heirs
is free from any condition imposed by the deceased himself and
the property is given out of pure generosity, it is gratuitous. It
does not matter if later the court orders one of the heirs, in this
case Juanito Frias Chua, to pay the Standard Oil Co. of New
York the amount of P3,971.20. This does not change the gratuitous nature of the transmission of the property to him. As far
as the deceased Jose Frias Chua is concerned the transmission
of the property to his heirs is gratuitous. This being the case the
lot in question is subject to reserva troncal under Art. 891 of the
New Civil Code.
“It is contended that the distribution of the shares of the
estate of Jose Frias Chua to the respondent heirs or legatees was
agreed upon by the heirs in their project of partition based on
the last will and testament of Jose Frias Chua. But petitioners
claim that the supposed Last Will and Testament of Jose Frias
Chua was never probated. The fact that the will was not probated was admitted in paragraph 6 of the respondents’ answer.
There is nothing mentioned in the decision of the trial court in
Civil Case No. 7839 A which is the subject of the present appeal
nor in the order of January 15, 1931 of the trial court in the Testate Estate Proceeding No. 4816 nor in the private respondents’
brief, that the Last Will and Testament of Jose Frias Chua has
ever been probated. With the foregoing, it is easy to deduce that
if the Last Will and Testament has in fact been probated there
would have been no need for the testamentary heirs to prepare a
project of partition among themselves. The very will itself could
be made the basis for the adjudication of the estate as in fact
they did in their project of partition with Juanito Frias Chua
getting one-half of Lot 399 by inheritance as a son of the deceased Jose Frias Chua by the latter’s second marriage.
“According to the records, Juanito Frias Chua died on February 27, 1952 without any issue. After the death his mother
Consolacion de la Torre succeeded to his one-half pro indiviso
share of Lot 399. This was, however, subject to the condition
that the property was reservable in character under Art. 891
of the Civil Code in favor of relatives within the third degree of
Jose Frias Chua from whom the property came.
These relatives are the petitioners herein.
“It is claimed that the complaint of petitioners to recover the one-half portion of Lot 399 which originally belonged to
Juanito Frias Chua has already prescribed when it was filed
on May 11, 1966. We do not believe so. It must be remembered

259

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

that the petitioners herein are claiming as reservees of the property in question and their cause of action as reservees did not
arise until the time the reservor, Consolacion de la Torre, died
in March 1966. When the petitioners therefore filed their complaint to recover the one-half (1/2) portion of Lot 399, they were
very much in time to do so.
“IN VIEW OF THE FOREGOING, the decision appealed
from is hereby set aside. The petitioners Ignacio Frias Chua,
Dominador Chua and Remedios Chua are declared owners of
1/2 undivided portion of Lot 399; and the Register of Deeds
of Negros Occidental is hereby ordered to cancel Transfer
Certificate of Title No. 31796 covering Lot No. 399 issued in the
name of Consolacion de la Torre and to issue a new Certificate
of Title in the names of Consolacion de la Torre, 1/2 undivided
portion; Ignacio Frias Chua, 1/4 undivided portion, of said lot.
Without pronouncement as to costs.
“SO ORDERED”.

It is also essential that the propositus should have died without
any legitimate issue in the direct descending line who could inherit
from him. This is so, because, evidently, if there are legitimate
descendants of the propositus who can inherit from him, it would
not be possible for the property to pass by operation of law to an
ascendant who shall be obliged to make the reservation in accordance
with the provision of Art. 891.
Idem; Ascendant-reservista. — The third person involved
in the reserva is the ascendant-reservista who is obliged to reserve
the property for the benefit of relatives of the descendant-propositus
who are within the third degree and who belong to the line from
which the said property came.
It is, however, an indispensable requisite before the property
is considered reservable that such ascendant should have acquired
it by operation of law from the descendant-propositus. The question
now is — when can the property be considered as having been
acquired by operation of law?
In intestate succession, the whole estate of the descendant, in
default of legitimate children or descendants, passes to the ascendant
by operation of law. If there are properties in the estate which the
descendant had previously acquired by gratuitous title from another
260

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

ascendant or from a brother or sister, then under Art. 891 of the
Code such properties are reservable.58
In testamentary succession, the expression “operation of law”
can be applied only to the transmission of the legitime, but not to
the transmission of the entirety or of a part of the free portion, since
it is an undisputed fact that when an ascendant inherits by will
from a descendant, in default of legitimate children or descendants
of the latter, the legitime passes to him by force of law, while the
free portion, if he is instituted to it, passes to him by force of the
testator’s will. Thus, if the ascendant is instituted as sole heir
by the descendant in his will and the hereditary state consists of
properties which the latter had previously acquired by gratuitous
title from another ascendant or from a brother or sister, the legitime
of the ascendant, which is one-half of the estate, shall pass to him
by operation of law, while the free portion, which is also one-half
of the estate, shall pass to him by force of the descendant’s will.
Consequently, only one-half of the entire estate is reservable, while
the other half is free property.59
The problem regarding the extent of the reservation in
testamentary succession becomes complicated, however, if some of
the properties in the hereditary estate of the descendant had been
acquired by gratuitous title from an ascendant or from a brother or
sister, while others had been acquired by some other title from the
same source or by any title from some other source. The problem may
be illustrated by a hypothetical case. Let us say that the descendantpropositus died with a will wherein his mother is instituted as
universal heir. The net value of his hereditary estate is P40,000.
One-half of this estate had been acquired gratuitously from his
deceased father, while the other half had been acquired through his
own efforts or industry. From an examination of the facts of this case
it is clear that a reservation is established in accordance with the
provision of Art. 891 of the Civil Code, but what shall be the extent
of such reservation? In other words, to what portion of the hereditary
estate shall the reservation attach? There are two divergent views
which had been advanced to resolve this question. According to
one view, known as reserva maxima, all of the properties which
the descendant had previously acquired by gratuitous title from
58
59

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 367.
Ibid.

261

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

another ascendant or from a brother or sister must be included in
the ascendant’s legitime insofar as such legitime can contain them.60
Thus, in the above problem, since one-half of the hereditary estate of
the descendant had been previously acquired by gratuitous title from
his father, all of the properties so acquired are reservable because
they can be contained within the ascendant’s legitime. According
to another view, known as reserva minima or proportional reserva,
which is supported by all Filipino commentators and by the great
majority of Spanish commentators, all of the properties which the
descendant had previously acquired by gratuitous title from another
ascendant or from a brother or sister must be considered as passing
to the ascendant-reservista partly by operation of law and partly
by force of the descendant’s will.61 Therefore, in the above problem,
since one-half of the hereditary estate of the descendant had been
previously acquired by gratuitous title from his father, one-half of
the properties so acquired shall be included in the legitime of the
mother, while the other half shall be included in the free portion.
Consequently, only the half which is included in the legitime is
reservable, while the other half is free property.
Idem; Reservatarios. — The fourth person or persons involved
in the reserva are the reservatarios or relatives of the descendantpropositus for whose benefit the reservation is established. However,
in order that such relatives may be benefited by the reservation, it is
indispensable that the following conditions must concur: first, such
relatives must be legitimate relatives of the descendant-propositus
within the third degree: second, they must belong to the line from
which the reservable property came; and third, they must survive
the ascendant-reservista.
With regard to the first condition, the Supreme Court in
several cases, notably the cases of Florentino vs. Florentino, 40 Phil.
480, Cobardo vs. Villanueva, 44 Phil. 186, and Lunsod vs. Ortega,
46 Phil. 664, has constantly held that the degree of relationship
must be counted from the descendant-propositus, because it is only
upon his death that the property becomes reservable. This doctrine
is in conformity with the opinion of the great majority of Spanish

60
61

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 368; 6 Sanchez Roman 1026; 14 Scaevola, 236.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 368-374; 6 Sanchez Roman 1027-1028.

262

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

commentators.62 Consequently, the only persons who can qualify as
reservatarios are the following:
(1) First degree relatives — This can only refer to the
legitimate father or mother of the descendant-propositus, since
it is evident that when an ascendant inherits from a descendant
either as a compulsory heir or as an intestate heir, it is because the
descendant has no legitimate descendants of his own, or, if he has,
they cannot inherit from him because of disinheritance, incapacity
or repudiation.
(2) Second degree relatives — This can only refer to the
grandparents as well as to the brothers and sisters of the full or half
blood of the descendant-propositus belonging to the line from which
the reservable property came.
(3) Third degree relatives – This can only refer to the greatgrandparents, uncles or aunts (brothers and sisters of the full or half
blood of the propositus’ father or mother), and nephews or nieces
(children of the propositus’ brothers or sisters of the full or half blood)
belonging to the line from which the reservable property came.63
With regard to the second condition, the expression “line from
which the property came” has always been understood as referring
to the paternal line as opposed to the maternal line, or vice versa
and not to that which is constituted by a series of degrees which
may be either direct or collateral. This interpretation is of course
logical in view of the fact that reserva troncal or lineal aims at
maintaining as much as possible absolute separation between the
paternal and maternal lines in order to prevent property which
belongs to one line from passing to a stranger through the agency
or instrumentality of the other line.64 There is, however, a conflict
of opinion among commentators on the question of whether the
paternal line or maternal line as contemplated by the Code should
be broadly construed to refer to the paternal or maternal line of the
descendant-propositus from which the reservable property came
without any qualification whatsoever so that anyone who belongs
to such line is qualified to be a reservatario or should be strictly
construed to refer specifically to the sub-line or branch within such
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., 282, p. 330; 6 Sanchez Roman 1002; 14 Scaevola 282.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 335.
64
6 Sanchez Roman 1015.
62
63

263

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

paternal or maternal line so that only one who belongs to such branch
is qualified to be a reservatario. Thus, if the descendant-propositus
had acquired the property by gratuitous title from his deceased
paternal grandfather, and upon his death the property passed to his
mother by operation of law, for whose benefit should the property
be reserved? Is it reserved for every relative of the descendantpropositus within the third degree in the paternal line, although the
relative may not be related by consanguinity to the source or origin
of the property, or is it necessary that we shall also have to consider
the branch from which the property came so that the relative must
not only be related by consanguinity to the descendant-propositus,
but also to the source or origin of the property? Suppose that when
the ascendant-reservista dies, the only survivor among the relatives
of the descendant-propositus who are within the third degree and
who belong to the paternal line is the paternal grandmother, shall
she be entitled to the reservable property? According to one view
as advocated by Manresa, since the law merely states that the
reservatario should belong to the line from which the reservable
property came without any qualification whatsoever, it is clear
that she would be entitled to the property.65 According to another
view as advocated by Sanchez Roman, which we believe is more in
conformity with the nature and purpose of the reserva, since she is
not related by consanguinity to the origin of the property, but only
by affinity, she cannot be considered as belonging to the line from
which the said property came. Otherwise, if she had remarried and,
subsequently, she had children out of such marriage, such children
would also be qualified as reservatario thus frustrating altogether
the very purpose of the reservation. Consequently, the applicable
rule may be stated as follows: The reservatario or person for whose
benefit the property is reserved must not only be a relative by
consanguinity of the descendant-propositus within the third degree,
but he must also be a relative by consanguinity of the source or
origin of the property.66
If the origin of the property is a brother or sister of the fullblood, the question of line is unimportant. This is so because in
such case there is no way by which we would be able to determine

65
66

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 332-333.
6 Sanchez Roman 1015.

264

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

the “line from which the property came.” However, if the origin is a
brother or sister of the half-blood, the common parent or ascendant
must always be considered. If the common ascendant is the father,
the property is reserved only for the relatives on the father’s side; if
the common ascendant is the mother, the property is reserved only
for the relatives on the mother’s side.67
Problem No. 1 — In 1970, O, a son of A by his first wife,
B, donated a valuable lot located in Metro Manila to his halfbrother, P, a son of A by his second wife, C. In 1975, both A and
O were killed in a vehicular accident. In 1978, P died intestate.
The lot passed to his mother, C, who was the only intestate heir.
In 1980, C also died intestate. The lot is now claimed by: (1) X,
a brother of A; (2) Y, a sister of B; and (3) Z, a sister of C. Who is
entitled to the property? Why?
Answer — X alone is entitled to the property. Undoubtedly, the lot is reservable within the meaning of Art. 891 of the
Civil Code. All of the requisites of reserva troncal are present. In
the first place, the property had been acquired by operation of
law by an ascendant (C) from his descendant (P) upon the death
of the latter; in the second place, the property had been previously acquired by gratuitous title by the descendant (P) from
a brother (O); and in the third place, such descendant (P) died
without any legitimate issue in the direct descending line who
can inherit from him. Consequently, when the property passed
by operation of law to C, the latter was obliged to reserve it
for the benefit of relatives of P who are within the third degree
and who belong to the line from which the reservable property
came.
The real question, therefore, is — who, among the three
claimants can qualify as reservatorio or reservee? In order to answer this question, two tests should be applied. They are: first, is
the claimant a relative of the descendant-propositus (P) within
the third degree; and second, does he belong to the line (line of
O) from which the reservable came? Applying these tests to the
case at bar, it is clear that Y cannot qualify because she is not
even a relative of the descendant-propositus, P. Neither can Z
qualify because she does not belong to the line from which the
property came. She is not related by consanguinity to O. But
X can qualify. He is not only a relative of P (being a paternal

67

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 334.

265

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

uncle) within the third degree; he also belongs to the line from
which the reservable property came. Therefore, he alone shall
be entitled to the property.
Problem No. 2 — O and P are the legitimate children of H
and W. H died in 1970. In 1972, O donated to his brother, P, a
valuable lot located in Metro Manila. In 1975, O was killed in a
vehicular accident. In 1978, P died intestate. The lot passed to
his mother, W, who was the only intestate heir. In 1980, W also
died intestate. The lot is now claimed by S, a sister of W, and by
B, a brother of H. Who is entitled to the property? Why?
Answer — Both S and B are entitled to the property in
equal shares. Undoubtedly, the lot is reservable within the
meaning of Art. 891 of the Civil Code. All of the requisites of
reserva troncal are present. In the first place, the property had
been acquired by operation of law by an ascendant (W) from a
descendant (P) upon the death of the latter; in the second place,
the property had been previously acquired by gratuitous title by
the descendant (P) from a brother (O); and in the third place,
such descendant (P) died without any legitimate issue in the
direct descending line who can inherit from him. Consequently,
when the property passed by operation of law to W, the latter
was obliged to reserve it for the benefit or relatives of P who are
within the third degree and who belong to the line from which
the reservable property came. Since both S and B are third degree relatives of P and both belong to the line from whence the
reservable property came, the property should now be given to
them automatically and by operation of law.
(Note: We are, of course, aware of the view of Justice Paras
that the origin of the property must be a half-brother or half-sister, thus implying that if the origin is a brother or sister of the
full blood, the property is not reservable within the meaning of
Art. 891 of the Civil Code (3 Paras 232). It is respectfully submitted, however, that the law does not make such a distinction.
As far as the origin of the property is concerned, it speaks only
of “another brother or sister”. Consequently, even if the origin is
a brother or sister of the full-blood, the property is still reservable although the question of line becomes unimportant. (See
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., 334). Of course, if in the above problem,
W was survived also by, let us say, a son or daughter, who is a
brother or sister of O and P, the question of whether or not the
property is reservable will become moot and academic. Whether
under instestate succession or under Art. 891 of the Civil Code,
the property shall pass to such brother or sister.)

266

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

With regard to the third condition, it must be observed that the
title of the ascendant-reservista is by its very nature subject to the
resolutory condition that if upon his or her death there are relatives
of the descendant-propositus who are within the third degree and
who belong to the line from, which the property came, then such
property shall pass by operation of law to such relatives. In order
that the purpose for which the reservation is established may be
attained, it is, therefore, indispensable that the ascendant-reservista
must be survived by such relatives of the descendant-propositus.
If the ascendant-reservista is survived by several relatives of the
descendant-propositus and all of them are within the third degree
belonging to the line from which the reservable property came,
who shall be entitled to such property? According to a well-settled
doctrine in this jurisdiction, in such case the rules of legal or intestate
succession shall apply.68 Consequently, if some of the survivors are
in the direct ascending line, while others are in the collateral line,
the rule of preference between line, by virtue of which those in the
direct ascending line shall exclude those in the collateral line, is
applicable. Within each line, however, the rule which is applicable
is that of proximity by virtue of which the nearest in degree shall
exclude the more remote ones.
A

O
B

R
ORIGIN

RESERVISTA

C
D

E

F

G

P

PROPOSITUS

H

I

Problem — Before his death in 1945, O donated to his son,
P, a parcel of land. Upon the death of P in 1960 without any
legitimate issue in the direct descending line, the land passed

68
Florentino vs. Florentino, 40 Phil. 480; Padura vs. Baldovino, 104 Phil. 1065.
See also 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 336-359; 6 Sanchez Roman 100, 1010.

267

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

to his mother, R in accordance with the laws of intestate succession. The latter died in 1970 without a will.
(1) Granting that the property is reservable in accordance with Art. 891 of the Civil Code, who shall be entitled to
it if the reservista, R, is survived by the following relatives of
the descendant-propositus, P: (a) A, grandfather in the paternal
line; (b) B and C, uncles in the paternal line; (c) F and G, children of D by a prior marriage, and, therefore, brothers of the
half blood, of P; (d) F and G, children of O and R, and, therefore
brothers of the full blood of P; and (e) H and I, children of F, and,
therefore, nephews of P?
Answer — While it is true that all of the survivors in this
particular case can qualify as reservatarios, since all of them
are relatives of the descendant-propositus, P, within the third
degree and they all belong to the line from which the reservable property came, yet the property cannot be given to all of
them. This is so because the rules of intestate succession shall
have to be applied. The reason for this is that in reserva troncal,
in reality, the reservatario or reservatarios inherit from the descendant-propositus, not from the ascendant-reservista. Since,
in intestate succession, those in the direct ascending line shall
exclude those in the collateral line, and since A is the only member of the direct ascending line among the survivors, therefore,
the entire reservable property shall pass to him automatically
and by operation of law upon the death of R.
(2) Suppose that we eliminate A from the list of survivors, who shall be entitled to the reservable property?
Answer – D, E, F and G shall be entitled to the reservable property. Since all of the survivors are collateral relatives,
therefore, the rule of proximity, by virtue of which those nearest
in degree to the descendant-propositus shall exclude the more
remote ones, shall apply. D, E, F and G are relatives of the second degree, while H and I are relatives of the third degree. Consequently, the former shall exclude the latter. With regard to
the division of the property itself, since F and G are brothers
of the full blood of P, while D and E are brothers of the halfblood, following the doctrine enunciated by the Supreme Court
in Padura vs. Baldovino,69 the rule of intestate succession stated
in Art. 1006 of the Civil Code, by virtue of which brothers and
sisters of the full blood shall be entitled to a share double that of
those of the half blood, is applicable. Consequently, the property
69

104 Phil. 1065.

268

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

must be partitioned among D, E, F, and G in the proportion of
1:1:2:2. D and E shall, therefore, be entitled to 1/6 each of the
property, while F and G shall be entitled to 2/6 or 1/3 each.
(3) Suppose that F died before the reservista, R, so that the
only survivors are B, C, D, E, G, H and I, who shall be entitled
to the reservable property?
Answer — Only D, E, G, H and I shall be entitled to the reservable property. B and C are of course excluded because they
are merely relatives of the third degree, while D, E and G are
relatives of the second degree. While it is true that H and I, who
are nephews of P, should also be excluded because they are also
relatives of the third degree, yet following the doctrine enunciated by the Supreme Court in Florentino vs. Florentino,70 they
cannot be excluded because they shall represent their deceased
father, F, in the reservable property. Even in reserva troncal,
the right of representation is recognized, provided that the representative is a relative of the descendant-propositus within the
third degree, and provided further, that he belongs to the line
from which the reservable property came.
Florentino vs. Florentino
40 Phil. 480
In 1908, Severina Foz de Leon died leaving by will her
entire estate including the property, which is the subject matter of this litigation, to her only daughter and compulsory heir,
Mercedes Fiorentino. The records show that she inherited the
property in question from her deceased son Apolinio Florentino
III, who, in turn, had inherited it from his deceased father Apolinio Florentino II. The right of the instituted heir, Mercedes
Florentino, to the property is now contested by the children and
grandchildren of Apolonio Florentino II by a previous marriage
on the ground that the said property is reservable in accordance
with the provision of Art. 811 (now Art. 891) of the Civil Code
and that they, together with Mercedes Florentino, are entitled
to the property as reservatarios. Declaring that the property is
reservable, and that the right of representation is applicable so
long as the representatives are relatives of the descendant-propositus within the third degree, the Supreme Court held:
“Following the order prescribed by law in legitimate succession, when there are relatives of the descendant within the

70

40 Phil. 480.

269

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

third degree, the right of the nearest relative over the property
which the reservista should return to him, excludes that of the
ones more remote. The right of representation cannot be alleged
when the one claiming the same as a reservatario of the reservable property is not among the relatives within the third degree
belonging to the line from which such property came, inasmuch
as the right granted by the Civil Code in Article 811 (now Art.
891) is in the highest degree personal and for the exclusive benefit of designated persons who are the relatives within the third
degree of the person from whom the reservable property came.
Therefore, relatives of the fourth and the succeeding degrees can
never be considered as reservatarios, since the law does not recognize them as such. Nevertheless, there is right of representation on the part of reservatarios who are within the third degree,
as the case of nephews of the deceased person from whom the
reservable property came. These reservatarios have the right
to represent their ascendants who are the brothers of the said
deceased person and relatives within the third degree in accordance with Article 811 of the Civil Code (now Art. 891).”
Padura vs. Baldovino
104 Phil. 1065
Agustin Padura contracted two marriages during his lifetime. With his first wife, he had one child, Manuel, and with his
second wife, Benita, he had two children, Fortunato and Candelaria. Agustin died in 1908, leaving all of his properties to
Benita and the three children. Four parcels of land were adjudicated to Fortunato. Shortly thereafter, Fortunato died without
a will. Not having any issue, the four parcels of land passed to
his mother, Benita. In 1934, Candelaria also died, leaving as
her only heirs four legitimate children, petitioners herein. In
1940, Manuel also died, leaving as his only heirs seven legitimate children, oppositors herein. In 1952, Benita died. The children of Manuel and Candelaria were declared to be the rightful
reservatarios. Subsequently, the children of Candelaria filed the
instant petition seeking to have the reservable properties partitioned, such that 1/2 of the same be adjudicated to them on the
basis that they inherit by right of representation. The children
of Manuel filed their opposition, maintaning that they (the 11
reservatarios) should all be deemed as inheriting in their own
right, as a consequence of which, they should all inherit in equal
shares. The question, therefore, is how shall the reservable
properties be divided among the eleven reservatarios? Speaking
through Justice J.B.L. Reyes, the Supreme Court held:

270

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

“The reservatarios nephews of the full blood are entitled to
a share twice as large as that of the others in conformity with
Arts. 1006 and 1008 of the Civil Code of the Philippines. The
reserva troncal is a special rule designed primarily to assure the
return of the reservable property to the third degree relatives
belonging to the line from which the property originally came,
and avoid its being dissipated by the relatives of the inheriting ascendant (reservista). The stated purpose of the reserva is
accomplished once the property has devolved to the specified
relatives of the line of origin. But from this time on, there is no
further occasion for its application. In the relations between one
reservatario and another of the same degree, there is no call for
applying Art. 891 any longer; wherefore, the respective shares
of each in the reversionary property should be governed by the
ordinary rules of intestate succession. In this spirit the jurisprudence of this Court and that of Spain has resolved that upon
the death of the ascendant reservista, the reservable property
should pass, not to all the reservatarios as a class, but only to
those nearest in degree to the descendant (propositus), excluding those reservatarios of more remote degree (Florentino vs.
Florentino, 40 Phil. 489-490; T. S. 8 Nov. 1894; Dir. Gen. de los
Registros, Resol. 20 March 1905). And within the third degree of
relationship from the descendant (propositus), the right of representation operates in favor of nephews (Florentino vs. Florentino, supra).
“Proximity of degree and right of representation are basic
principles of ordinary intestate succession; so is the rule that
whole blood brothers and nephews are entitled to a share double
that of brothers and nephews of half-blood. If in determining
the rights of the reservatarios inter se, proximity of degree and
the right of representation of nephews are made to apply, the
rule of double share for immediate collaterals of the whole blood
should be likewise operative. In other words, the reserva troncal merely determines the group of relatives (reservatarios) to
whom the property should be returned; but within that group,
the individual right to the property should be decided by the
applicable rules of ordinary intestate succession, since Art. 891
does not specify otherwise. This conclusion is strengthened by
the circumstances that the reserva being an exceptional case,
its application should be limited to what is strictly needed to accomplish the purpose of the law. The restrictive interpretation
is the more imperative in view of the new Civil Code’s hostility
to successional reservas and reversions, as exemplified by the
suppression of the reserva viudal and the reversion legal of the
Code of 1889 (Arts. 812 and 968-980.)

271

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

“Even during the reservista’s lifetime, the reservatarios,
who are the ultimate acquirers of the property, can already assert the right to prevent the reservista from doing anything that
might frustrate their reversionary right; and for this purpose
they can compel the annotation of their right in the Registry
of Property even while the reservista is alive (Ley Hipotecaria
de Ultramar, Arts. 168, 199; Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil. 295).
This right is incompatible with the mere expectancy that corresponds to the natural heirs of the reservista. It is likewise clear
that the reservable property is no part of the estate of the reservista, who may not dispose of them by will, so long as there
are reservatarios existing (Arroyo vs. Gerona, 38 Phil. 237). The
latter, therefore, do not inherit from the reservista, but from the
descendant-propositus, of whom the reservatarios are the heirs
mortis causa, subject to the condition that they must survive the
reservista. Had the nephews of whole and half blood succeeded
the propositus directly, those of full blood would undoubtedly
receive a double share compared to those of the half-blood. Why
then should the latter receive equal shares simply because the
transmission of the property was delayed by the interrugnum
of the reserva? The decedent (causante), the heirs and their relationship being the same, there is no cogent reason why the
hereditary portions should vary.”

Property Subject to Reservation. — It is clear from what
had already been stated that the property which is subject to the
reservation established in Art. 891 must be the same property which
the ascendant-reservista had acquired by operation of law from the
descendant-propositus upon the death of the latter and which the
latter, in turn, had acquired by gratuitous title during his lifetime
from another ascendant or from a brother or sister. Consequently,
the ascendant-reservista cannot substitute another property for that
which he is obliged by law to reserve. This consequence is deducible
not only from the object and purpose of the reserva, but also from
the obligations imposed upon the reservista, such as the obligation
to make an inventory of all reservable property and the obligation to
annotate in the Registry of Property the reservable character of all
reservable immovable property.71
There are, however, certain cases, and these are by no means
rare, where there would have to be substitution of the reservable

71

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 363-364.

272

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

property through unavoidable necessity, such as when the property
is consumable, or when it is lost or destroyed through the fault of
the reservista, or when it has deteriorated through the same cause,
or when it has been alienated. In such cases, the remedy of the
reservatarios or persons entitled to the reservable property would
be to recover the value of the property or to seek the ownership
and return thereof depending upon the circumstances of each
particular case. These remedies are available regardless of whether
or not the required inventory has been made and the mortgage has
been constituted, although undoubtedly, restitution or recovery
would be rendered much more difficult or even impossible if these
requirements are not complied with.72
If the reservable property consists of a sum of money and
there is no ready cash in the estate of the reservista when he dies,
what is the remedy available to the reservatarios? It is believed
that in this particular case the ordinary rules for the collection of a
judgment credit in accordance with our laws of procedure shall have
to be applied. Consequently, the reservatarios entitled to the sum of
money can ask for the sale of property belonging to the estate of the
reservista in order to raise the necessary amount.73
Rights of Reservista. — Since the ascendant-reservista
actually acquires the ownership of the reservable property upon
the death of the descendant-propositus subject to the resolutory
condition that there must exist at the time of his death relatives
of the descendant who are within the third degree and who belong
to the line from which the property came, it is clear that all of the
attributes of the right of ownership, such as enjoyment, disposal
and recovery, belong to him exclusively, although conditional and
revocable.74 He can, therefore, alienate or encumber the property if
he so desires, but he will only alienate or encumber what he had and
nothing more because no one can give what does not belong to him. As
a consequence, the acquirer will only receive a limited and revocable
title. Therefore, after the death of the ascendant, the reservatarios
may then rescind the alienation or encumbrance, because the
condition to which it is subject has already been fulfilled.75

Ibid., pp. 364-365.
Ibid., p. 365.
74
See Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil. 295.
75
Edroso vs. Sablan, Ibid., Lunsod vs. Ortega, 46 Phil. 664.
72
73

273

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

Obligations of Reservista. — The obligations of the ascendant-reservista are:
(1)

To make an inventory of all reservable property;

(2)

To appraise the value of all reservable movable property;

(3) To annotate in the Registry of Property the reservable
character of all reservable immovable property; and
(4) To secure by mortgage (a) the restitution of movable
property not alienated, (b) the payment of damages caused or
which may be caused by his fault or negligence, (c) the return of the
price which he has received for movable property alienated, or the
payment of its value at the time of its alienation, if such alienation
was made by gratuitous title, and (d) the payment of the value of
immovable property validly alienated.76
Rights of Reservatarios. — During the whole period between
the constitution in legal form of the reserva and the extinction
thereof, an expectation that cannot be transmitted to their own
heirs, unless these heirs are also within the third degree.77 In spite
of this, it is undeniable that they are entitled to certain rights
which are necessary, not only for the recognition of the existence of
their expectation or eventual right to the property, but also for the
preservation of such expectation. These rights, which are correlative
to the obligations of the reservista, are to ask for the inventory of
all reservable property, the appraisal of all reservable movable
property, the annotation in the Registry of Property of the reservable
character of all reservable immovable property, and the constitution
of the necessary mortgage.78
Can a reservatorio alienate his expectation to the property
during the pendency or lifetime of the reserva? According to the
Supreme Court in the case of Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil. 295,
which was decided on September 13, 1913, he cannot because of the
following reasons: first, the property is in no way, either actually,
constructively or formally, in his possession; second, he has no title
of ownership or of fee simple to the property which he can transmit
to another; and third, it is impossible to determine the part of the
property that might pertain to him at the time he exercises the
Arts. 977, 978, Spanish Civil Code; Dizon vs. Galang, 48 Phil. 601.
6 Sanchez Roman 1035; Riosa vs. Rocha, 48 Phil. 737.
78
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 385-388.
76
77

274

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

right, because, in view of the nature and scope of the right required
by law to be reserved, the extent of his right cannot be foreseen,
for it may disappear by his dying before the ascendant-reservista. It
must be observed, however, that this doctrine was to a certain extent
based on a decision rendered by the Supremo Tribunal of Spain
on December 3, 1897, a decision which is now practically obsolete
due to its reversal by the same tribunal on April 1, 1941. As it now
stands, the accepted rule in Spain is to the effect that a reservatario
may dispose of his expectancy to the reservable property during the
pendency of the reserva in its uncertain and conditional form. If he
dies before the reservista, he has not transmitted anything, but if
he survives such reservista, the transmission shall become effective.
On March 24, 1961 in Sieves vs. Esparcia, 1 SCRA 750, our Supreme
Court finally adopted this view.
The following problem essentially based upon Sienes is
interesting:
Problem — The lot in question originally belonged to A.
With his first wife, B, A had four children, D, E, F, and G, while
with his second wife, C, he had only one child, H. Upon his death
in 1956, said lot was left to H. When H died in 1952, single and
without any descendant, his mother, C, sold the property to X.
Subsequently, D, E, F and G sold the same property to Y. Several years later, C died.
(a)

Is the property reservable?

(b) How about the two sales which were executed — are
they valid or not?
(c)

Who is now entitled to the property?

Answer — (a) In order that the property shall be considered as reservable under Art. 891 of the Civil Code, it is necessary that the following requisites must concur: (1) The property
should have been inherited by operation of law by an ascendant
from his descendant upon the death of the latter; (2) the property should have been previously acquired by gratuitous title
by the descendant from another ascendant or from a brother
or sister; and (3) the descendant should have died without any
legitimate issue in the direct descending line who could inherit
from him. It is clear that all of these requisites are present in
the instant case. Consequently, when H died in 1952, and the
property passed by operation of law to his mother, C, it became
reservable. In order words, C, who is the reservista, must re-

275

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

serve the property for the benefit of the relatives of H who are
within the third degree and who belong to the line from which
the property came. This reservation, however, is subject to two
resolutory conditions, namely: (1) the death of the ascendant
reservista, and (2) the survival, at the time of his death, of relatives of the descendant-propositus who are within the third degree and who belong to the line from which the reservable property came. (6 Manresa, 268-269; 2 Sanchez Roman 1934; Sienes
vs. Esparcia, 1 SCRA 750.)
(b) As far as the first sale is concerned, undoubtedly, it
is valid, but the reservista can only alienate that which he has
and nothing more — a limited and revocable title to the reservable property. Hence, the alienation transmits only the conditional and revocable title of the reservista, the rights acquired by
the transferee being revoked or resolved by the survival of reservatarios at the time of the death of the reservista (Edroso vs.
Sablan, 25 Phil. 295; Lunsod vs. Ortega, 46 Phil. 664; Florentino
vs. Florentino, 40 Phil. 279; Sieves vs. Espacio, supra.) Consequently, in the instant case, inasmuch as the reservatarios, D, E,
F, and G, were still alive at the time of the death of the reservista, C, the conclusion becomes inescapable that the previous sale
made by such reservista in favor of X became of no legal effect,
and as a consequence, the reservable property passed automatically and by operation of law to the reservatarios. But then, the
reservatarios had also alienated their right or expectancy over
the reservable property during the pendency of the reserva. Was
this sale valid? This question was answered in the affirmative
by the Supreme Court in Sienes vs. Esparcia, (supra). But, of
course, it is subject to the same conditions to which the previous
sale is subject.
(c)
Premises considered, it is clear that Y is now entitled to the subject property.

Idem; When reservatario acquires right; effect. — Assuming that the reservatario has all of the necessary qualifications, his
hope or expectancy over the reservable property is finally converted
into a perfected right upon the concurrence of two requisites — death
of the reservista and survival. Upon the death of the reservista, the
reservatario nearest the descendant-propositus becomes, automatically and by operation of law, the absolute owner of the reservable
property.79 Consequently, the property is withdrawn automatically
79

Cano vs. Director of Lands, 105 Phil. 1.

276

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

from the estate of the reservista. Hence, even the creditors of such
reservista cannot touch it. Furthermore, if in the decree of registration there is an express recognition of the rights of the reservatario,
the acquisition of the property by such reservatario upon the death
of the reservista may be entered immediately in the property records
without the necessity of opening any state proceedings.80
Extinction of Reserva. — The following are the different
causes for the extinguishment of the reserva:
(1)

Death of the ascendant-reservista.81

(2) Death of all relatives of the descendant-propositus within
the third degree who belong to the line from which the property
came. In such case, the active subject of the reserva disappears, as a
consequence of which the resolutory condition which limits the title
of the reservista also disappears.82
(3) Loss of the reservable property for causes not due to the
fault or negligence of the reservista.83
(4) Waiver or renunciation by the reservatarios.84 The renunciation may be before or after the death of the reservista. If the renunciation is made before the death of the reservista, such renunciation cannot affect other third degree relatives who may be born
subsequently and who survive the reservista; if it is made after the
death of the reservista, the reservation is extinguished but only insofar as the share of the renouncer is concerned. In either case, the
renunciation may be either express or implied.85
(5) Prescription of the right of the reservatarios, when the
ascendant-reservista holds the property adversely against them in
the concept of an absolute owner.86 The possibility of the reservatarios
losing their right in the reservable property by extraordinary

Ibid.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 390.
82
Ibid., pp. 390-391.
83
Ibid., p. 391.
84
Ibid., pp. 391-392.
85
6 Sanchez Roman 1040-1041.
86
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 393.
80
81

277

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

prescription has been explicitly recognized by the Supreme Court in
Maghirang vs. Balcita87 and in Carillo vs. De Paz.88
In the first case (Maghirang vs. Balcita), the subject property
was inherited by a minor, Gertrudis Balcita, in 1902 directly from
her maternal grandfather, Bonifacio Gutierrez, in representation of
her predeceased mother. In 1906, Atilano Bautista, father of Gertrudis, representing himself to be the absolute owner of the land, sold
it to Esteban Reyes with right or repurchase within ten years. Upon
buying the property, Reyes immediately took possession thereof. In
1912, Gertrudis died survived by her father, Atilano Bautista, and
a maternal aunt, the plaintiff Sergia Gutierrez. In 1918, the latter brought an action for registration of the land in her capacity
as reservatario or reservee under Art. 911 (now 891) of the Civil
Code. The lower court ruled that Reyes had already acquired absolute ownership over the property by acquisitive prescription because
he had been in continuous and adverse possession thereof for more
than ten years. The Supreme Court, however, held:
“We are of the opinion that the conclusion thus reached is
erroneous. We may accept the legal proposition that occupancy
by Esteban Reyes, pursuant to the contract of sale with pacto de
retro by which he acquired the property, and prior to the expiration of the period for redemption, may be considered an adverse
possession as against everybody having a prescriptive interest,
notwithstanding the existence of the stipulation for repurchase.
As was said by this court in Santos vs. Heirs of Crisostomo and
Tiongson (41 Phil. 342, 352), the insertion of a stipulation for
repurchase by the vendor in a contract of sale does not necessarily create a right inconsistent with the right of ownership in the
purchaser. Such a stipulation is in the nature of an option, and
the possible exercise of it rests upon contingency. It creates no
subsisting right whatever in the property, and so far from being
inconsistent with the idea of full ownership in the purchase, it
really rests upon the assumption of ownership in him.
“But it must be borne in mind that the true owner of this
property was Gertrudis Balcita, a minor, and the period of limi-

48 Phil. 551.
18 SCRA 467. See also prior case of Carillo vs. De Paz, 91 Phil. 265. As a matter of fact, the Supreme Court has even held that estoppel and laches may also bar
the reservatarios from claiming the reservable property (Arroyo vs. Gerona, 58 Phil.
226, 237).
87
88

278

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

tation did not begin to run against her or any person claiming
in her right until the date of her death, which was December
9, 1912. It must furthermore be remembered that the plaintiff
does not claim in the character of an ordinary successor to the
rights of Gertrudis Balcita; her claim is based upon a positive
provision of law, which could not operate in any wise until the
death of Gertrudis Balcita, when the reservable character first
attached to the property in question. From this it is obvious that
the right of the plaintiff — which even yet is of a purely contingent nature — could not be affected by anything that had occurred prior to the death of Gertrudis Balcita; and as this action
was begun in May, 1918 the ten-year period necessary to confer
a complete prescriptive title had not then elapsed.
“What has been said makes it unnecessary to express any
opinion upon the more recondite question whether Sergia Gutierrez really has a prescriptible interest in the parcel B, but we
may observe that the position of the reservee under the Spanish law is very much like that of the ordinary remainderman
at common law, who is entitled to take after the termination of
a particular life estate; and it is generally accepted doctrine in
common-law jurisdictions that if the life tenant loses his life
estate by adverse possession the interest of the remainderman
is not thereby destroyed. (17 R.C.L. 982; 21 C.J., 972, 975, 1013.)
The reason for the rule is said to be that, during the existence
of the life estate, the remainderman has no right to possession
and consequently cannot bring an action to recover it. (21 C.J.,
974.) As was said by the Supreme Court of Ohio in Webster vs.
Pittsburg, etc., Railroad Co. (15 L.RA. (N.S.), 1154), “No possession can be deemed adverse to a party who has not at the time
the right of entry and possession.”

The case of Carillo is even more interesting. Without deviating
substantially from the actual facts and decision, we have formulated
the following problem and the corresponding answer based on the
decision:
Problem — In 1943, Severino Salak sold 1/2 of a parcel of
land (the subject property) to Honoria Salak. He died in 1944
survived by a daughter, Francisco Salak de Paz. In January,
1945, Honoria, together with her mother, Isabel Carillo Salak,
and her brother, Adolfo Salak, were massacred by the Japanese.
At the time of their death, Honoria was 25 years old, Adolfo,
32 years old, and Isabel, 52 years old. They were survived by
Agustina de Guzman Vda. de Carrillo, mother of Isabel. In 1946,

279

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

in the intestate proceeding for the settlement of the estate of
Severino Salak, the entire subject property was adjudicated to
the decedent’s daughter, Francisca. On April 24, 1950, Agustina
died. In 1963, Prima Carillo, a daughter of Agustina and sister
of Isabel, brought an action against Francisca for recovery of 1/2
of the subject property in her capacity as reservatario or reservee under Art. 891 of the Civil Code. Defendant interposed the
defense of prescription. Decide.
Answer — The defense of prescription should be sustained.
It is of course, very true that the subject property is reservable under Art. 891 of the Civil Code. All of the requisites
are present. Since at the time they were massacred by the Japanese, Honoria was 25 years old, Adolfo, 32 years old, and Isabel,
52 years old, under the presumptions on survivorship enunciated in Rule 123, Sec. 69 (ii) (now Rule 131, Sec. 5, ii), of the Rules
of Court, Honoria was the first to die, followed by Isabel, and
then Adolfo, it is obvious that 1/2 of the subject property, which
Honoria had bought from Severino Salak in 1943, passed by intestate succession to her mother, Isabel. When Isabel died, the
said 1/2 of the property also passed by intestate succession to
her son, Adolfo. When Adolfo died, it passed again by intestate
succession, this time, to his maternal grandmother, Agustina.
Hence, all of the requisites of reserva troncal under Art. 891 of
the Civil Code are present with: (1) Isabel as the origin of the
property; (2) Adolfo as the descendant-propositus; (3) Agustina
as the ascendant-reservista; and (4) Prima as the reservatario or
reservee. Thus, Agustina had inherited the property by operation of law from her descendant Adolfo; Adolfo, in turn, had acquired said property by gratuitous title from another ascendant,
his mother, Isabel; and finally, Adolfo, the propositus, died without issue. From the moment Agustina inherited the property
from Adolfo in 1945, it became reservable. In other words, she
was obliged to reserve the property for the benefit of relatives of
Adolfo who are within the third degree and who belong to the
line from which the said property came.
Agustina finally died on April 24, 1950. From that very
moment, the reserva was extinguished. Prima, maternal aunt,
and therefore, a third degree relative of Adolfo, became automatically and by operation of law the absolute owner of the reservable property. From that very moment she had a perfect
right to bring an action against Francisca for the recovery (accion reinvindicatoria) of 1/2 of the subject property. Such right
or cause of action accrued on April 24, 1950. The law (Section 40

280

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

of the Code of Civil Procedure) fixes 10 years as the period for
actions to recover real property, counted from the time the cause
of action accrued. This is the applicable law (Art. 1116, Civil
Code). Plaintiffs suit herein, having been filed only in 1963, or
more than 10 years from April 24, 1950, has already prescribed.
(Carillo vs. De Paz, 18 SCRA 467.) (Note: It must be noted that
had the massacre of Honoria, Isabel and Adolfo taken place after the effectivity of the New Civil Code (Aug. 31, 1950), there
would have been no reserva troncal. The presumptions on survivorship would not then apply. What would have been applicable
would be the presumption stated in Art. 43 of the New Civil
Code. All of the three would be presumed to have died at the
same time. Hence, there would have been no transmission of
successional rights from one to the other.)

The above doctrine was again recognized in Chua vs. Court of
First Instance of Negros Occidental (supra.). In this case, one of the
incidental issues that had to be resolved was the contention of private
respondents (the legal heirs of the ascendant-reservista Consolacion
de la Torre that the complaint of petitioner (the reservatarios or
reservees) for recovery of one-half (1/2) of the subject property had
already prescribed. The Supreme Court ruled:
“It is claimed that the complaint x x x had already prescribed when it was filed on May 11, 1966. We do not believe so.
It must be remembered that the petitioners herein are claiming
as reservees of the property in question and their cause of action
as reservees did not arise until the time the reservor, Consolacion de la Torre, died in March, 1966. When, the petitioners
therefore filed their complaint to recover the one-half (1/2) portion of Lot 399, they were very much in time to do so.”
It is interesting to note that in the 1979 Bar Examinations, a problem was asked based on the three cases that we
have just discussed. The problem (and corresponding answer)
are as follows:
Problem — A married B in 1950 bringing into the marriage a 10-hectare piece of unregistered land in Antipolo which
he inherited from his father. Of the marriage two daughters
were born. On February 10, 1955, A and his two daughters went
to Baguio. On the way they met an accident and A died instantly
on the spot while the two daughters died two days later in the
hospital where they were brought. In 1960, B sold the land to C.
In 1977, B died so D, the only brother of A, asked C to reconvey
the land to him. Upon C’s refusal, D filed a complaint for recov-

281

ART. 891

SUCCESSION

ery of the land. C raised the defense of prescription. Should the
defense be sustained? Why?
Answer — The defense should be sustained but only with
respect to one-third of the subject property; however, with respect to the other two thirds, it should not be sustained.
It must be observed that when A died, the subject property passed by intestate succession to his wife B and his two
daughters in the proportion of one-third for each. When the two
daughters died two hours later, their one-third shares passed
by intestate succession to their mother B. These shares which B
acquired by operation of law from her two daughters become reservable. In other words, by mandate of the law, upon acquiring
the two-thirds share of her daughters she was obliged to reserve
such share for the benefit of relatives of her two deceased daughters who are within the third degree and who belong to the line
from whence the reservable property came: All of the requisites
of reserva troncal are, therefore, present. In the first place, the
property was acquired by a descendant from an ascendant or
from a brother or sister by gratuitous title; in the second place,
said descendant died without any legitimate issue in the direct
descending line who can inherit from him; in the third place, the
property is inherited by another ascendant by operation of law;
and in the fourth place, there are relatives of the descendant
who are within the third degree and who belong to the line from
which said property came. Consequently, when C bought the
subject property from B in 1960, he acquired only that which B
had and nothing more. In other words, when B, the ascendantreservista, sold the property to C in 1960, the latter acquired
the one-third share which B had inherited from A without any
condition whatsoever. However, with respect to the other twothirds share which is reservable, C acquired a limited and revocable title only. Therefore, when B, the ascendant-reservista
vendor finally died in 1977, automatically, by operation of law,
the two-thirds share which is reservable passed to D, who is the
reservee or reservatario.
Premises considered, the defense of prescription can only
be sustained with respect to the one-third share of B which she
had inherited from A in 1955. The computation of the 10-year
period of prescription must commence from 1960. In the case of
the two-thirds share which is reservable, the computation must
commence from 1977 when B, the ascendant-reservista, died.
When D, the reservatario, therefore, filed his action after the
death of B, he was very much in time to do so.

282

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 891

(6) Registration by the reservista of the property as free
property under the Land Registration Act (Act No. 496)89
De los Reyes vs. Paterno
34 Phil. 420
The records show that the reservista registered the property in question as free property under the Land Registration
Act without any opposition on the part of the reservatarios. After this death, six years later, the plaintiff, commenced this action for the recovery of the property on the ground that he is
entitled to the ownership and possession thereof in accordance
with the provision of Art. 811 (now Art. 891) of the Civil Code.
On appeal, the Supreme Court held that his failure to present
any opposition to the registration within a period of one year
after the decree of registration had been entered has the effect
of extinguishing his right to the property. Subsequently, his
counsel presented a motion for rehearing wherein he invoked
the doctrine in the case of Edroso vs. Sablan, 25 Phil. 295. The
Supreme Court, however, held:
“It is true that in the case of Edroso vs. Sablan, we held
that the owners of ‘el derecho reservable’ were entitled to have
their right noted in the certificate of registration as a valid lien
against the property. In that case (Edroso vs. Sablan), the persons holding the reservable rights presented their opposition
to the registration of the land in question during the pendency
of the action in the Court of Land Registration. In the present
case, the land in question was registered in the month of September, 1909. No objection was presented to the registration of
the property. No question is now raised that the proceedings for
the registration of the land in question were not regular and
in accordance with the provisions of the Land Registration Act.
Moreover, the plaintiff presented no claim whatever for a period
of six years. In the case of Edroso vs. Sablan, the parties interested went to the Court of Land Registration during the pendency of the action there and fully protected their rights. In the
present case, the plaintiff did not, thereby losing his right given
him under the law to the land in question. Whether he has any
other remedy for the purpose of recovering damages to cover his
loss is a question which we do not now discuss or decide. The appellee apparently had the idea that the decision in the present
case destroys ‘el derecho reservable.’ That was not the purpose

89

De los Reyes vs. Paterno, 34 Phil. 420.

283

ARTS. 892-894

SUCCESSION

of the decision. The effect of the decision simply is that unless
such right is protected during the pendency of the action for the
registration of the land within a period of one year, thereafter,
such right is lost forever. We are of the opinion that there is no
conflict between the decision in the present case and in the case
of Edroso vs. Sablan.’’

Art. 892. If only one legitimate child or descendant of the deceased survives, the widow or widower shall be entitled to onefourth of the hereditary estate. In case of a legal separation, the
surviving spouse may inherit if it was the deceased who had given
cause for the same.
If there are two or more legitimate children or descendants,
the surviving spouse shall be entitled to a portion equal to the legitime of each of the legitimate children or descendants.
In both cases, the legitime of the surviving spouse shall be
taken from the portion that can be freely disposed of by the testator.90
Art. 893. If the testator leaves no legitimate descendants, but
leaves legitimate ascendants, the surviving spouse will have a
right to one-fourth of the hereditary estate.
This fourth shall be taken from the free portion of the estate.91
Art. 894. If the testator leaves illegitimate children, the surviving spouse shall be entitled to one-third of the hereditary estate
of the deceased and the illegitimate children to another third. The
remaining third shall be at the free disposal of the testator.92
Legitime of Surviving Spouse. — One of the major changes
effected in the New Civil Code is to give to the surviving spouse
absolute dominion over a certain portion of the decedent’s estate
rather than a mere interest in the form of a usufruct which is often
difficult to satisfy and which prevents the property from being
freely alienated to third persons.93 Thus, under the present Code
Art. 834, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
Art. 836, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
92
New provision.
93
Report of the Code Commission, p. 112.
90
91

284

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 894

the surviving spouse is entitled to a legitime the amount of which
is variable depending upon whether he or she survives alone or
concurrently with other compulsory heirs. It must be noted, however,
that in case of legal separation, if the survivor happens to be the
guilty spouse, he or she is incapacitated to inherit from the deceased
spouse.94
The successional rights of the surviving spouse with respect to
his or her legitime may be summarized as follows:
(1) Surviving alone — 1/2 of the estate, unless the marriage
between the surviving spouse and the testator was solemnized in
articulo mortis and the testator died within three months from the
time of such marriage, in which case the legitime of the surviving
spouse is 1/3 of the estate, except when they have been living as
husband and wife for more than five years, in which case the legitime
of such surviving spouse is again 1/2 of the estate.
(2) Surviving with legitimate descendants — 1/4 of the estate,
if there is only one child; the same as that of each child, if there are
two or more children.
(3)

Surviving with ascendants — 1/4 of the estate.

(4)

Surviving with illegitimate children — 1/3 of the estate.

(5) Surviving with legitimate descendants and illegitimate
children — 1/4 of the estate, if there is only one legitimate child;
the same as that of each legitimate child, if there are two more
legitimate children.
(6) Surviving with legitimate ascendants and illegitimate
children — 1/8 of the estate.
Idem; Alone as a class. — As a general rule, if the only
surviving compulsory heir of the testator is the widow or widower,
the legitime of such widow or widower consists of one-half (1/2) of
the hereditary estate. There is, however, an exception to this rule.
If the marriage between the surviving spouse and the testator was
solemnized in articulo mortis and the testator died within three
months from the time of such marriage, the legitime of the surviving
spouse as the sole heir shall be one-third (1/3) of the hereditary

94

Arts. 106, 892, Civil Code.

285

ART. 894

SUCCESSION

estate, while the remaining two-thirds shall be at the testator’s free
disposal. Nevertheless, this exception shall not apply, if they had
been living together as husband and wife for more than five years
before the celebration of the marriage.95
Idem; With legitimate descendants. — If the surviving
spouse concurs with only one legitimate child or descendant, his
or her legitime consists of one-fourth (1/4) of the hereditary estate
which shall be taken from the free portion.96 Consequently, the
division of the estate shall be as follows:
Legitimate of the child or descendant ............

1/2

Legitime of the surviving spouse ....................

1/2

For free disposal ..............................................

1/4

If he or she concurs with two or more legitimate children
or descendants, his or her legitime shall be equal to that of each
legitimate child or descendant which shall be taken from the free
portion.97 Thus, if the testator is survived by his widow, W, two
legitimate children, A and B, and two grandchildren, D and E,
children of a deceased legitimate child, C, and the net value of
the estate is P60,000, the legitime of the legitimate children and
descendants shall consists of 1/2 of P60,000, or P30,000. The legitime
of the legitimate children and descendants of P30,000, however,
shall be divided per stirpes and not per capita. This is so, because D
and E are entitled by right of representation to the legitime which
would have pertained to their deceased father, C.98 Consequently,
the division of the estate shall be as follows:
Legitime of A ......................................................

P10,000

Legitime of B ......................................................

10,000

Legitime of D by right of representation ..........

5,000

Legitime of E by right of representation ..........

5,000

Art. 900, Civil Code.
Art. 892, par. 1, Civil Code.
97
Art. 892, par. 2, Civil Code.
98
Arts. 970, 972, 974, Civil Code.
95
96

286

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 894

Legitime of W......................................................

10,000

For free disposal .................................................

20,000
P60,000

Idem; With legitimate ascendant. — If the surviving spouse
concurs only with legitimate parents or ascendants, the legitime of
the former consists of one-fourth (1/4) of the hereditary estate to be
taken from the free portion,99 while that of the latter consists of onehalf (1/2).100 Thus, if the testator is survived by his widow, W, and
his legitimate parents, F and M, and the net value of the estate is
P40,000, the division shall be as follows:
Legitime of F .......................................................

P10,000

Legitime of M ......................................................

10,000

Legitime of W .....................................................

5,000

For Free disposal ...............................................

5,000
P40,000

Idem; With illegitimate children. — If the surviving spouse
concurs only with illegitimate children, he or she shall be entitled
to a legitime of one-third (1/3) of the hereditary estate, while the
latter shall also be entitled to one-third (1/3). The remaining onethird (1/3) shall be at the free disposal of the testator.101
Problem — The testator is survived by: (1) W, his widow;
(2) N, an acknowledged natural child; and (3) S, an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural. The net value of the
estate is P54,000. How shall such estate be divided?
Answer — By virtue of the provision of Art. 894 of the Civil
Code, the legitime of the surviving spouse, W, shall consist of
1/3 of P54,000, or P18,000, the legitime of the illegitimate children, N and S, shall also consist of 1/3 of P54,000, or P18,000,
while the remaining 1/3 of P54,000, or P18,000, shall be at the
testator’s free disposal. It must be observed, however, that N is
Art. 893, Civil Code.
Art. 889, Civil Code.
101
Art. 894, Civil Code.
99

100

287

ART. 895

SUCCESSION

an acknowledged natural child, while S is an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural. Therefore, the rule stated in
the second paragraph of Art. 895 of the Civil Code is applicable.
According to this rule, “the legitime of an illegitimate child who
is neither an acknowledged natural, nor a natural child by legal
fiction, shall be equal in every case to four-fifths of the legitime
of an acknowledged natural child.” From this rule, it is evident
that the proportion between the legitime of an acknowledged
natural child and that of an acknowledged illegitimate child
who is not natural is five to four (5:4). Applying this proportion to the problem, N shall be entitled to 5/9 of the legitime of
P18,000, while S shall be entitled to 4/9. Therefore, the entire
estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of W .....................................

P18,000

Legitime of N......................................

10,000

Legitime of S ......................................

8,000

For free disposal.................................

18,000
P54,000

Note: This rule was repealed by the Family Code. Since
the various classifications of illegitimate children was eliminated such that they are now all classified as illegitimate children,
their legitime shall be the same, that is, one-half of the legitime
of a legitimate child. The 5:4 proportion is, thus, inapplicable.
The entire estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of W .....................................

P18,000

Legitime of N......................................

9,000

Legitime of S ......................................

9,000

For free disposal.................................

18,000
P54,000

Art. 895. The legitime of each of the acknowledged natural
children and each of the natural children by legal fiction shall
consist of one-half of the legitime of each of the legitimate children
or descendants.
The legitime of an illegitimate child who is neither an acknowledged natural, nor a natural child by legal fiction, shall be
equal in every case to four-fifths of the legitime of an acknowledged natural child.
288

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ARTS. 896-900

The legitime of the illegitimate children shall be taken from the
portion of the estate at the free disposal of the testator provided
that in no case shall the total legitime of such illegitimate children
exceed that free portion, and that the legitime of the surviving
spouse must first be fully satisfied.102
Art. 896. Illegitimate children who may survive with legitimate
parents or ascendants of the deceased shall be entitled to onefourth of the hereditary estate to be taken from the portion at the
free disposal of the testator.103
Art. 897. When the widow or widower survives with legitimate
children or descendants, and acknowledged natural children by
legal fiction, such surviving spouse shall be entitled to a portion
equal to the legitime of each of the legitimate children which must
be taken from that part of the estate which the testator can freely
dispose of.104
Art. 898. If the widow or widower survives with legitimate
children or descendants, and with illegitimate children other than
acknowledged natural, or natural children by legal fiction, the
share of the surviving spouse shall be the same as that provided
in the preceding article.105
Art. 899. When the widow or widower survives with legitimate
parents or ascendants and with illegitimate children, such
surviving spouse shall be entitled to one-eighth of the hereditary
estate of the deceased which must be taken from the free portion,
and the illegitimate children shall be entitled to one-fourth of the
estate which shall be taken also from the disposable portion. The
testator may freely dispose of the remaining one-eighth of the
estate.106
Art. 900. If the only survivor is the widow or widower, she
or he shall be entitled to one-half of the hereditary estate of the
deceased spouse, and the testator may freely dispose of the other
half.

Art. 840, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
Art. 841, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
104
New Provision.
105
New Provision.
106
New Provision.
102
103

289

ARTS. 901-902

SUCCESSION

If the marriage between the surviving spouse and the testator
was solemnized in articulo mortis, and the testator died within three
months from the time of the marriage, the legitime of the surviving
spouse as the sole heir shall be one-third of the hereditary estate,
except when they have been living as husband and wife for more
than five years. In the latter case, the legitime of the surviving
spouse shall be that specified in the preceding paragraph.107
Art. 901. When the testator dies leaving illegitimate children
and no other compulsory heirs, such illegitimate children shall
have a right to one-half of the hereditary estate of the deceased.
The other half shall be at the free disposal of the testator.108
Art. 902. The rights of illegitimate children set forth in the preceding articles are transmitted upon their death to their descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate.109
Legitime of Illegitimate Descendants. — Another major
change that is introduced in the new Civil Code is the improvement
of the successional rights of illegitimate children. Under the law,
only acknowledged natural children were entitled to succeed as
compulsory heirs; under the present law, all classes of illegitimate
children are entitled to succeed as compulsory heirs.110 The amount
of their legitime, however, is variable depending upon whether
they inherit alone or as a class or concurrently with other classes of
compulsory heirs.
Idem; Alone as a class. — When the only survivors are
illegitimate children, the legitime of such illegitimate children
consists of one-half (1/2) of the hereditary estate, while the other
half is at the testator’s free disposal.111 This rule which is contained
in Art. 901 of the Code must, however, be supplemented by the
rule contained in the second paragraph of Art. 895 if some of the
survivors are acknowledged natural or natural children by legal
fiction, while others are acknowledged illegitimate children who are
not natural. This rule, however, was repealed by the Family Code,
more particularly by the second sentence of Art. 176 which states
Art. 837, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
Art. 842, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
109
Art. 843, Spanish Civil Code, in amended form.
110
See Report of the Code Commission, pp. 112-114.
111
Art. 901, Civil Code.
107
108

290

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

that the legitime of each illegitimate child shall consist of one — half
of the legitime of a legitimate child. Since the various classifications
of illegitimate children was eliminated such that they are now all
simply classified as illegitimate children, their legitime shall be the
same, that is, one-half of the legitime of a legitimate child.
Problem No. 1 — The testator is survived by an acknowledged natural child, A, and an acknowledged illegitimate child
who is not natural, X. The net value of the estate is P36,000.
How shall such estate be divided?
Answer — Since the only surviving compulsory heirs are
illegitimate children, their legitime shall consist of 1/2 of the estate of P36,000, or P18,000 (Art. 901, Civil Code). It must, however, be noted that A is an acknowledged natural child, while X
is an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural. Hence,
as far as the division of the legitime of P18,000 is concerned,
the rule stated in the second paragraph of Art. 895 of the Code
shall apply. In other words, the legitime of an acknowledged illegitimate who is not natural shall be 4/ 5 of that of an acknowledged natural child. It is, therefore, evident that the proportion
between the share of an acknowledged natural child and that of
an acknowledged illegitimate who is not natural is five to four
(5:4). This merely means that for every five shares or parts that
each acknowledged natural child shall receive, an acknowledged
illegitimate who is not natural shall be entitled to four parts.
Applying this proportion to the problem, A shall be entitled to
5/9 of P18,000, or P10,000, while X shall be entitled to 4/9 of
P18,000, or P8,000. Consequently, the entire estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P10,000

Legitime of X ...........................................

8,000

For free disposal......................................

18,000
P36,000

In view of the provisions of the Family Code, the 5:4 proportion is inapplicable. The entire estate shall, therefore, be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P 9,000

Legitime of X ...........................................

9,000

For free disposal......................................

18,000
P36,000

291

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

Problem No. 2 — The testator is survived by two acknowledged natural children, A and B, and three acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural, X, Y, and Z. The net value
of the estate is P88,000. How shall such estate be divided?
Answer — Since all of the survivors are illegitimate children, their legitime shall consist of 1/2 of the entire estate of
P88,000, or P44,000. Two of the survivors, however, are acknowledged natural children, while three are acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural. Therefore, the legitime
of P44,000 shall be divided among them in accordance with the
proportion of 5:5:4:4:4. In other words, each of the acknowledged natural children shall be entitled to 5/22 of the legitime
of P44,000, or P10,000, while each of the acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural shall be entitled to 4/22 of the
legitime of P44,000, or P8,000. Consequently, the entire estate
shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P10,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

10,000

Legitime of X ...........................................

8,000

Legitime of Y ...........................................

8,000

Legitime of Z ..........................................

8,000

For free disposal......................................

44,000
P88,000

With the new provisions of the Family Code, the 5:5:4:4:4
proportion is inapplicable. As there is now no distinction between acknowledged natural children and acknowledged illegitimate children not natural since they are both simply classified
as illegitimate children, the entire estate shall be divided as:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P 8,800

Legitime of B ...........................................

8,800

Legitime of X ...........................................

8,800

Legitime of Y ...........................................

8,800

Legitime of Z ..........................................

8,800

For free disposal......................................

44,000
P88,000

292

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

Idem; With legitimate descendants. — If illegitimate children concur with legitimate children or descendants, the legitime of
each of the acknowledged natural children and each of the natural
children by legal fiction shall consist of one-half of the legitime of
each of the legitimate children or descendants, while the legitime of
each of the acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural
shall be equal in every case to four-fifths of the legitime of each of
the acknowledged natural children.112 In other words, the legitimes
of illegitimate children shall be computed in such a way that the
legitime of an acknowledged natural child or a natural child by legal
fiction shall consist of one-half (1/2), and that of an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural, two-fifths (2/5), of the legitime of
a legitimate child or descendant. But this computation was repealed
by the provisions of the Family Code as (i) the acknowledged natural child; (ii) the natural child by legal fiction; and (iii) the acknowledged illegitimate child are now all classified simply as illegitimate
children.
Since the law has already reserved one-half of the hereditary
estate for this legitime of legitimate children or descendants,113
these legitimes of illegitimate children shall be taken from the free
portion of the estate, provided that in no case shall the total exceed
such free portion.114
Problem No. 1 — The testator is survived by two legitimate children, A and B, two acknowledged natural children, C
and D, and two acknowledged illegitimate children who are not
natural, E and F. What are the legitimes of these survivors if
the net value of the hereditary estate is P80,000?
Answer — A and B, who are legitimate children, shall be
entitled to one-half of the entire estate which they shall divide
in equal shares. They shall, therefore, receive P20,000 each. C
and D, who are acknowledged natural children, shall each be
entitled to one-half of the legitime of A or B. They shall, therefore, receive P10,000 each. E and F, who are acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural, shall each be entitled to
two-fifths of the legitime of A or B. They shall, therefore, receive

Art. 895, pars. 1, 2, Civil Code.
Art. 888, Civil Code.
114
Art. 895, Civil Code.
112
113

293

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

P8,000 each. Consequently, the entire estate shall be divided as
follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P20,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

20,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

10,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

10,000

Legitime of E ..........................................

8,000

Legitime of F ..........................................

8,000

For free disposal......................................

4,000
P80,000

Since C, D, E and F are all classified as illegitimate children under the Family Code, they shall receive P10,000 each.
Consequently, the division of the entire estate shall be as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P20,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

20,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

20,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

20,000

Legitime of E ..........................................

20,000

Legitime of F ..........................................

20,000

For free disposal......................................

none
P80,000

Problem No. 2 — The testator is survived by two legitimate children, A and B, four acknowledged children, C, D, E,
and F, and one acknowledged illegitimate child, G. What are
the legitimes of these survivors if the net value of the hereditary
estate is P96,000?
Answer — A and B shall be entitled to a legitime of onehalf of P96,000, or P48,000, which they shall divide in equal
shares. The free portion, from which the legitimes of the illegitimate children shall be taken, is, therefore, P48,000. Now, if we
are going to satisfy the legitimes of the illegitimate children in
such a way that each of the four acknowledged natural children
shall receive 1/2, and the acknowledged illegitimate child who
is not natural, 2/5 of the legitime of each of the legitimate chil-

294

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

dren, the free portion of P48,000 shall not be sufficient to satisfy such legitimes. Since the law says that in no case shall the
total legitimes of illegitimate children exceed the free portion,
we shall, therefore, have to apply the proportion of 5:5:5:5:4 in
order to divide the free portion of P48,000 among the five illegitimate children. Hence, each of the four acknowledged natural
children shall be entitled to 5/24 of P48,000, or P10,000, while
the acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural shall be
entitled to 4/24 of P48,000, or P8,000. Consequently, the entire
estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P24,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

24,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

10,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

24,000

Legitime of E ...........................................

24,000

Legitime of F ...........................................

10,000

Legitime of G ...........................................

24,000
P96,000

There is nothing left at the testator’s free disposal.
Under the Family Code, C, D, E, F and G are all classified
as simply illegitimate children. Since the law provides that the
total legitime of the illegitimate children shall not exceed the
free portion, the legitime of each illegitimate child cannot be
computed at one-half the legitime of the legitimate child. Hence,
the free portion of P40,000 shall equally be divided among the
five illegitimate children. Consequently, the entire estate shall
be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P24,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

24,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

9,600

Legitime of D ...........................................

9,600

Legitime of E ...........................................

9,600

Legitime of F ...........................................

9,600

Legitime of G ...........................................

9,600
P96,000

There will be nothing left at the testator’s free disposal.

295

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

Idem; With ascendants. — If the testator is a legitimate
person and he is survived by his legitimate parents or ascendants
and illegitimate children, the legitime of the legitimate parents or
ascendants shall consist of one-half (1/2) of the hereditary estate,115
while that of the illegitimate children shall consist of one-fourth
(1/4) to be taken from the free portion.116 If the testator, however, is
an illegitimate person and he is survived by his illegitimate parents
and illegitimate children, the former are not entitled to any legitime,
because they are excluded by the presence of the latter.117 In such
case, the legitime of the illegitimate children shall consist of onehalf (1/2) of the hereditary estate.118
Problem — The testator is survived by his legitimate parents, F and M, his adopted child, A, and an acknowledged natural child, N. The net value of the hereditary estate is P40,000.
What is the legitime of the survivors?
Answer — In order to solve the problem, we must take
into consideration the provision of Art. 39, No. 4, of the Child
and Youth Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603). Under this article, if
the adopter is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants and
by an adopted person, the latter shall not have more successional rights than an acknowledged natural child. Applying this
rule to the above problem, it is evident that A’s legitime shall
be equal to N’s legitime. Thus, the legitime of the parents is
P20,000 which they shall divide in equal shares; the legitime of
A and N is P10,000 which they shall divide in equal shares; and
the remaining P10,000 shall be at the testator’s free disposal.

Idem; With spouse. — If illegitimate children concur with
the widow or widower of the testator, the legitime of the illegitimate
children shall consist of one-third (1/3) of the hereditary estate and
that of the surviving spouse shall also consist of another third (1/3),
with the remaining third (1/3) available for free disposal.119
Idem; With legitimate descendants and spouse. — If
illegitimate children concur with legitimate chidren or descendants

Art. 899, Civil Code.
Art. 896, Civil Code.
117
Art. 903, Civil Code.
118
Art. 901, Civil Code.
119
Art. 894, Civil Code.
115
116

296

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

and the widow or widower of the testator, the rules prescribed by the
New Civil Code in Arts. 888, 892, 897, and 898 and by the Family
Code in Art. 176, second sentence which repealed Art. 895 of the
New Civil Code. These rules may be restated as follows:
(1) The legitime of legitimate children or descendants shall
consist of one-half of the hereditary estate.120
(2) The legitime of the surviving spouse shall be equal
to the legitime of the legitimate children,121 unless there is only
one legitimate child or descendant, in which case the legitime of
such surviving spouse shall consist of one-fourth of the hereditary
estate.122
(3) The legitime of each illegitimate child shall consist of onehalf of the legitime of a legitimate child. It is to be recalled that all
three types of illegitimate children under the New Civil Code are
simply classified in the Family Code as illegitimate children. Hence,
the rules that: (i) the legitime of each of the acknowledged natural
children and natural children by legal fiction shall consist of one-half
of the legitime of the legitimate children or descendants;123 and (ii)
the legitime of each of the acknowledged illegitimate children who
are not natural shall consist of four-fifths of the legitime of each of
the legitimate of four-fifths of the legitime of each of the legitimate
children or descendants124 are now both repealed.
(4) The legitimes of the surviving spouse and the illegitimate
children shall be taken from the free portion, provided that in no
case shall the total legitime of such illegitimate children exceed such
free portion, and provided further that the legitime of the surviving
spouse must first be fully satisfied.125
Problem No. 1 — The testator is survived by two legitimate children, A and B, one acknowledged natural child, C, one,
acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural, D, and his

Art. 888, Civil Code.
Arts. 897, 898, Civil Code.
122
Art. 292, par. 1, Civil Code.
123
Art. 895, par. 1, Civil Code (repealed by Art. 176, 2nd sentence, Family
Code).
124
Art. 895, par. 2, Civil Code (repealed by Art. 176, 2nd sentence, Family
Code).
125
Art. 895, par. 3, Civil Code (repealed by the Family Code).
120
121

297

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

widow, W. What are the legitimes of these survivors if the net of
the hereditary estate is P72,000?
Answer — The legitime of A and B consists of one-half
of the entire estate (Art. 888). They are, therefore, entitled to
P18,000 each. The legitime of the widow, W, consists of a portion
equal to the legitime of each of the legitimate children (Arts. 897
and 898). She is, therefore, entitled to P18,000 which must be
taken from the free portion. The legitime of the acknowledged
natural child, C, consists of one-half of the legitime of each of
the legitimate children or descendants (Art. 895, par. 1). He is,
therefore, entitled to P9,000 which must be taken from the free
portion. The legitime of the acknowledged illegitimate child who
is not natural, D, consists of two-fifths of the legitime of each of
the legitimate children or descendants (Art. 895, par. 2). He is,
therefore, entitled to P7,200 which must be taken from the free
portion. Consequently, the estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P18,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

18,000

Legitime of W ..........................................

18,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

9,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

7,200

For free disposal......................................

1,800
P72,000

Under the provisions of the Family Code, the legitime of
either C or D, both of whom are simply classified as illegitimate
children, shall consist of one-half of the legitime of either A or B.
C and D are, therefore, entitled to P9,000 each, which amounts
must be taken from the free portion. Thus, the estate shall be
divided as:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P18,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

18,000

Legitime of W ..........................................

18,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

9,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

9,000

For free disposal......................................

none
P72,000

298

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

Problem No. 2 — The testator is survived by two legitimate children, A and B, two acknowledged natural children,
C and D, two acknowledged illegitimate children who are not
natural, E and F, and his widow, W. What are the legitimes of
these survivors if the net value of the estate is P72,000?
Answer — Since the legitime of legitimate children or descendants consists of one-half of the hereditary estate (Art. 888),
A and B shall, therefore, be entitled to P36,000, or P18,000 each.
Hence, the free portion from which the legitimes of the other
survivors shall be satisfied is P36,000. It is evident, however,
that if we are going to satisfy such legitimes in accordance with
the shares prescribed for the survivors in the Civil Code, the
amount of P36,000 will not be sufficient. How then can the legitimes of the survivors be satisfied? The solution is found in the
last paragraph of Art. 895 of the Code. In a case like this, two
limitations or conditions must always have to be considered. In
the first place, in no case shall the total legitime of the illegitimate children ever exceed the free portion; and in the second
place, the legitime of the surviving spouse must first be fully
satisfied. (Art. 895, par. 3). Hence, since the legitime of the surviving spouse is equal to that of each of the legitimate children
(Arts. 897 and 898), W shall be entitled to P18,000. There will,
therefore, be P18,000 left in the free portion which will be available for distribution to the illegitimate children. Since the legitime of an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural
shall be equal in every case to four-fifths of the legitime of an
acknowledged natural child, this remainder of P18,000 shall
be divided among the illegitimate children in the proportion of
5:5:4:4. Therefore, C and D shall be entitled to 5/18 of P18,000
each, while E and F shall be entitled to 4/18 of P18,000 each.
Consequently, the estate shall be divided as follows:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P18,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

18,000

Legitime of W ..........................................

18,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

5,000

Legitime of D ...........................................

5,000

Legitime of E ...........................................

4,000

Legitime of F ...........................................

4,000
P72,000

There will be nothing left at the testator’s free disposal.

299

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

In view of the changes brought about by the provisions of
the Family Code, the proportion of 5:5:4:4 is inapplicable. Consequently, the estate shall be divided as:
Legitime of A ...........................................

P18,000

Legitime of B ...........................................

18,000

Legitime of W ..........................................

18,000

Legitime of C ...........................................

4,500

Legitime of D ...........................................

4,500

Legitime of E ...........................................

4,500

Legitime of F ...........................................

4,500
P72,000

There will be nothing left at the testator’s free disposal.

Idem; With legitimate ascendants and spouse. — If illegitimate children concur with legitimate parents or ascendants and
the surviving spouse, the hereditary estate shall be divided as follows:
(1) Legitime of the legitimate parents or ascendants — 1/2 of
the estate.126
(2) Legitime of the surviving spouse — 1/8 of the estate to be
taken from the free portion;
(3) Legitime of the illegitimate children — 1/4 of the estate to
be taken from the free portion;
(4)

Disposable portion — 1/8 of the estate.127

Problem — The testator died with a will in 1978, survived
by his legitimate mother, M, his widow, W, one acknowledged
natural child, A, and one acknowledged illegitimate child who is
not natural, B. Although he instituted all of these survivors as
heirs in his will, he also disposed of the entire disposable portion
of his estate to a stranger, X. Granting that the net value of his
entire estate is P72,000, how shall it be divided?

126
127

Art. 899, Civil Code.
Art. 899, Civil Code.

300

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

Answer — The estate shall be divided as follows:
(1)

Legitime of M, consisting of 1/2 of estate ... P36,000

(2)

Legitime of W, consisting of 1/8 of estate...

9,000

(3)

Legitime of A and B, consisting
of 1/4 of estate ..............................................

18,000

Disposable portion in favor of X .................

9,000

(4)

P72,000
Applying the provisions of the second paragraph of Art.
895 of the Civil Code, the P18,000 to which A and B are entitled
shall be divided between them in the proportion of 5 is to 4. In
other words, A shall be entitled to 5/9 of P18,000, or P10,000,
while B shall be entitled to 4/9 of P18,000, or P8,000. Said 5:4
proportion is, however no longer applicable considering that
there is no distinction between A and B under the Family Code.
Hence, both shall be entitled to P9,000 each.

Idem; Transmissibility of rights. — If an illegitimate
child dies before the testator, can his right to the legitime which
had been reserved for him by law be transmitted to his own heirs?
This question is answered by the provision of Art. 902 of the Code,
which states that the rights of illegitimate children set forth in
the preceding articles are transmitted upon their death to their
descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate. In reality, this
provision is merely a recognition of the principle of representation.128
Consequently, the precept can be extended to cases of disinheritance
or incapacity.129
It must be observed, however, that unlike the case of legitimate
children or descendants, where the person or persons to whom the
right is transmitted must be legitimate descendants, here the representatives may be either legitimate or illegitimate descendants.
Problem No. 1 — Two years ago, X executed a will instituting as universal heirs his wife, W, and his two legitimate
children, A and B, in the proportion of one-half (1/2) for W, onefourth (1/4) for A and one-fourth (1/4) for B. Several days ago,
in a vehicular accident, both X and B were killed. B was killed

128
129

Arts. 970, et seq., Civil Code.
Arts. 923, 1035, Civil Code.

301

ART. 902

SUCCESSION

instantly; X died two hours afterwards. B is survived by two legitimate children, C and D, and two acknowledged natural children, E and F. The net value of X’s estate is P240,000. The only
survivors are W, A, C, D, E and F. Distribute the estate.
Answer — Had B survived X, the distribution of the estate
would have been as follows:
W .................................. P60,000, as compulsory heir
60,000, as voluntary heir
A ...................................

60,000, as compulsory heir

B ...................................

60,000, as compulsory heir
P280,000

Because of predecease, B’s share, which is in reality his legitime, is rendered vacant. Under the law, this vacant share shall
now pass to B’s legitimate children, C and D, by right of representation. His acknowledged natural children, E and F, cannot participate as co-representatives because of the doctrine of
absolute separation between members of the legitimate family
and members of the illegitimate family (Art. 992, Civil Code).
Consequently, the estate shall be distributed as follows:
W .............................

P60,000, as compulsory heir
60,000, as voluntary heir

A ..............................

60,000, as compulsory heir

C ..............................

30,000, by right of representation

D ..............................

30,000, by right of representation
P240,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem, both
A and B, instead of being legitimate children of X, are acknowledged natural children, how shall you distribute the estate?
Answer — In such case, E and F, acknowledged natural
children of B, can then participate in the succession as co-representatives. In other words, the legitime of B, which has been
rendered vacant because of predecease, shall now pass to his
children, C, D, E and F in the proportion of 2:2:1:1. C shall receive 2/6 or 1/3 of P60,000; D, the same; E shall receive 1/6 of
P60,000; and F, the same.

302

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 902

Consequently, the estate shall be distributed as follows:
W .......................... P60,000, as compulsory heir
60,000, as voluntary heir
A ...........................

60,000, as compulsory heir

C ...........................

20,000, by right of representation

G............................

20,000, by right of representation

E ............................

10,000, by right of representation

F ...........................

10,000, by right of representation
P240,000

In view, however, of the new provisions of the Family
Code, C, D, E and F shall all simply be classified as illegitimate
children. Hence, the proportion of 2:2:1:1 is inapplicable. The
estate shall, thus, be distributed as:
W .............................. P60,000, as compulsory heir
60,000, as voluntary heir
A ...............................

60,000, as compulsory heir

C ...............................

15,000, by right of representation

D ...............................

15,000, by right of representation

E ...............................

15,000, by right of representation

F ...............................

15,000, by right of representation
P240,000

(Note: In subsection 2, under Section 1 of Chapter 3 (Legal
or Intestate Succession), the subject of representation, Arts. 970,
et seq., will be discussed. Although it is a concept of intestate
succession, nevertheless, representation may also take place in
testamentary succession in case of predecease, incapacity and
disinheritance. It must be noted, however, that in testamentary
succession, only a compulsory heir may be represented and only
with respect to his legitime.
Anent the subject of representation by illegitimates which
will also be discussed under Arts. 970, et seq., and under Art.
992, it must be noted that the following rules will apply: first, if
the person to be represented is legitimate, it is essential that the
representative must also be legitimate; and second, if the person
to be represented is illegitimate, then it is immaterial whether

303

ARTS. 903-904

SUCCESSION

the representative is legitimate or illegitimate. This is so because of the doctrine of absolute separation between members
of the legitimate family and members of the illegitimate family
enunciated in Art. 992 of the Civil Code.)

Art. 903. The legitime of the parents who have an Illegitimate
child, when such child leaves neither legitimate descendants, nor
a surviving spouse, nor illegitimate children, is one-half of the hereditary estate of such illegitimate child. If only legitimate or illegitimate children are left, the parents are not entitled to any legitime
whatsoever. If only the widow or widower survives with parents of
the illegitimate child, the legitime of the parents is one-fourth of
the hereditary estate of the child, and that of the surviving spouse
also one-fourth of the estate.130
Legitime of illegitimate Parents. — Under the present
Code, illegitimate parents are classified as compulsory heirs of their
illegitimate children, but only in default of children or descendants,
whether legitimate or illegitimate. If the testator leaves neither
legitimate descendants, nor a surviving spouse, nor illegitimate
children, and the only survivors are illegitimate parents, such
parents shall be entitled to a legitime of one-half (1/2) of the
hereditary estate. If the widow or widower of the testator, however
concurs with illegitimate parents, the legitime of the parents shall
consist of one-fourth (1/4) of the hereditary estate, while that of the
surviving spouse shall also consist of one-fourth (1/4) of the estate,
leaving one-half (1/2) for the testator’s free disposal.131
Art. 904. The testator cannot deprive his compulsory heirs of
their legitime, except in cases expressly specified by law.
Neither can he impose upon the same any burden, encumbrance, condition, or substitution of any kind whatsoever.132
Preservation of Legitime. — The principle of the untouchability of the legitime of compulsory heirs in enunciated in the
above article. The same principle is also encunciated either expressly
or impliedly in Arts. 842, 864 and 872 of the Code.
New provision.
Art. 903, Civil Code.
132
Art. 813, Spanish Civil Code.
130
131

304

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 904

There are two aspects of the principle. In the first place, the
testator cannot deprive his compulsory heirs of their legitime. The
only exception is when the testator disinherits a compulsory heir
for a cause expressly stated by law.133 In the second place, he cannot
impose upon the same any burden, encumbrance, condition, or
substitution of any kind whatsoever. The only exception is when he
expressly prohibits the partition of the hereditary estate for a period
which shall not exceed twenty years.134 This power of the testator to
prohibit division applies even to the legitime of compulsory heirs.135
Of course, there are other instances when a charge or burden is
imposed upon the legitime of compulsory heirs, such as in the case
of reserva troncal136 or when the estate consists of a family home,137
but in these cases, the charge is imposed by the law and not by the
testator.
Idem; Effect of impairment. — If the testator deprives a
compulsory heir of his legitime in violation of the principle declared
in Art. 904, the effect of such deprivation must be distinguished or
qualified. There are four possible ways by which the testator may
attempt to deprive a compulsory heir of his legitime. They are as
follows:
(1) By valid disinheritance138 in such a case, the disinheritance shall take effect, provided that the requisite formalities prescribed by law are complied with. As heretofore stated, this is the
only exceptional case under our Code where the testator may, by
his own act, deprive a compulsory heir of the legitime to which he is
entitled by law.
(2) By imperfect disinheritance.139 By imperfect disinheritance, we refer to the expressed attempt of the testator to deprive
a compulsory heir of his legitime without the requisite formalities
prescribed by law. The effect of such attempt would be the partial
annulment of the institution of heirs to the extent that the legitime

Art. 915, Civil Code.
Art. 1083, Civil Code.
135
Ibid.
136
Art. 891, Civil Code.
137
Art. 238, Civil Code.
138
Arts. 915, et seq., Civil Code.
139
Art. 918, Civil Code.
133
134

305

ART. 905

SUCCESSION

of the heir disinherited is prejudiced, but legacies and devises which
are not inofficious shall be respected.
(3) By preterition of a compulsory heir in the direct line.140 In
this case, the attempt of the testator to deprive the compulsory heir
of his legitime is implied. The effect of such attempt would be the
annulment of the institution of heirs, but legacies and devises which
are not inofficious shall be respected.
(4) By leaving to the compulsory heir by any title any property
or amount which is not sufficient to satisfy the legitime to which
such heir is entitled by law.141 In such a case, the heir can ask for the
completion of his legitime.
Art. 905. Every renunciation or compromise as regards a
future legitime between the person owing it and his compulsory
heir is void, and the latter may claim the same upon the death of
the former; but they must bring to collation whatever they may
have received by virtue of the renunciation or compromise.142
Effect of Renunciation or Compromise. — According to
the above article, every renunciation or compromise as regards a
future legitime between the testator and his compulsory heirs is
void. The reasons for this precept are evident. In the first place,
the rights of the heirs with respect to their legitime are merely
inchoate or prospective, because such rights are perfected only at
the moment of the death of the testator.143 Hence, before the death
of the latter, there can be nothing to renounce or compromise. In
the second place, no contract may be entered into with respect to
future inheritance except in the cases expressly authorized by law.144
The only exceptional cases where a contract may be entered with
respect to future inheritance would be those contemplated in Arts.
130 and 1080 of the Code. It is, therefore, clear that all agreements
between the testator and a compulsory heir which partake of the
nature of a renunciation or compromise with regard to the future
legitime of the heir would be void under this article. As a matter
Art. 854, Civil Code.
Art. 906, Civil Code.
142
Art. 816, Spanish Civil Code.
143
Art. 777, Civil Code.
144
Art. 1347, Civil Code.
140
141

306

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 905

of fact, the rule can be extended to any contract with regard to the
future legitime entered into, not only between the testator and the
heir, but also among the heirs themselves, or between the heirs and
third persons.145 This is so by virtue of the provision of Art. 1347 of
the Code. It must be noted, however, that the prohibition cannot be
applied to donations inter vivos made by the testator to a compulsory
heir. Such donations, which are presumed to be advances of the
legitime, are allowed by the law but subject to collation.146
Who can claim the nullity of the renunciation or compromise?
It is clear that such nullity may be claimed either by the compulsory
heir who made it or by any other compulsory heir who is prejudiced
by such renunciation or compromise.147 It must be observed, however,
that if the nullity is claimed after the death of the testator, it is
required that the heir who is filing the claim must bring to collation
whatever he might have received by virtue of the renunciation or
compromise. This requirement is logical because it would be unjust
if such heir is allowed to claim his legitime and still retain what he
had received.148
Problem — MN, a wealthy hacendero died leaving to his
four legitimate children and his widow an estate worth about
P2,000,000. When the proceedings for the settlement of his estate were pending, Rosie, a child he begot with his lavandera,
filed a claim for a share in the estate. The widow and four children contested the claim on the ground that in a previous action
for support filed by the lavandera when Rosie was still a minor,
the lavandera agreed to dismiss the case and signed an agreement acknowledging that the sum of P50,000 paid thereunder
included payment for whatever inheritance Rosie was to have.
Should Rosie’s claim be granted? Why? (1979 Bar Problem)
Answer — Rosie’s claim should be granted but subject to
the condition that the portion of the P50,000 paid to her mother
as her inheritance shall be brought to collation. It must observed
that the agreement is actually a renunciation or compromise as
regards a future legitime or inheritance between the person owing it and a compulsory heir. According to the Civil Code, such
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 443-444; 6 Sanchez Roman 940-941. See Art. 2035,
Civil Code.
146
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 444.
147
Ibid., p. 445.
148
Ibid.
145

307

ART. 906

SUCCESSION

a renunciation or compromise is void, and the latter may claim
the same upon the death of the former, but he must bring to collation whatever he may have received by virtue of the renunciation or compromise. (Art. 905, Civil Code)

Art. 906. Any compulsory heir to whom the testator has left
by any title less than the legitime belonging to him may demand
that the same be fully satisfied.149
Effect of Incomplete Legitime. — The case contemplated
in this Article must be distinguished from the preterition of a
compulsory heir in the direct line as contemplated in Art. 854 of
the Code. In preterition, there is a total omission of the compulsory
heir in the institution, and consequently, a total deprivation of his
legitime; in this article, the testator has not entirely forgotten the
heir, but making a wrong estimate of the portion which he could
freely dispose of, he has left to such heir something less than the
portion to which he is entitled by operation of law. In preterition,
the effect is the total annulment of the institution of heirs; in this
article, the only effect is to give a remedy or a right of action to the
compulsory heir who is prejudiced to demand for the completion of
his legitime. However, it must be noted that under the latter case, if
the heir cannot lose his legitime, neither can he demand more than
what it amounts to. At most, he can only ask for the balance of what
he is legally entitled to.150
It must also be noted that the law uses the phrase “by any title”
in describing the disposition of the property given by the testator to
the compulsory heir who is prejudiced. There is, therefore, a clear
implication that the property which the testator had given to the
compulsory heir, and which is not sufficient to cover the legitime
of such heir, might not have been disposed of by the will itself,
but by some other gratuitous title, such as by way of donation,
during the lifetime of the testator. The reason for this is evident.
In the computation of the legitime of compulsory heirs during the
proceedings for the settlement of the estate of the testator, the value
of the property donated to the heir at the time when the donation was

Art. 815, Spanish Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 437-438. See Aznar vs. Duncan, G.R. No. L24365, June
30, 1966, 17 SCRA 590.
149
150

308

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 907

made shall be collated to the net value of the estate and subsequently
imputed against his legitime.151 Consequently, whether the property
had been disposed of by will or by way of donation, the same rule
applies; the remedy of the heir who is prejudiced is to demand for
the completion of his legitime.
Art. 907. Testamentary dispositions that impair or diminish
the legitime of the compulsory heirs shall be reduced on petition
of the same, insofar as they may be inofficious or excessive.152
Effect of Inofficious Testamentary Dispositions. — The
testamentary dispositions alluded to in the above article refer not
only to those dispositions in favor of voluntary heirs, but also to all
legacies, devises, and other charges which are chargeable against the
disposable free portion of the hereditary estate. Such testamentary
dispositions are considered inofficious if they are in excess of the
disposable free portion of the hereditary estate thus resulting in the
impairment of the legitime of compulsory heirs. What is the effect of
inofficious testamentary dispositions? According to the above article,
they shall be reduced on petition of the compulsory heirs who are
prejudiced. The procedure for such reduction is regulated by Arts.
911 and 912 of the Code.
There is a very clear analogy between inofficious testamentary
dispositions and inofficous donations inter vivos. This is evident
from an examination of the provisions of Arts. 771 and 907 of the
Code. According to the first article, donations inter vivos which are
inofficious, bearing in mind the estimated net value of the donor’s
estate at the time of his death, shall be reduced with regard to the
excess. The reduction shall be made on petition of the compulsory
heirs who are prejudiced. The procedure for such reduction shall be
regulated by Arts. 911 and 912 of the Code. The basis of the rule in
either case is the very concept of the legitime itself. Under our system
of compulsory succession, the testator’s freedom of disposition is
limited by the fact that he cannot make any gratuitous disposition
of his property, whether by an act inter vivos or by an act mortis
causa, which would impair the legitime of his compulsory heirs. This
principle, crystallized in Art. 904 of the Code, is complemented by

151
152

Arts. 908-910, Civil Code.
Art. 817, Spanish Civil Code.

309

ARTS. 908-910

SUCCESSION

Art. 752, which declares that no person can give by way of donation
more than he can dispose of by will. Violation of the principle in cases
of donations inter vivos shall pave the way for the remedy provided
for in Art. 771; violation of the principle in cases of donations mortis
causa or testamentary dispositions shall pave the way for the remedy
provided for in Art. 907.153
Art. 908. To determine the legitime, the value of the property
left at the death of the testator shall be considered, deducting all
debts and charges, which shall not include those imposed in the
will.
To the net value of the hereditary estate, shall be added the
value of all donations by the testator that are subject to collation,
at the time he made them.154
Art. 909. Donations given to children shall be charged to their
legitime.
Donations made to strangers shall be charged to that part of
the estate of which the testator could have disposed by his last
will.
Insofar as they may be inofficious or may exceed the disposable portion, they shall be reduced according to the rules established by this Code.155
Art. 910. Donations which an illegitimate child may have received during the lifetime of his father or mother, shall be charged
to his legitime.
Should they exceed the portion that can be freely disposed
of, they shall reduced in the manner prescribed by this Code.156
Steps in Distribution of Estate If There are Donations.
— There are five distinct steps in the determination of the legitime
of compulsory heirs. They are:
(1) Determination of the gross value of the estate at the time
of the death of the testator.
See 64 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 448-449.
Art. 818, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
155
Art. 819, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
156
Art. 847, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
153
154

310

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 910

(2) Determination of all debts and charges which are
chargeable against the estate.
(3) Determination of the net value of the estate by deducting
all of the debts and charges from the gross value of the estate.
(4) Collation or addition of the value of all donations inter
vivos to the net value of the estate.
(5) Determination of the amount of the legitime from the total
thus found in accordance with the rules (Arts. 888-903) established
in the Civil Code.
In order to distribute the hereditary estate in accordance with
the will of the testator, two more steps are added to the above steps.
They are:
(6) Imputation of the value of all donations inter vivos made
to compulsory heirs against their legitime and of the value of all
donations inter vivos made to strangers against the disposable free
portion and restoration to the hereditary estate if the donation is
inofficious.
(7) Distribution of the residue of the estate in accordance
with the will of the testator.
The steps in the determination of the legitime of compulsory
heirs may be illustrated by the following case:
Mateo vs. Lagua
29 SCRA 864
Sometime in 1917, Cipriano Lagua and his wife, in a public
instrument, donated two lots to their son Alejandro Lagua,
in consideration of the latter’s marriage to Bonifacia Mateo.
Alejandro took possession of the properties, but the Certificate
of Title remained in the name of Cipriano. In 1923, Alejandro
died, survived by his wife Bonifacia, and a daughter, Anatalia.
Cipriano then undertook the farming of the donated lots giving
to Bonifacia and her daughter the owner’s share of the harvest.
On July 31, 1941, Cipriano executed a deed of sale of the two lots
in favor of his younger son, Gervacio. This sale notwithstanding,
Bonifacia was given the owner’s share of the harvest until 1956
when it was altogether stopped. It was only then that Bonifacia
learned of the sale of the lots to her brother-in-law, who had
the sale in his favor registered only on September 22, 1955. As

311

ART. 910

SUCCESSION

a consequence, two Transfer Certificates of Title were issued to
Gervacio. Bonifacia and her daughter then brought an action
against Cipriano and Gervacio seeking the annulment of the
deed of sale and recovery of the possession of the properties. On
January 3, 1957, judgment was rendered in favor of Bonifacia and
her daughter. Subsequently, Gervacio and his wife commenced
an action against Bonifacia and Anatalia for reimbursement of
the improvements allegedly made on the two lots plus damages.
At about the same time, Gervacio and his father, Cipriano, filed
an action for the annulment of the donation of the two lots insofar
as one-half portion thereof was concerned. It was their claim that
in donating the two lots, which allegedly were all that Cipriano
owned, said plaintiff not only neglected leaving something for his
own support but also prejudiced the legitime of his forced heir,
plaintiff Gervacio. Being intimately related, the two cases were
heard jointly. The trial court rendered a decision dismissing the
first case, plaintiffs being possessors in bad faith, and, therefore
not entitled to reimbursement of expenses for improvements put
up by them on the land. The other suit was likewise dismissed
on the ground of prescription. Plaintiffs appealed to the Court
of Appeals. Said tribunal affirmed the ruling of the trial court
in the first case. In regard to the annulment case, the Court
held that the donation was inofficious to the extent of about
500 square meters, and, therefore, defendants must reconvey
a portion of the donated lots equivalent to about 500 square
meters. From this decision, Bonifacia and Anatalia resorted to
the Supreme Court. Speaking through Justice J. B. L. Reyes,
the Court held:
“In reality, the only question this case presents is whether or not the Court of Appeals acted correctly in ordering the
reduction of the donation for being inofficious, and in ordering
herein petitioners to reconvey to respondent Gervacio Lagua an
unidentified 494.75-square-meter portion of the donated lots.
“We are in accord with the Court of Appeals that Civil
Case No. 442 is not one exclusively for annulment or revocation
of the entire donation, but of merely that portion thereof allegedly trenching on the legitime of respondent Gervacio Lagua;
that the cause of action to enforce Gervacio’s legitime, having
accrued only upon the death of his father on 12 November 1958,
the dispute has to be governed by the pertinent provisions of
the new Civil Code; and that a donation propter nuptias may be
reduced for being inofficious. Contrary to the views of appellants
(petitioner’s), donations propter nuptias (by reason of marriage)
are without onerous consideration, the marriage being merely

312

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 910

the occasion or motive for the donation, not its causa. Being
liberalities, they remain subject to reduction for inofficiousness
upon the donor’s death, if they should infringe the legitime of a
forced heir.
“It is to be noted, however, that in rendering the judgment
under review the Court of Appeals acted on several unsupported
assumption: that the lot mentioned in the decision (Nos. 998,
5106 and 6541) were the only properties composing the net hereditary estate of the deceased Cipriano Lagua; that Alejandro
Lagua and Gervacio Lagua were his only legal heirs; that the
deceased left no unpaid debts, charges, taxes, etc., for which the
estate would be answerable. In the computation of the heirs’
legitime, the Court of Appeals also considered only the area, not
the value, of the properties.
“The infirmity in the above course of action lies in the fact
that in its Article 908, the new Civil Code specifically provides
as follows:
“Art. 908. To determine the legitime, the value of
the property left at the death of the testator shall be considered, deducting all debts, and charges, which shall not
include those imposed in the will.”
“To the net value of the hereditary estate, shall be
added the value of all donations by the testator that are
subject to collation, at the time he made them.”
“In other words, before any conclusion about the legal
share due to a compulsory heir may be reached, it is necessary
that certain steps be taken first. The net estate of the decedent
must be ascertained, by deducting all payable obligations and
charges from the value of the property owned by the deceased
at the time of his death; then all donations subject to collation
would be added to it. With the partible estate thus determined,
the legitimes of the compulsory heir or heirs can be established;
and only thereafter can it be ascentained whether or not a donation had prejudiced the legitimes. Certainly, in order that a
donation may be reduced from being inofficous, there must be
proof that the value of the donated property exceeds that of the
disposable free portion plus the donee’s share as legitime in the
properties of the donor. In the present case, it can hardly be said
that, with the evidence then before the court, it was in any position to rule on the inofficiousness of the donation involved here,
and to order its reduction and reconveyance of the deducted portion to the respondents.

313

ART. 910

SUCCESSION

“For the foregoing consideration, the decision of the Court
of Appeals, insofar as Civil Case No. 442 of the court a quo is
concerned, is hereby set aside and the trial court’s order of dismissal sustained, without prejudiced to the parties’ litigating
the issue of inofficiousness in a proper proceeding, giving due
notice to all persons interested in the estate of the late Cipriano
Lagua. Without costs.”

Idem; Gross value of estate. — The procedure for the determination of the gross value of the estate at the time of the death of
the testator shall depend upon whether there is a judicial proceeding
for the settlement of the estate or not. In case there is a judicial proceeding, the procedure shall depend upon the nature of the proceeding itself. Thus, in case of administration proceedings, the executor
or administrator, within three months after his appointment, shall
return to the court a true inventory or appraisal of all the real and
personal estate of the deceased which have come to his possession
or knowledge.157 If there is no administration proceeding, it is the
actual value of the estate which should be taken into consideration,
and not the sentimental value. The valuation or appraisal may even
be made by common agreement.158
Idem; Debts and charges. — Deductible debts and charges
refer to pre-existing obligations of the testator which he had
incurred during his lifetime, and not to the charges or burdens
which are created by testamentary dispositions found in the will.
According to the law, charges or burdens arising from or based upon
testamentary dispositions are chargeable or imputable against the
portion at the testator’s free disposal. Since it would be impossible
to determine such disposable portion without first determining the
legitime of compulsory heirs, it is clear that such charges or burdens
cannot be placed in the same category as pre-existing obligations of
the testator.159
Idem; Collation of donations. — Upon the determination
of the net value of the estate by the settlement or liquidation of all
deductible debts and charges, the next step in the determination
of the legitime of compulsory heirs is the collation or addition of

Secs. 1-3, New Rules of Court.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 452.
159
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 453; 14 Scaevola 390.
157
158

314

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 910

the value of all donations which the testator had made during his
lifetime to the net value of the estate. The value to be collated or
added is the value of the thing donated at the time when the donation
was made.160 Consequently, any loss, deterioration, or improvement
of the thing donated from the time when the donation was made up
to the time of the settlement of the donor’s estate shall be for the
account or for the benefit of the donee.161
Idem; Id. — Meaning of collation. — Collation, as it is used
in the Civil Code, has three different but interrelated acceptations.
In one sense, it is understood as a fictitious mathematical process
of adding the value of the thing donated to the net value of the
hereditary estate. This is the sense in which it is used in Art. 908
of the Code. The immediate purpose is to compute the legitime of
compulsory heirs. In another sense, it includes not only the process
of adding the value of the thing donated to the net value of the
hereditary estate but also the subsequent act of charging or imputing
such value against the legitime of the compulsory heir to whom the
thing was donated. This is the sense in which it is used in Art. 1061
of the Code. The immediate purpose is to take the donations “in
the account of the partition” in order to equalize the shares of the
compulsory heirs as much as possible. In still another sense, it refers
to the actual act of restoring to the hereditary estate that part of the
donation which is inofficious in order not to impair the legitime of
compulsory heirs. The immediate purpose is to protect the legitime
of compulsory heirs.
Idem; Id.; Id. — Donations to be collated. — Whether
the donation was made to a compulsory heir or to a stranger, the
value thereof at the time when it was made shall be added to the
net value of the hereditary estate for the purpose of determining
the legitime of compulsory heirs and the portion at the testator’s
free disposal. That donations inter vivos made to compulsory heirs
shall be collated is evident from the provision of Art. 1061 of the
Code. In case of donations inter vivos to strangers, the basis of the
rule is found in the prohibition of inofficious donations, or those
which impair the legitime of compulsory heirs (Arts. 752, 771,
Civil Code). Besides, under the second paragraph of Art. 909, such

160
161

Arts. 908, 1071, Civil Code.
Art. 1071, Civil Code.

315

ART. 910

SUCCESSION

donations are imputable against the portion at the testator’s free
disposal in order to determine whether they are inofficious or not.
It is clear that before they can be so imputed and before they can be
considered inofficious, it is essential that their value must be added
to the net remainder of the estate in order to determine the legitime
of compulsory heirs and the portion at the testator’s free disposal
against which they are imputable. This has been the consistent
doctrine enunciated by the Supreme Tribunal of Spain and by the
majority of Spanish commentators.162 This is also the view upheld by
practically all Filipino commentators and by an obiter dictum of the
Supreme Court in the case of Liguez vs. Court of Appeals.163
How about the proceeds of a life insurance policy, where the
beneficiary is a third person or even a compulsory heir, shall such
proceeds be collated or not? In the case of Del Val vs. Del Val,164
where the beneficiary was a third person, it was held that the
proceeds of an insurance policy belong exclusively to the beneficiary
and not to the estate of the insured; consequently, the provisions of
the Civil Code with regard to collation cannot apply. It is believed
that the same principle can be applied where the beneficiary is a
compulsory heir: As far as the premiums are concerned, although
they partake of the nature of donations, commentators sustain the
view that so long as they are paid from the income of the insured
and are not excessive, they are not subject to collation.165
Idem; Imputation. — After the value of all donations inter
vivos have already been added to the net value of the hereditary
estate, the next step is the determination of the legitime of compulsory
heirs in accordance with the rules prescribed in Arts. 888 to 903 of
the Code using as basis the total amount obtained. Donations given
to compulsory heirs will then be imputed against their legitime,
while those given to strangers will be imputed against the disposable
portion.166 If such donations are inofficious in the sense that they

162
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 454-457. In his original commentaries, however, Manresa
was of the opinion that only donations to compulsory heirs must be collated. In the Philippines, Dr. Padilla still follows this view. (See 2 Padilla, Civil Code, 1956 Ed., p. 922).
163
102 Phil. 577.
164
429 Phil. 534.
165
3 Tolentino, Civil Code, 956 Ed., p. 305, citing 5 Planiol & Ripert 349.
166
Arts. 909, 910, Civil Code.

316

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 910

cannot be contained in the disposable portion, they must be reduced
in accordance with the rules prescribed in Arts. 911 and 912 of the
Civil Code.167
It must be noted that the act of imputation is merely a mathematical process of determining whether the value of the donation
can be contained in the legitime or disposable portion, as the case
may be, or not. In other words, the purpose is to determine whether
it is inofficious or not. If it is not inofficious, it will be respected; the
donee shall not be required to make any restoration to the hereditary estate. If it is inofficious, it will be reduced with respect to the
excess; the donee shall be required to make an actual restoration to
the hereditary estate in order not to impair the legitime of compulsory heirs.
It must also be noted that in the case of a donation to a
compulsory heir, just because the value of the thing donated cannot
be contained in his legitime does not necessarily mean that the
donation is inofficious. The only effect in such case, would be to place
the donation in the same category as a donation to a stranger with
respect to the excess. Hence such excess will be imputed against the
disposable portion. If it can be contained in such disposable portion,
it is not inofficious; consequently, it will not be reduced. These
rules, however, must be qualified by the provision of Art. 1062 of
the Code, which declares that “collation shall not take place among
compulsory heirs if the donor should have so expressly provided.”
This provision merely means that if the donor has expressly provided
either in the deed of donation or in his will that the donation given
to a compulsory heir shall not be collated, the value of such donation
shall be imputable against the disposable portion and not against
the legitime of such heir.
Idem; Illustrations. — The different steps in the distribution
of the testator’s estate among those who are called to inherit may be
illustrated by the following problems:
Problem No. 1— The value of the testator’s estate at the
time of his death is P40,000. However, the claims against his
estate based on obligations incurred during his lifetime amount

167

Ibid.

317

ART. 910

SUCCESSION

to P20,000. During his lifetime, he had also made two donations
– P20,000 to A, his elder son, and P40,000 to X, a friend. In his
will, he instituted his two legitimate children, A and B, who are
his only compulsory heirs, as sole heirs, with the proviso that
the entire free portion shall be given to B. How shall the estate
be distributed?
Answer — First, deduct the debts amounting to P20,000
from the gross value of the estate, thus leaving a net remainder of P20,000. To this remainder, add or collate the value of
the two donations, thus making a total of P80,000. It is from
this amount that the legitime of A and B shall be determined.
Their legitime is 1/2 of P80,000, or P40,000, or P20,000 each
(Art. 888). Since the donation of P20,000 to A is a donation to
a compulsory heir, it shall be charged against his legitime of
P20,000 (Art. 909). There is neither a balance nor an excess.
It is, therefore, presumed that the testator, in making the donation to A, had merely advanced his legitime. Consequently,
A will no longer be entitled to any legitime. The donation of
P40,000 to X, on the other hand, being a donation to a stranger,
shall be charged against the disposable portion of P40,000 (Art.
909). Again, there is neither a balance nor an excess. It will,
therefore, stand without any reduction since it is not inofficious.
However, the proviso in the will giving the entire free portion
to B is rendered useless because there is no balance out of the
disposable portion. Consequently, the net remainder of P20,000,
which is available for distribution, will all be given to B in order
to satisfy his legitime.
Problem No. 2 — The value of the testator’s estate after his
death is P40,000. However, the claims against his estate based
on obligations incurred during his lifetime amount to P20,000.
During his lifetime, he had made two donations — P40,000 to
A, his elder son, given in 1950, and P20,000 to X, a friend, given
in 1945. In his will, he instituted his two legitimate children, A
and B, and his wife, W, who are his only compulsory heirs, as
sole heirs, with the proviso that the entire free portion shall be
given to W. How shall the estate be distributed?
Answer — The first step in the solution of the problem is
to determine the gross value of the testator’s estate. According
to the facts stated, the gross value is P40,000.
The second step is to determine the amount of all debts
and charges incurred by the testator during his lifetime. According to the facts stated, the debts amount to P20,000.

318

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 910

The third step is to determine the net value of the estate
by deducting all debts from the gross value of the estate. That
leaves an amount of P20,000.
The fourth step is to add or collate the value of all donations inter vivos to the net value of the estate. The aggregate
sum is P80,000.
The fifth step is to determine the legitime of the three compulsory heirs, using as basis the amount of P80,000. The legitime of A and B is 1/2 of P80,000, or P40,000, or P20,000 each
(Art. 888). The legitime of W is equal to that of each legitimate
child (Art. 892), or P20,000. The disposable portion is, therefore,
P20,000. The donation of P40,000 given to A shall be charged
against his legitime of P20,000. There is an excess of P20,000,
which cannot be contained in the legitime. Consequently, A will
no longer be entitled to any legitime because when the testator
made the donation to him, it is presumed that he was merely
advancing the payment of such legitime. As a matter of fact, he
had advanced to him P20,000 more than the amount to which
he is entitled by law. This excess of P20,000 shall, therefore, be
placed in the same category as a donation to a stranger. Hence,
this excess of P20,000 given to A as well as the donation of
P20,000 given to X shall be charged against the disposable portion of P20,000. It is evident that such disposable portion is not
sufficient to contain both of them. Which of the two shall be suppressed or reduced? In this case, Art. 773 of the Code is directly
applicable. The excess of P20,000 given to A shall be suppressed
on the ground that it is absolutely inofficious. It must be observed that while the donation to A was given only in 1950, the
donation given to X was given in 1945. Consequently, the latter
must be the first to be charged against the disposable portion of
P20,000, applying the provision of Art. 773. It is not inofficious;
hence, it will not be reduced. The excess of P20,000 given to
A, on the other hand, is absolutely inofficious since there is no
balance left out of the disposable free portion against which it
can be charged. Hence, A can now be compelled to restore to the
estate P20,000. This amount plus the net remainder of P20,000
will, therefore, make an aggregate total of P40,000, which will
be distributed as follows:
B

.....................................

P20,000, as legitime

W

....................................

20,000, as legitime

A, of course, will no longer be entitled to any legitime because he has already received it in advance. The testamentary

319

ART. 911

SUCCESSION

disposition giving the entire disposable free portion to W, on the
other hand, is useless because there is nothing left out of such
portion which can be given to her.

Art. 911. After the legitime has been determined in accordance
with the three preceding articles, the reduction shall be made as
follows:
(1) Donations shall be respected as long as the legitime can
be covered, reducing or annulling, if necessary, the devisees or
legacies made in the will;
(2) The reduction of the devises or legacies shall be pro
rata, without any distinction whatever.
If the testator has directed that a certain devise or legacy be
paid in preference to others, it shall not suffer any reduction until
the latter have been applied in full to the payment of the legitime.
(3) If the devise or legacy consists of a usufruct or life
annuity, whose value may be considered greater than that of the
disposable portion, the compulsory heirs may choose between
complying with the testamentary provision and delivering to the
devisee or legatee the part of the inheritance of which the testator
could freely dispose.168
Reduction of Testamentary Dispositions and Donations.
— The order of preference enunciated in the above article
contemplates a case in which the legitime of compulsory heirs is
impaired by inofficious testamentary dispositions and inofficious
donations inter vivos. In such case, the rule is to reduce or suppress the
testamentary disposition or even the donation if necessary. However,
as between donations inter vivos and donations or dispositions mortis
causa, preference is always given to the former. Therefore, in case
of concurrence between the two and the disposable portion is not
sufficient to cover both of them, the testamentary dispositions, such
as legacies or devises, are the first to be reduced or even suppressed
if necessary. If after such suppression, the value of the donations
inter vivos cannot still be covered by the disposable portion, then
such value shall be reduced in order to preserve the legitime of
168

Art. 820, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

320

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 911

compulsory heirs. The principal reason for giving preference to
donations inter vivos is found in the fact that they are irrevocable
by their very nature. Acceptance by the donee is essential, so much
so that they are perfected only from the moment the donor knows of
the acceptance by the donee. Once perfected, they produce juridical
effects; they become irrevocable. Testamentary dispositions, on the
other hand, are unilateral in character. They produce juridical effects
only after the death of the testator. Hence, to place both in the same
level would be equivalent to allowing the donor to partially revoke an
act, which by its very nature is irrevocable, by the simple expediency
of providing for legacies or devises in his last will and testament,
besides creating as a necessary consequence the disturbances which
would be occasioned by the reduction of donations made by him
while living.169
Idem; Procedure for reduction. — Under Art. 911, the order
of preference is, therefore, as follows: first, legitime of compulsory
heirs; second, donations inter vivos; third, preferential legacies or
devices; and fourth, all other legacies or devises. If after satisfying
the legitime of compulsory heirs, the disposable portion is sufficient
to cover donations inter vivos, but not sufficient to cover the legacies
and devises, the rule is that such legacies and devises will be reduced
pro rata, after first satisfying all of those which the testator has
declared to be preferential.
The formula for the pro rata reduction of legacies or devises
which are not preferred is as follows:
Reduced legacy

Legacy to be reduced

Disposable portion

Total of all legacies

This formula is based on the fact that the proportion which the
reduced amount of the legacy or devise bears to the amount actually
at the testator’s free disposal is equal to the proportion which the
value of the legacy or devise before reduction bears to the total value
of all legacies or devises.

169

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 464-465.

321

ART. 912

SUCCESSION

Problem — The net value of the testator’s estate after his
death is P40,000. During his lifetime, he donated to F P10,000.
In his will, he bequeathed P10,000 to X, P5,000 to Y, and P5,000
to Z. He has two legitimate children — A and B. Distribute the
state.
Answer — Collate or add the P10,000 to the value of the
testator’s estate. The sum is P50,000. Therefore, the legitime of
A and B is P25,000, while the disposable portion is also P25,000.
The aggregate sum of the donation and legacies is P30,000,
which is more than the disposable portion. Since the P10,000
donation can be covered by the free portion, it shall not be reduced. However, the amount left out of the disposable portion
will only be P15,000 which is less than the total amount of legacies. Hence, it shall be necessary to reduce the legacies pro rata
in accordance with the formula given above. Thus —
Let

x

=

reduced amount of legacy to X;

P15,000 =

amount for free disposal;

P10,000 =

value of legacy to X which must be reduced;

P20,000 =

total value of all legacies.

x
15,000

10,000
20,000

x

=

P7,500, reduced amount of legacy to X.

Following the same procedure for Y and Z, their reduced
legacies shall be P3,750 each.

Art. 912. If the devise subject to reduction should consist of
real property, which cannot be conveniently divided, it shall go to
the devisee if the reduction does not absorb one-half of its value;
and in a contrary case, to the compulsory heirs; but the former
and the latter shall reimburse each other in cash for what respectively belongs to them.
The devisee who is entitled to a legitime may retain the entire
property, provided its value does not exceed that of the disposable
portion and of the share pertaining to him as legitime.170

170

Art. 821, Spanish Civil Code.

322

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ARTS. 913-914

Art. 913. If the heirs or devisees do not choose to avail
themselves of the right granted by the preceding article, any heir
or devisee who did not have such right may exercise it; should the
latter make use of it, the property shall be sold at public auction at
the instance of any one of the interested parties.171
Rules of Reduction of Devises. — Under Art. 912, it is
clear that there are two sets of rules which must be complied with
depending upon whether the devisee is one who is not entitled to
a legitime or one who is entitled to a legitime because he is also a
compulsory heir.
In the first case, if the reduction of the devise does not absorb
one-half of the value of the property, said property shall go to
the devisee, but with the obligation of the latter to reimburse the
compulsory heirs in cash for what pertains to them by virtue of
the reduction. If the reduction absorbs more than one-half of the
property, said property shall go to the compulsory heirs. The latter,
however, shall reimburse the devisee in cash in order to cover up
the reduced amount of the devise. If the reduction absorbs exactly
one-half of the property according to Manresa, the property shall go
to the legatee;172 but according to Sanchez Roman, it shall go to the
compulsory heirs.173 It is submitted that the latter opinion is more in
conformity with the letter of the law.
Art. 914. The testator may devise and bequeath the free
portion as he may deem fit.174

Art. 822, Spanish Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 470.
173
If natural parents concur with the surviving spouse, the legitime of the former
is 1/4, while that of the latter is also 1/4.
174
If testator is an illegitimate person, his natural parents are also excluded by
presence of illegitimate children.
171
172

323

ART. 914

SUCCESSION

Table of Legitime Under The New Civil Code

Survivors

1. Any class
alone

2.
Allclassess
– but only one
LD
3. All classes
– but two or
more LD

4. a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Surviving
Spouse
5. a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Illegitmate
Children
6. a. Surviving
Spouse
b. Illegitimate
Children

Legitimate
Descendants (LD)

Legitimate
Ascendants (LA)

Surviving
Spouse

Illegitimate
Children
Ack. Nat.
– (ANC)
Ack. Not
Nat.–(SC)

1/2 unless the testator and the SS were married in articulo
mortis and the testator died within 3 months from the time
of such marriage, in which case, legitime of SS as sole heir
is 1/3
1/2

Excluded

1/4

ANC–1/2 of that
of a LD
SC–2/5 of that of
a LD

1/2

Excluded

Equal to
that of
each LD

—

1/2

1/4

–

—

1/2

—

1/4
(5:4)

—

—

1/3

1/3
(5:4)

—

1/2

1/8

1/4
(5:4)

If free portion
is not sufficient
– divide 5:4

7. a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Surviving
Souse
c. Illegitimate
Children

324

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 914

Table of Legitime Under The Family Code

Survivors
Any class alone

All classes–but
only one LD
All classes–but
two or more LD

a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Surviving
Spouse
a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Illegitimate
Children
a. Surviving
Spouse
b. Illegitimate
Children

Legitimate
Descendants (LD)

Legitimate
Ascendants
(LA)

Surviving
Spouse (SS)

Illegitimate
Children (IC)

1/2, unless the testator and the SS were married in articulo
mortis and the testator died within 3 months from the time
of such marriage, in which case, legitime of SS as sole heir
is 1/3.
1/2 of that of
a LC. If free
portion is not
sufficient,
divide equally
among the LC

1/2

Excluded

1/4

1/2

Excluded

Equal to that
of each LD

1/2

1/2*

1/4

—

—

1/2**

—

1/4

—

—

1/3

1/3

—

1/2

1/8

1/4

a. Legitimate
Ascendants
b. Surviving
Spouse
c. Illegitimate
Children

*If the testator is an illegitimate person, his natural parents are also excluded
by presence of illegitimate children.
**If natural parents concur with the surviving spouse, the legitime of the
former is 1/4, while that of the latter is also 1/4.

325

ARTS. 915-916

SUCCESSION

Problem — Emil, the testator, has 3 legitimate children,
Tom, Henry and Warlito; a wife named Adette; parents named
Pepe and Pilar; an illegitimate child named Ramon; brother
Mark; and a sister, Nanette. Since his wife Adette is well-off,
he wants to leave his illegitimate child as much of his estate
as he can legally do. His estate has an aggregate net amount of
P1,200,000.00, and all the above-named relatives are still living.
Emil now comes to you for advice in making a will. How will you
distribute his estate according to his wishes without violating
the law on testamentary succession? (2005)
Answer — P600,000.00 — legitime to be divided equally
among Tom, Henry and Warlito as the legitimate children. Each
will be entitled to P200,000.00 [Art. 888, NCC].
P100,000.00 — share of Ramon, the illegitimate child.
This is equivalent to 1/2 of the share of each legitimate child
[Art. 176, NCC].
P200,000.00 — Adette, the wife. Her share is equivalent to
the share of one legitimate child [Art. 892, par. 2, NCC].
Pepe and Pilar, the parents are only secondary compulsory heirs and they cannot inherit if the primary compulsory heirs
(legitimate children) are alive [Art. 887, par. 2, NCC].
Brother Mark and sister Nanette are not compulsory heirs
since they are not included in the enumeration under Art. 887
of the NCC.
The remaining balance of P300,000.00 is the free portion
which can be given to the illegitimate child as an instituted heir
(Art. 914, NCC). If so given by the decedent, ramon would receive a total of P400,000.00 (Suggested Answers to the 2005 Bar
Examination Questions, PALS).

Section 6. — Disinheritance
Art. 915. A compulsory heir may, in consequence of disinheritance, be deprived of his legitime, for causes expressly stated by
law.1
Art. 916. Disinheritance can be effected only through a will
wherein the legal cause therefor shall be specified.2
1
2

Art. 848, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 849, Spanish Civil Code.

326

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 917

Art. 917. The burden of proving the truth of the cause for disinheritance shall rest upon the other heirs of the testator, if the
disinherited heir should deny it.3
Concept of Disinheritance. — Disinheritance may be defined as the act of the testator in depriving a compulsory heir of his
legitime for causes expressly stated by law.4 It is the only instance
recognized in the Civil Code by which a compulsory heir may be
deprived of his legitime by the testator. The reason behind the recognition of this power of the testator is evident. It is a fact that there
are certain instances when a person may not want his property or
fortune for which he had slaved for so long to pass after his death to
a compulsory heir because of some present or antecedent act of the
latter. The law, therefore, allows him to punish such heir, but only
in the cases expressly stated by law.
Requisites of Disinheritance. — In order that a compulsory
heir may be deprived of his legitime through disinheritance, the following requisites must concur:
(1)
by law;

The disinheritance must be for a cause expressly stated

(2)

The disinheritance must be effected only through a valid

will;
(3) The legal cause for the disinheritance must be specified in
the will itself;
(4)

The cause for the disinheritance must be certain and

(5)

The disinheritance must be total; and

(6)

The disinheritance must be unconditional.

true;

The most indispensable requisite of a valid disinheritance is
that it must be for a cause expressly stated by law.5 The cause may
actually be a just one, or the testator may actually believe that he
has a very strong ground for depriving a compulsory heir of any
participation in the inheritance, but if such cause is not one of those

Art. 850, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 915, Civil Code; 4 Castan, 6th Ed., pp. 367-368.
5
Art. 915, Civil Code.
3
4

327

ART. 917

SUCCESSION

expressly recognized by law, he cannot disinherit such heir. It is,
therefore, essential that the cause must be one of those designated
by law; otherwise, the disinheritance is null and void.6
The second requisite is that the disinheritance must be effected only through a valid will.7 Because the act of disinheritance
involves the exercise of an exceptional power by virtue of which a
compulsory heir is deprived of his legitime, the same requisites and
formalities necessary for the disposition of properties mortis causa
are also necessary for such act.8 Consequently, if the will is invalid
because it has not been executed in accordance with the formalities
prescribed by law, the disinheritance is also invalid; if the will is
valid, but subsequently it is revoked in accordance with law, the
disinheritance is also revoked.9
The third requisite is that the cause for the disinheritance
must be specified in the will itself.10 From this it is evident that
there can be no implied or tacit disinheritance. It must be noted,
however, that the last will of the testator may be embodied in
several documents. Taken together, they constitute his last will and
testament. Therefore, if a compulsory heir is disinherited in one
will without a specification of the cause, the defect may be cured if
the cause thereof is specified in another will. It must also be noted
that while the law requires that the cause must be express, there
is no legal precept which requires that the specification must be
couched in the exact language of the law or that details and other
circumstances surrounding it must be given.11
The fourth requisite is that the cause specified in the will must
be certain and true. This can be implied from the provision of Art.
917, which declares that the burden of proving the truth of the cause
for disinheritance shall rest upon the other heirs of the testator if
the disinherited heir should deny it. Consequently, the cause must
not be a mere figment of the mind or an insane delusion. Neither
must it be based on mere suspicion or on the biased opinion of others. As Manresa states it, the testator must not only have a knowl6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 665; 6 Sanchez Roman 1106.
Art. 916, Civil Code.
8
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 664-665; Merza vs. Porras, 93 Phil. 142.
9
6 Sanchez Roman, 1106.
10
Art. 916, Civil Code.
11
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 667-668.
6
7

328

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 918

edge of the cause, but it must also be in the process of being committed, or at least, it has already been committed at the time of the
disinheritance. Hence, he cannot, with efficacy, state in his will: “If
my wife should ever commit adultery, she shall not be entitled to
any of my properties.”12 Such an act of disinheritance will violate
two requisites which are clearly deducible from the law — that the
cause must be certain and true and that it must be unconditional.
Art. 918. Disinheritance without a specification of the cause,
or for a cause the truth of which, if contradicted, is not proved, or
which is not one of those set forth in this Code, shall annul the
institution of heirs insofar as it may prejudice the person disinherited; but the devises and legacies and other testamentary dispositions shall be valid to such extent as will not impair the legitime.13
Imperfect Disinheritance. — Under the above article, there
are three causes or instances where the disinheritance is considered
imperfect or defective. They are: first, when it does not specify the
cause; second, when it specifies a cause the truth of which, if contradicted, is not proved; and third, when it specifies a cause which is
not one of those set forth in the Code. The enumeration, however,
is not complete. It is clear that the disinheritance is also defective
in those cases where the other requisites for a valid act of disinheritance are lacking, such as when it is not total or it is conditional.
Consequently, we can very well define imperfect disinheritance as
the expressed attempt of the testator in depriving a compulsory heir
of his legitime without the requisite formalities prescribed by law.
Idem; Distinguished from preterition. — Imperfect disinheritance must not be confused with preterition as defined in Art.
854 of the Code. The two may be distinguished from each other in
the following ways:
(1) In imperfect disinheritance, the person disinherited may
be any compulsory heir, while in preterition, the person omitted
must be a compulsory heir in the direct line.
(2) In the first, the attempt to deprive the heir of his legitime
is always express, while in the second, the attempt is always implied.
12
13

Ibid., pp. 668-669.
Art. 851, Spanish Civil Code.

329

ART. 918

SUCCESSION

(3) In the first, the attempt to deprive the heir of his legitime
is always intentional, while in the second, the attempt may be intentional or unintentional.
(4) In the first, the effect is a partial annulment of the institution of heirs, while in the second, the effect is a total annulment.
Problem No. 1 — X died leaving a will wherein he instituted as his heirs his wife, W, and his two daughters, A and B,
without designating their shares. A third daughter, C, is ommitted entirely without being disinherited. In the will, X also
bequeathed a legacy of P20,000 to A. The net value of his estate
is P240,000. How shall such estate be distributed?
Answer — It must be observed that because of the omission of C in X’s will, there is now a preterition of a compulsory
heir in the direct line in the testator’s will. According to the Civil Code, such preterition shall have the effect of annulling the
institution of heirs entirely, but legacies and devises shall be
valid insofar as they are not inofficious. Since there is a legacy
of P20,000 given to A we must therefore, determine whether it is
inofficious or not. The legitime of A, B and C is 1/2 of the entire
estate, or P120,000, or P40,000 each. The legitime of W is the
same as that of each of the legitimate children, or P40,000 also.
The disposable free portion is therefore, P80,000. It is clear, that
the legacy of P20,000 given to A is not inofficious because it can
easily be contained in said disposable free portion. Therefore, it
is valid. Consequently, it must be paid to A. That leaves a balance of P220,000 in the estate. Since the institution of heirs has
been entirely annulled because of the preterition of C, the rules
of intestacy shall now be applied with respect to this balance. It
shall be divided equally among W, A, B, and C. The distribution
shall, therefore, be as follows:
A

..................................

P55,000, as legal heir
20,000, as legatee

B

..................................

55,000, as legal heir

C

..................................

55,000, as legal heir

W

..................................

55,000, as legal heir
P240,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that C, in the above problem,
was disinherited without any specification of the cause or ground
for disinheritance, how shall the estate be distributed?

330

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 918

Answer — It must be observed that the disinheritance of
C is defective because the testator did not state the cause or
ground of disinheritance. Consequently, according to the Civil
Code, such imperfect disinheritance shall annul the institution
of heirs insofar as it prejudices the legitime of C, but legacies
and devises shall be valid insofar as they are not inofficious.
Hence, we must determine the legitime of the survivors and the
disposable free portion. The legitime of A, B and C is 1/2 of the
entire estate, or P120,000, or P40,000 each. The legitime of W is
the same as that of each of the legitimate children, or P40,000
also. The disposable free portion is, therefore, P80,000. It is
clear that the legacy of P20,000 given to A is not inofficious because it can easily be contained in said disposable free portion.
Therefore, it is valid. Consequently it must be paid to A. That
leaves a balance of P60,000 in the disposable free portion. This
balance of P60,000 shall be given to W, A and B in accordance
with the testator’s will. That means P20,000 for each of them
in addition to their legitime of P40,000. The distribution shall,
therefore, be as follows:
A

..........................

P40,000, as compulsory heir
20,000, as voluntary heir
20,000, as legatee

B

..........................

40,000, as compulsory heir

C

..........................

20,000, as voluntary heir

W

..........................

40,000, as compulsory heir
20,000, voluntary heir
P240,000

Idem; Effect of imperfect disinheritance. — According to
Art. 918, the imperfect disinheritance of a compulsory heir shall result in the annulment of the institution of heirs insofar as it may
prejudice the person disinherited, but the devises and legacies and
other testamentary dispositions shall be valid to such extent as will
not impair the legitime. In other words, the imperfect disinheritance
shall result in the annulment of the institution of heirs insofar as
the legitime of the compulsory heir who is disinherited is prejudiced,
although the devises and legacies and other testamentary dispositions shall be valid, provided that the legitime of compulsory heirs is
not impaired. This effect is, therefore, different from that of preterition where the annulment of the institution of heirs is total.
331

ART. 919

SUCCESSION

Problem — A died leaving a will containing three testamentary clauses. In the first clause he instituted his two legitimate children, B and C, as his universal heirs; in the second
clause he disinherited his legitimate child, D, without specifying
the cause; and in the third clause he left a legacy of P10,000 to a
third person E. The net remainder of his estate is P60,000. How
shall such estate be distributed?
Answer — In the first place, since the only compulsory
heirs surviving the testator are three legitimate children, B,
C and D, therefore, 1/2 of the net remainder of the estate, or
P30,000, is reserved as their legitime, while the other half, or
P30,000, is free or disposable (Art. 888). In the second place,
the disinheritance of D is imperfect because there is no specification of the cause; consequently, it shall result in the partial
annulment of the institution of B and C as heirs insofar as D’s
legitime of P10,000 is prejudiced (Art. 918). In the third place,
the legacy of P10,000 to E is not inofficous since it can easily be
contained within the free portion of P30,000; hence it does not
impair the legitime of the three compulsory heirs which is also
P30,000 (Art. 918). Therefore, the estate shall be distributed as
follows:
B

...............................

P10,000 as compulsory heir
P10,000 as voluntary heir

C

..............................

P10,000 as compulsory heir
P10,000 as voluntary heir

D

...............................

E

...............................

P10,000 as compulsory heir
P10,000 as legatee
P60,000

Art. 919. The following shall be sufficient causes for the disinheritance of children and descendants, legitimate as well as illegitimate.
(1) When a child or descendant has been found guilty of an
attempt against the life of the testator, his or her spouse, descendants, or ascendants;
(2) When a child or descendant has accused the testator of
a crime for which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or
more, if the accusation has been found groundless;
(3) When a child or descendant has been convicted of adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator;
332

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 919

(4) When a child or descendant by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to
change one already made;
(5) A refusal without justifiable cause to support the parent
or ascendant who disinherits such child or descendant.
(6) Maltreatment of the testator by word or deed, by the
child or descendant;
(7) When a child or descendant leads a dishonorable or disgraceful life;
(8) Conviction of a crime which carries with it the penalty of
civil interdiction.14
Grounds for Disinheritance of Descendants. — Art. 919
enumerates eight different grounds for the disinheritance of children or descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate. They are:
(1) When a child or descendant has been found guilty of an attempt against the life of the testator, his or her spouse, descendants
or ascendants. Evidently, this ground refers to either attempted or
frustrated parricide as defined and punished in the Revised Penal
Code. Therefore, the first requisite is that the child or descendant
must have committed either attempted or frustrated parricide. Furthermore, the law requires that there must have been a previous
criminal conviction. Therefore, the second requisite is that the child
or descendant must have been convicted for the criminal offense of
attempted or frustrated parricide. It is, however, possible that even
if there is no previous criminal conviction, the attempt, if it is made
against the life of the testator, will constitute a valid ground for
disinheritance, provided that it falls within the scope or purview of
“maltreatment of the testator by word or deed” within the meaning
of No. 6 of the article under discussion.
(2) When the child or descendant has accused the testator of
a crime for which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or
more, if the accusation has been found groundless. This ground requires the following requisites: first, the heir must have accused the
testator of a crime; second, the penalty prescribed by law for such

14

Arts. 756, 853, 674, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

333

ART. 919

SUCCESSION

crime must be six years imprisonment or more, and third, the accusation must have been found to be groundless. Since the law does
not make any qualification whatsoever, it is clear that “accusation”
includes not only the act of the disinherited heir of instituting the
criminal action in the capacity of a complainant, but also any act of
intervention such as being a witness for the prosecution, by which
he accuses the testator of having committed the crime charged. Similarly, as regards the third requisite, it will not make any material
difference whether the accusation was found groundless during the
preliminary investigation, or during the trial, or on appeal.
(3) When the child or descendant has been convicted of adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator. As in the case of
the first ground, a final judgment of conviction is an essential requisite. Mere adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator is
not, therefore, a ground for the disinheritance of a child or descendant. It is, however, possible that even without a previous criminal
conviction, adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator
may be a ground for disinheriting the child or descendant, provided
that it falls within the scope or purview of “living a disgraceful or
dishonorable life” within the meaning of No. 7 of the article under
discussion.
(4) When the child or descendant by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to
change one already made. It must be noted that the fraud, violence,
intimidation, or undue influence may have been employed either
for the purpose of causing the testator to execute a will or for the
purpose of causing the testator to change or will which has already
been made. Consequently, what had been stated in a previous section with regard to fraud, violence, intimidation, and undue influence may also be applied here.
(5) When the child or descendant refuses without justifiable
cause to support the testator. It must be noted that the refusal of
the heir to give support must be without justifiable cause. Hence,
if there was a justifiable cause for such refusal, the disinheritance
would be ineffectual or imperfect. Examples of this would be those
cases where the resources of the child or descendant have been reduced to the point where he cannot give the support without neglecting his own needs and those of his family, or when the testator
334

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 919

has improved his fortune in such a way that he no longer needs the
allowance for his subsistence.15
(6) When the child or descendant maltreats the testator by
word or deed. It is clear that this ground includes all acts of violence
against the person of the testator. It also includes any maltreatment of the testator by words, whether such words are defamatory
or not. A final judgment of conviction is not required. It is, however,
necessary that the maltreatment must have been intentional or voluntary. Otherwise, if it was due to insanity, lack of discernment or
tender years of the child or descendant, the maltreatment cannot be
considered as a sufficient cause for disinheritance.16 Thus, where the
testator’s granddaughter was only 14 years old at the time when she
insulted and slapped him, and prior to that occasion, she had been
suffering from fits of insanity, it was held that there is no sufficient
ground for the testator in disinheriting her, since it is clear that she
had acted without discernment.17
(7) When the child or descendant leads a dishonorable or disgraceful life. The scope of this ground under the old law was much
more limited than its scope under the present law. Thus, according to
No. 3, Art. 853 of the Spanish Civil Code, a daughter or granddaughter may be disinherited by the parents or ascendants if she becomes
a prostitute. The old law, therefore, referred only to a limited extent
to the immoral life of a daughter or granddaughter, but did not have
any provision regarding the immoral conduct of a son or grandson.
The Code Commission, believing that this ground for disinheritance
should be broad enough to include both male and female descendants, has changed the old provision so that under our present law,
it is now possible for parents or ascendants to disinherit any child
or descendant who leads a dishonorable or disgraceful life.18 Hence,
any dishonorable or disgraceful conduct, such as engaging in a life
of crime or immorality, provided that it characterizes the mode of
living of the child or descendant disinherited, is a sufficient cause
for disinheritance.
(8) When the child or descendant is convicted of a crime which
carries with it the penalty of civil interdiction.
See Art. 303, Civil Code.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 682.
17
Pecson vs. Mediavillo, 28 Phil. 81.
18
Report of the Code Commission, pp. 119-120.
15
16

335

ART. 920

SUCCESSION

Art. 920. The following shall be sufficient causes for the disinheritance of parents or ascendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate:
(1) When the parents have abandoned their children or induced their daughters to live a corrupt or immoral life, or attempted against their virtue;
(2) When the parent or ascendants has been convicted of
an attempt against the life of the testator, his or her spouse, descendants, or ascendants;
(3) When the parent or ascendant has accused the testator
of a crime for which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years
or more, if the accusation has been found to be false;
(4) When the parent or ascendant has been convicted of
adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator;
(5) When the parent or ascendant by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to
change one already made;
(6) The loss of parental authority for causes specified in
this Code;
(7) The refusal to support the children or descendants without justifiable cause;
(8) An attempt by one of the parents against the life of the
other, unless there has been a reconciliation between them.19
Grounds for Disinheritance of Ascendants. — Art. 920
enumerates eight different grounds for the disinheritance of parents
or ascendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate. They are:
(1) When the parents have abandoned their children, or induced their daughters to live a corrupt or immoral life, or attempted
against her virtue. Actually, this ground may be subdivided into
three — first, when the parents have abandoned their children; second, when the parents have induced their daughters to live a corrupt or immoral life; and third, when the parents have attempted
against the virtue of their daughters. According to Sanchez Roman,
19

Arts. 756, 854, 674, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

336

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 920

“abandonment” within the meaning of the law refers to the failure
of the parents to give to their children due care, instruction and support.20 This definition is of course in consonance with the provision of
what is now Art. 316 of the present Code to the effect that the father
and mother have, with respect to their unemancipated children, the
duty to support them, to have them in their company, educate and
instruct them in keeping with their means, and to represent them
in all actions which may redound to their benefit. Hence, failure to
comply with these duties shall justify a child in disinheriting a parent. “Inducing their daughters to live a corrupt and immoral life”
comprehends the act of the parents in inducing their daughters or
granddaughters, by advice, force, intimidation, or any other positive act, to live a life of corruption and immorality. The law speaks
of daughters only, but this must be taken to mean any daughter or
granddaughter of the erring parent or parents. “Attempting against
their virtue” includes any act of the parents either as principals, coprincipals, or accomplices, which can properly be classified as an attempt against the virtue of their daughters or granddaughters. This
would include all criminal acts against the chastity of the latter.
(2) When the parent or ascendant has been convicted of an
attempt against the life of the testator, his or her spouse, descendants or ascendants. This ground is a common ground for the disinheritance of any compulsory heir. Consequently, what had been
stated under Art. 919 with regard to this ground are also applicable
here.
(3) When the parent or ascendant has accused the testator of
a crime for which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or
more, if the accusation has been found groundless. This is the second common ground for the disinheritance of any compulsory heir.
Consequently, what had been stated under Art. 919 with regard to
this ground are also applicable here.
(4) When the parent or ascendant has been convicted of adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the testator. This is also a
ground for the disinheritance of children or descendants. Consequently, what had been stated under Art. 919 with regard to this
ground are also applicable here.

20

7 Sanchez Roman 274-275.

337

ART. 920

SUCCESSION

(5) When the parent or ascendant by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to
change one already made. This is the third common ground for the
disinheritance of any compulsory heir. Consequently, what had been
stated under Art. 919 with regard to this ground are also applicable
here.
(6) The loss of parental authority for causes specified in the
Civil Code. It is evident that there must be an actual loss of parental
authority; otherwise, the testator cannot disinherit the parent or
ascendant. This is so, even granting that such parent or ascendant
has committed an act or offense which constitutes a ground for loss
of parental authority by judicial decree. The difficulty, however, is
with regard to the proper interpretation which must be given to the
phrase “for causes specified in this Code.” We know that the causes
specified in the Code and which can be used as grounds for disinheritance are the following: (1) emancipation; (2) adoption; (3) appointment of a general guardian; (4) subsequent marriage of the widowed
mother; (5) deprivation by final judgment in a criminal case; (6) deprivation by final judgment in legal separation proceedings; and (7)
deprivation by final judgment on the ground of excessive harshness,
or of corrupting orders, counsels or examples, or of making them
beg, or of abandonment.21 We also know that there can be no question with regard to the right of the child or-descendant to disinherit
his parent or ascendant on the ground of actual loss of parental authority effected by final judgment, such as those specified in Arts.
330 and 332 of the Code. But suppose that the loss of the parental
authority is effected by operation law, such as in emancipation, or in
adoption, or when a general guardian is appointed, or when the widowed mother remarries — would there be a right of the child or descendant to disinherit the parent or ascendant? Under the Spanish
Code, there is no difficulty regarding this question because the right
to disinherit the parent or ascendant exists only when there is loss
of parental authority effected by final judgment.22 Unfortunately,
under the new Code, there is no qualification whatsoever. Does that
mean that even if the parent or ascendant is not guilty of any offense
which constitutes a ground for deprivation of parental authority by
final judgment, the child or descendant can still disinherit such par-

21
22

See Arts. 327, 328, 330, 332, Civil Code.
Art. 854, Spanish Civil Code.

338

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ART. 920

ent or ascendant, provided that there is an actual loss of parental
authority effected by emancipation, or adoption, or appointment of
a general guardian, or remarriage of a widowed mother? If we shall
answer this question in the affirmative on the ground that since the
law does not impose any qualification, we must not also impose any
qualification, we would be forced to witness the absurd spectacle of
a child or descendant being allowed to disinherit a parent or ascendant just because he has already attained the age of 21, or because,
for his protection, his parent had given his consent to his adoption,
or because a general guardian had been appointed to take care of
his person and property by reason of the insanity of the parent, or
because the widowed mother remarried in order to protect her family. It is submitted that these causes were never contemplated by
the law. Consequently, we believe that when the law speaks of the
right of a child or descendant to disinherit a parent or ascendant if
there is loss of parental authority “for causes specified in this Code,”
the cause referred to are those specified in Arts. 330 and 332 and not
those specified in Arts. 327 and 329.
There is a second question which is taken up in connection
with this ground for disinheritance. It must be observed that some
of the causes of loss of parental authority are temporary in character. Thus, in case of legal separation, there is always the possibility
of reconciliation. Similarly, in case of criminal conviction, there is
always the possibility of absolute pardon. In such cases, there is
a restoration of parental authority. What will be the effect of such
restoration to the right to disinherit or to the disinheritance if it
has already been made? There are two views. One view maintains
that there is no effect upon the right to disinherit or upon the disinheritance if it has already been made, because the ground or basis
for the disinheritance is not the loss of parental authority, but the
offense committed by the offender.23 Another view holds that the
restoration of parental authority would have the effect of depriving the child or descendant of his right to disinherit the parent or
ascendant or of rendering the disinheritance ineffectual if it has already been made, because the legal basis for disinheritance would
no longer exist, since, it is admitted, that the disinheritance can
take effect only upon the death of the testator.24 We believe that the

23
24

6 Sanchez Roman, p. 1120.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 688.

339

ART. 921

SUCCESSION

first view is more in consonance with the law. After all, the law does
not make any qualification which is similar to that which is provided
for in Art. 922. Besides, the very philosophy of disinheritance contemplates a right by which the testator is permitted to punish the
offender by depriving the latter of the legitime to which he would
otherwise be entitled by operation of law. It is clear, therefore, that
what the law allows the testator to punish is not the consequence of
the offense, but the offense itself. Hence, even if there is a restoration of parental authority brought about by absolute pardon or by
reconciliation of the spouses, although that will have the effect of
erasing the existence of the offense as far as the State or the spouses
are concerned, it cannot erase the existence of the offense against
the testator. Consequently, the ground for disinheritance still exists. Of course, it must be noted that this conclusion is predicated
upon the fact that there is no reconciliation between the offended
and the offender, because, otherwise, the provisions of Art. 922 shall
apply.
(7) When the parent or ascendant refuses without justifiable
cause to support the testator. This is the fourth common ground for
the disinheritance of any compulsory heir. Consequently, what had
been stated under Art. 919 with regard to this ground are also applicable here.
(8) An attempt by one of the parents against the life of the
other, unless there has been a reconciliation between them. It will
be observed that unlike the grounds stated is Nos. 2 and 4 of the
article under discussion, under this ground, a final judgment of conviction is not an essential requisite.
Art. 921. The following shall be sufficient causes for disinheriting a spouse:
(1) When the spouse has been convicted of an attempt
against the life of the testator, his or her descendants, or ascendants;
(2) When the spouse has accused the testator of a crime for
which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or more, and
the accusation has been found to be false;
(3) When the spouse by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to change one
already made;
340

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

(4)

ART. 921

When the spouse has given cause for legal separation;

(5) When the spouse has given grounds for the loss of parental authority;
(6) Unjustifiable refusal to support the children or the other
spouse.25
Grounds for Disinheritance of Spouse. — Art. 921 enumerates six different grounds for the disinheritance of the spouse.
Those stated in Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 6 are, however, common grounds
for the disinheritance of any compulsory heir. Consequently, what
had been stated under Art. 919 with regard to these grounds are
also applicable here. These six grounds for the disinheritance of the
spouse are:
(1) When the spouse has been convicted of an attempt against
the life of the testator; his or her descendants, or ascendants.
(2) When the spouse has accused the testator of a crime for
which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or more, and
the accusation has been found to be groundless.
There is an interesting problem which was incidentally taken
up by the Supreme Court in Javier vs. Lucero26 in connection with
this ground for disinheritance. The wife brought an action against
her husband for bigamy. The latter was acquitted of the crime for
lack of criminal intent, inasmuch as he believed that the divorce
which he had obtained in the United States had already dissolved
the first marriage. Would there be a ground for disinheritance or
for refusal to give support in such a case? According to the Supreme
Court, there would be no ground either for disinheritance or for refusal to give support, because the accusation was not “found to be
false.” After all, the accused got married, not only twice, but three
times. We can, therefore, conclude that it is not enough that there
must be an acquittal based on reasonable doubt. The law requires
more than that. It is essential that the acquittal must be based on
the fact that the offense charged has not been committed.

25
26

Arts. 756, 855, 674, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
50 Off. Gaz. 4845.

341

ART. 921

SUCCESSION

(3) When the spouse by fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence causes the testator to make a will or to change one
already made.
(4) When the spouse has given cause for legal separation.
Under the original project of the Civil Code as drafted by the Code
Commission, this ground for disinheritance was not included. It was
only when the project was being discussed by Congress that it was
inserted. As it now stands, it is clear that by virtue of this provision,
if the wife has committed adultery, or if the husband has committed
concubinage, or if either of the spouses has made an attempt against
the life of the other, the innocent spouse would be justified in disinheriting the offending spouse.27 Thus, it has been held that criminal
conviction is not a condition sine qua non in order that the wife can
disinherit an unfaithful husband.28 The same principle can also be
applied to an attempt made by one spouse against the life of the
other. There is, therefore, a partial conflict between this provision
and that of No. 1 of the article under discussion. Under this provision, the mere attempt by one of the spouses against the life of the
other without a previous final judgment of conviction is a sufficient
cause for disinheritance, while under No. 1, a previous final judgment of conviction is an essential requisite. The effect of this conflict
is that, unwittingly, the provision of No. 1 with regard to the conviction of the spouse of an attempt against the life of the testator has
become practically useless. However, if the attempt is made against
a descendant or an ascendant of the testator, conviction would still
be essential.
(5) When the spouse has given grounds for the loss of parental authority. It must be observed that under this ground, the mere
fact that there is a ground for the loss of parental authority is a
sufficient cause for disinheritance, whereas under No. 6 of Art. 920,
in order that a child or descendant can disinherit a parent or ascendant, it is essential that there must be an actual loss of parental
authority.
(6) When the spouse refuses without justifiable cause to support the children or the other spouse.

27
28

See Art. 97, Civil Code.
Hilado vs. De Leon, (CA), 50 Off. Gaz. 222.

342

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legitime

ARTS. 922-923

Art. 922. A subsequent reconciliation between the offender
and the offended person deprives the latter of the right to disinherit, and renders ineffectual any disinheritance that may have
been made.29
Effect of Subsequent Reconciliation. — During that period between the execution of the will and the death of the testator, it is always possible that the testator may pardon the offender.
Such pardon, however, cannot have any possible effect either upon
the testator’s right to disinherit or upon the disinheritance if it has
already been made. Under the law, before it can have any effect, it
is essential that it must have been accepted by the offender thus
resulting in a reconciliation between the two. It is, therefore, clear
that what the law requires is a bilateral act and not a mere unilateral act. Once there is a reconciliation between the offender and the
offended person, such reconciliation shall have the effect of depriving the latter of the right to disinherit the former or of rendering
ineffectual any disinheritance that may have been made.
Art. 923. The children and descendants of the person disinherited shall take his or her place and shall preserve the rights of
compulsory heirs with respect to the legitime; but the disinherited
parent shall not have the usufruct or administration of the property which constitutes the legitime.30
Effects of Disinheritance. — The most important effect of
disinheritance is of course the deprivation of the compulsory heir
who is disinherited of any participation in the inheritance including this legitime. However, if the compulsory heir has children or
descendants of his own, such children or descendants, according to
Art. 923, shall take his or her place and shall preserve his or her
right with respect to the legitime, although the disinherited parents
shall not have the usufruct or administration of the property which
constitutes the legitime. According to Manresa, since disinheritance
is a penalty which the testator may impose upon a compulsory heir
who is guilty of any of the causes prescribed by law, its imposition
upon the latter is undoubtedly in conformity with the requirements

29
30

Art. 856, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 857, Spanish Civil Code.

343

ARTS. 924-925

SUCCESSION

of strict justice. But to impose it in the same manner upon the innocent children or descendants of the offender would be unjust.31
Hence, under the law, after the death of the testator, the children
and descendants of the disinherited heir shall represent the latter
with respect to the legitime.
It must be noted, however, that Art. 923 cannot be applied to
all cases in which the compulsory heir who is disinherited has children or descendants of his own. Although it appears to be of general application, yet it is undeniable that it is applicable only if the
compulsory heir who is disinherited happens also to be a child or
descendant of the testator. This is so, because, in reality, this article establishes or recognizes a right on the part of the children or
descendants of the disinherited heir to represent the latter with regard to the legitime to which he would have been entitled had he not
been disinherited, and it is a well-known principle of testamentary
succession that the right of representation can take place only in the
direct descending line, but never in the ascending.32

Section 7. — Legacies and Devises
Concept of Legacies and Devises. — Under Art. 782 of the
Code, a legatee is defined as a person to whom a gift of personal property is given by virtue of a will, while a devisee is defined as a person
to whom a gift of real property is given by virtue of a will. Hence,
a legacy may be defined as a testamentary disposition by virtue of
which a person is called by the testator to inherit an individual item
of personal property. A devise, on the other hand, may be defined as
a testamentary disposition by virtue of which a person is called by
the testator to inherit an individual item of real property.
Art. 924. All things and rights which are within the commerce
of man may be bequeathed or devised.1
Art. 925. A testator may charge with legacies and devises not
only his compulsory heirs but also the legatees and devisees.
31
32

1

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 695-696.
Art. 972, Civil Code.

Art. 865, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

344

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 926

The latter shall be liable for the charge only to the extent of
the value of the legacy or the devise received by them. The compulsory heirs shall not be liable for the charge beyond the amount
of the portion given them.2
Art. 926. When the testator charges one of the heirs with a
legacy or devise, he alone shall be bound.
Should he not charge anyone in particular, all shall be liable
in the same proportion in which they may inherit.3
Persons Charged With Legacies and Devises. — The following may be expressly charged by the testator with the payment
or delivery of a legacy or devise: (1) Any compulsory heir; (2) any
voluntary heir; (3) any legatee or devisee; and (4) the estate, represented by the executor or administrator.
If the will is silent with regard to the person who shall pay or
deliver the legacy or devise, it is clear that the obligation constitutes
a charge or burden upon the estate of the testator. Consequently,
if there is an administration proceeding, the obligation will be performed by the executor or administrator;4 if there is none, it will be
performed by the heirs themselves.5
Idem; Extent of liability. — Since, by its very nature, a legacy or devise constitutes a charge or burden upon the disposable portion of the testator’s estate, it is but logical that if the person who is
charged with the obligation is a compulsory heir, he cannot be held
liable beyond the amount of the disposable portion given him.6 Thus,
if, according to the law and the will of the testator, A, who is one of
the compulsory heirs, is entitled to P10,000 in his capacity as compulsory heir and to P5,000 in his capacity as voluntary heir, and he
is charged with the obligation of paying P10,000 to X, a third person,
he can be held liable only for P5,000. This rule, stated in the second paragraph of Art. 925, is in conformity with the rule regarding
the untouchability of the legitime of compulsory heirs. On the other
hand, if the person who is charged with the obligation is a voluntary

Art. 858, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 859, Spanish Civil Code.
4
See Sec. 1, Rule 85, Sec. 1, Rule 90, New Rules of Court.
5
Art. 926, par. 2, Civil Code.
6
Art. 925, par. 2, Civil Code.
2
3

345

ARTS. 927-928

SUCCESSION

heir, or a legatee, or a devisee, his liability shall extend to the entire
share, or legacy, or devise received by him.7 Although the law does
not mention voluntary heirs, it is evident that they must be placed
in the same class as legatees or devisees since their shares are also
chargeable against the disposable portion of the estate.
Idem; Liability when no one is charged. — According to
the second paragraph of Art. 926, should the testator not charge
anyone in particular, all shall be liable in the same proportion in
which they may inherit. This provision, which is copied verbatim
from the Spanish Civil Code, does not consider the nature of legacies
and devisees in relation with the provisions of the Rules of Court
regarding the settlement of the estate of deceased persons. If the
testator’s will is silent with regard to the person who shall pay or
deliver the legacy or devise, there is a presumption, clearly inferable from the provisions of the Rules of Court,8 that such legacy or
devise constitutes a charge against the decedent’s estate. Therefore,
the obligation must be performed by the executor or administrator
as decreed by the court after the liquidation of all claims against the
estate. Consequently, the provision of the second paragraph of Art.
926 is applicable only when there is no administration proceeding
for the settlement of the decedent’s estate.
Art. 927. If two or more heirs take possession of the estate,
they shall be solidarily liable for the loss or destruction of a thing
devised or bequeathed, even though only one of them should have
been negligent.9
Art. 928. The heir who is bound to deliver the legacy or devise
shall be liable in case of eviction, if the thing is indeterminate and
is indicated only by its kind.10
Liability for Eviction. — According to the above article, if the
legacy or devise is indeterminate or generic, the heir who is charged
with the payment or delivery of the legacy or devise shall be liable
in case of eviction. Hence, Art. 1548 of the Code, which provides for
warranty by the vendor of the thing sold in case of eviction, shall
Ibid.
See Rules 88 to 90 New Rules of Court.
9
New provision.
10
Art. 860, Spanish Civil Code.
7
8

346

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 929

apply. However, if the legacy or devise is determinate or specific,
the heir who is charged cannot be held liable in case of eviction. The
reason for this is that the heir, certainly, would not be at fault if the
thing bequeathed or devised by the testator had a defective title. It
is different when the thing is indeterminate because then the acquisition or choice shall depend upon him.11
Art. 929. If the testator, heir, or legatee owns only a part of,
or an interest in the thing bequeathed, the legacy or devise shall
be understood limited to such part or interest, unless the testator
expressly declares that he gives the thing in its entirety.12
Legacy of Things Belonging Partly to Strangers. — The
presumption is that the testator desires to bequeath or devise only
that which belongs to him. Hence, if he bequeaths or devises a thing
which belongs partly to him and partly to a third person, the legacy
or devise shall be understood limited only to the part or interest
belonging to him. The same rule is applied where the thing belongs
partly to the heir, legatee or devisee and partly to a third person.
The legacy or devise is limited only to the part or interest belonging
to such heir, legatee or devisee.13 There is, however, an exception
to the rule and that is when the testator expressly declares that he
bequeaths or devises the thing in its entirety. However, before this
exception can be applied, there must be: first, an express declaration
to that effect appearing in the will itself; and second, knowledge on
the part of the testator that the thing belongs partly to a third person. Such knowledge may be proved either from the context of the
will itself or from extrinsic evidence. Obviously, such knowledge on
the part of the testator of his limited right is essential because, otherwise, the legacy or devise would be void under Art. 930.14
Idem; Effect of partition. — It may happen that subsequently the thing which is bequeathed or devised is finally divided or partitioned between the owners in common. If the thing is physically
divisible or convenient of division, the rules stated are still applicable. However, if the thing is physically indivisible or inconvenient
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 712-713.
Art. 864, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
13
This was what used to be known as a sub-legacy under the old Code (Art. 863,
Spanish Civil Code).
14
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 723; 6 Sanchez Roman 1309-1310.
11
12

347

ARTS. 930-931

SUCCESSION

of division, the rules applicable shall depend upon whether the thing
is finally adjudicated to the testator or to the other owner applying
the provisions of Arts. 929 and 930.
In the first case, i.e., where the thing is adjudicated to the testator, there is no question that the same rules are still applicable
with greater force. If what is bequeathed or devised by the testator
is that part which belonged to him before the partition, the legacy
or devise still subsists without any change. If what is bequeathed
or devised, however, is the entire property in accordance with the
exception provided for in Art. 929, the whole property shall pass in
its entirety to the legatee or devisee, applying again the rule stated
in Arts. 929 and 930.
In the second case, i.e., when the thing is adjudicated to the
other owner, the rules applicable shall depend upon whether or not
the testator has expressly declared that he bequeaths or devises the
property in its entirety. If he has not expressly declared that he bequeaths or devises the property in its entirety, the legacy or devise
shall be without effect, applying the provision of No. 2 of Art. 957,
which declares that the alienation of the thing bequeathed or devised shall result in the legal revocation of the legacy or devise.
If he has expressly declared that he bequeaths or devises the
property in its entirety and the property subsequently is adjudicated
to the other owner, the legacy or devise shall be without effect only
with respect to what had formerly belonged to him, again applying
the rule stated in No. 2 of Art. 957. However, the legacy or devise is
still effective with respect to the part belonging to the owner or third
person to whom the entire property was adjudicated, again applying
the provisions of Arts. 929 and 23.15
Art. 930. The legacy or devise of a thing belonging to another
person is void, if the testator erroneously believed that the thing
pertained to him. But if the thing bequeathed, though not belonging to the testator when he made the will, afterwards becomes his,
by whatever title, the disposition shall take effect.16
Art. 931. If the testator orders that a thing belonging to another be acquired in order that it be given to a legatee or devisee, the
15
16

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 724-725.
Art. 862, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

348

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 931

heir upon whom the obligation is imposed or the estate acquire it
and give the same to the legatee or devisee; but if the owner of the
thing refuses to alienate the same, or demands an excessive price
therefor, the heir of the estate shall only be obliged to give the just
value of the thing.17
Legacy of Things Belonging to Strangers. — It will be
observed from a study of Arts. 930 and 931 that the all-important
factor in the determination of the validity of a legacy or devise of a
thing belonging to another is the knowledge of the testator that the
thing bequeathed or devised belonged to another at the time of the
execution of the will. If the testator erroneously believed that the
thing belonged to him and not to another, the legacy or devise is
void. On the other hand, if the testator knew that the thing belonged
to another, the legacy or devise is valid because it is presumed that
his intention is that such thing which is bequeathed or devised must
be acquired either by the executor or administrator of his estate or
by the heir expressly charged with such obligation for the benefit of
the legatee or devisee.18
It is clear that, under the law, there are two instances where
the testator may be considered to have disposed of the thing with
knowledge that it belongs to another. They are: first, where he subsequently acquires the thing from the owner by whatever title; and
second, where he expressly orders in his will that the thing shall be
acquired in order that it be given to the legatee or devisee. In both
instances, the disposition is valid.
With respect to the second case, it must be observed that the
law expressly provides that either the heir upon whom the obligation is imposed or the estate, i.e., the executor or administrator,
must acquire it and give the same to the legatee or devisee. If the
owner refuses to alienate the same, or demands an excessive price
therefor, the heir or the estate shall only be obliged to give the just
value of the thing. Thus, if the testator provides in his will: “I charge
the executor of my estate with the obligation of acquiring the Italian
– made car of my neighbor, X, to be delivered to my friend, A,” the
executor shall have to acquire the car from X. If X refuses to sell or

17
18

Art. 861, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 718-719.

349

ARTS. 932-933

SUCCESSION

charges, let us say, P100,000 for the car (the real value of the car is
P20,000), then the executor shall give to A only the just value of the
car.
Where the testator, however, erroneously believed at the time
of the execution of the will that the thing belonged to him, the legacy
or devise is void. There is only one exception to this rule and that
is when he subsequently acquires the thing by whatever title. In
such case, the legacy or devise is valid. Although he may have been
ignorant of the fact that the thing belonged to another at the time
of the execution of the will, yet it is presumed that once he was appraised of his mistake, he subsequently acted in order to remove all
obstacles to his will.19
Art. 932. The legacy or devise of a thing which at the time of
the execution of the will already belonged to the legatee or devisee
shall be ineffective, even though another person may have some
interest therein.
If the testator expressly orders that the thing be freed from
such interest or encumbrance, the legacy or devise shall be valid
to that extent.20
Art. 933. If the thing bequeathed belonged to the legatee or
devisee at the time of the execution of the will. The legacy or devise shall be without effect, even though it may have been subsequently alienated by him.
If the legatee or devisee acquires it gratuitously after such
time, he can claim nothing by virtue of the legacy or devise; but if
it has been acquired by onerous title he can demand reimbursement from the heir or the estate.21
Legacy of Things Belonging to Legatee. — The legacy or
devise referred to in the above articles is a legacy or devise in favor
of the person to whom the thing bequeathed or devised belongs. The
rule with regard to such legacy or devise is that it shall be ineffective whether or not the testator had knowledge of the fact. The

Ibid., p. 719.
Art. 866, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
21
Art. 879, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
19
20

350

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 933

rule applies even though another person may have some interest
therein. The rule also applies even though the legatee or devisee
who is supposed to be favored may have subsequently alienated the
thing. To hold otherwise would be to permit the testator to play a
grotesque joke in his dispositions mortis causa. If he did not know
that the thing or property belonged to the legatee or devisee favored
at the time of the execution of the will, the law presumes that had
he known of the fact, he would not have bequeathed or devised the
thing.22
It must be observed, however, that the second paragraph of
Art. 932 provides that if another person has an interest in the thing
which is the object of the legacy or devise and the testator expressly
orders that the thing be freed from such interest or encumbrance,
the legacy or devise shall be valid to that extent. This is of course
just and proper because what is being bequeathed or devised is no
longer something which belongs to the legatee or devisee.
It is, therefore, clear that if the thing bequeathed or devised
belonged to the legatee or devisee at the moment of the execution
of the will, the legacy or devise is ineffective. If subsequently, the
thing is alienated to a third person, the legacy or devise is still ineffective. The heir or heirs or the estate represented by the executor
or administrator in such case shall not be bound to acquire the thing
from the third person after the death of the testator for the benefit
of the legatee or devisee. Manresa, however, mentions one exception
to this rule and that is when the testator himself before his death
acquires the thing by whatever title. In this exceptional case, the
legacy or devisee would be valid applying the provision of Art. 930.
Idem; Effect of acquisition by legatee. — The phraseology
of the second paragraph of Art. 933 is not very clear. The question is:
does this constitute an exception to the rule stated in the first paragraph or not? Briefly stated, the rule in the first paragraph is that
the legacy or devise of a thing belonging to the legatee or devisee
at the time of the execution of the will shall be without effect, even
though it is subsequently alienated. This same rule is also stated in
Art. 932. The second paragraph follows with the rule — “If the legatee or devisee acquires it gratuitously after such time,” the legacy or
devise is still ineffective; “but if it has been acquired by onerous title,
22

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 730.

351

ART. 933

SUCCESSION

he can demand reimbursement from the heir or the estate.” Does the
last part of the paragraph constitute an exception to the rule stated
in the first paragraph of the article? It is clear from an analysis of
the entire provision that when the law speaks of the gratuitous or
onerous acquisition of the thing bequeathed or devised “after such
time,” the time referred to is the moment of the execution of the
will, not the moment of alienation by the legatee or devisee favored.
Therefore, such acquisition by such legatee or devisee must have
been made between the execution of the will and the death of the
testator. For purposes of clarity, let us divide the different cases that
may possibly arise under this provision:
(1) If the thing belonged to a third person at the time of the
execution of the will: In this case, the testator may or may not have
any knowledge of the fact that the thing belonged to a third person
at the time when he executed his will. If he erroneously believed
that the thing pertained to him, the legacy or devise is void. The subsequent, acquisition of the thing by the legatee or devisee favored
cannot, therefore, have any effect upon such legacy or devise. However, if he had knowledge that the thing belonged to a third person,
the second paragraph of Art. 933 is applicable.
(2) If the thing belonged to the testator at the time of the
execution of the will: In this case, the thing may be alienated by the
testator subsequently either to a third person or to the legatee or
devisee favored. If the thing is alienated in favor of a third person,
clearly the legacy or devise is revoked by express provision of Art.
957. Hence, the subsequently acquisition by the legatee or devisee
cannot revive the legacy or devise. If the thing is alienated in favor
of the legatee or devise. If the thing is alienated in favor of the legatee or devisee himself, there is no revocation. As a matter of fact,
there is a clear intention to comply with the legacy or devise if the
alienation is gratuitous. If such alienation is onerous, the second
paragraph of Art. 933 applies.23
(3) If the thing belonged to the beneficiary at the time of the
execution of the will: In this case, the provision of the second paragraph of Art. 933 cannot apply because this case is precisely what is
contemplated by the first paragraph of the same article.

23

Ibid., pp. 773-774.

352

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ARTS. 934-937

Art. 934. If the testator should bequeath or devise something
pledged or mortgaged to secure a recoverable debt before the
execution of the will, the estate is obliged to pay the debt, unless
the contrary intention appears.
The same rule applies when the thing is pledged or mortgaged after the execution of the will.
Any other charge, perpetual or temporary, with which the
thing bequeathed is burdened, passes with it to the legatee or devisee.24
Art. 935. The legacy of a credit against a third person or of the
remission or release of a debt of the legatee shall be effective only
as regards that part of the credit or debt existing at the time of the
death of the testator.
In the first case, the estate shall comply with the legacy by
assigning to the legatee all rights of action it may have against the
debtor. In the second case, by giving the legatee an acquittance,
should he request one.
In both cases, the legacy shall comprise all interests on the
credit or debt which may be due the testator at the time of his
death.25
Art. 936. The legacy referred to in the preceding article shall
lapse if the testator, after having made it, should bring an action
against the debtor for the payment of his debt, even if such payment should not have been effected at the time of his death.
The legacy to the debtor of the thing pledged by him is understood to discharge only the right of pledge.26
Art. 937. A generic legacy of release or remission of debts
comprises those existing at the time of the execution of the will,
but not subsequent ones.27
Legacy of a Credit. — The legacy of a credit taken up in Art.
935, takes place when the testator bequeaths to the legatee a credit
Art. 867, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 870, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
26
Art. 871, Spanish Civil Code.
27
Art. 872, Spanish Civil Code.
24
25

353

ART. 937

SUCCESSION

which he has against a third person. There are, therefore, three parties involved — the testator-creditor, the legatee, and the debtor. In
this type of legacy, there is a novation of the credit by subrogating
the legatee in the rights of the original creditor.28 Thus, if X, a third
person, is indebted to the testator for P5,000, and the latter, in his
will, bequeaths the right to collect the credit to A, the estate of the
testator upon his death, can comply with the legacy by assigning to
A all rights of action which it may have against X.
Legacy of Remission of Debts. — The Civil Code distinguishes three different kinds of legacies of remission or release of
debts. They are: first, specific legacy for the remission of a definite
debt; second, generic legacy for the remission of all debts of the legatee existing at the time of the execution of the will; and third, legacy
to the debtor of the thing pledged by him.29 The first is regulated by
Art. 935, the second, by Art. 937, and the third, by the second paragraph of Art. 936.
The legacy of remission or release of a definite debt of the legatee, which is taken up in Art. 935, involves only two parties – the
testator-creditor and the legatee-debtor. Thus, if D is indebted to his
uncle, C, for P5,000, and in the will of the latter, he expressly condones the obligation, the estate, upon his death, can comply with the
legacy by giving D an acquittance from the debt, should he request
one.
The generic legacy of remission or release of all debts of the
legatee, which is taken up in Art. 937, is not very different from a
specific legacy of remission with regard to the rules which are applicable. The only fundamental difference is that when the release is
specific, such release can only refer to the debt which is specifically
mentioned in the will of the testator; but if the release is generic,
such release comprises all debts existing at the time of the execution
of the will, but not subsequent ones. Whether the legacy is specific or
generic, the rule that the legacy shall comprise only what is due the
testator at the time of his death shall apply.
Revocation of Legacy. — Whether the legacy is of a credit
against a third person or of a release or remission of a debt of the
28
29

6 Sanchez Roman 1315.
Ibid., p. 1317.

354

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ARTS. 938-939

legatee, such legacy shall be considered revoked (Art. 936 says it
shall lapse) if the testator, after having made it, shall bring an action against the debtor for the payment of his debt, even if such payment should not have been effected at the time of his death. The law
expressly states “if the testator should bring an action against the
debtor.” This must be construed to mean a judicial action; hence, an
extrajudicial demand shall not be sufficient to revoke the legacy.30
Art. 938. A legacy or devise made to a creditor shall not be
applied to his credit, unless the testator so expressly declares.
In the latter case, the creditor shall have the right to collect
the excess, if any, of the credit or of the legacy or devise.31
Art. 939. If the testator orders the payment of what he believes he owes but does not in fact owe, the disposition shall be
considered as not written. If as regards a specified debt more than
the amount thereof is ordered paid, the excess is not due unless a
contrary intention appears.
The foregoing provisions are without prejudice to the fulfillment of natural obligations.32
Legacy to Creditors. — The general rule is that a legacy or
devise made to a creditor shall not be applied to his credit. Thus, if
the testator is indebted to X for P5,000, and, in his will, he bequeaths
P3,000 to him, X shall have two claims against the estate of the testator after the latter’s death — one as creditor for P5,000, and the
other as legatee for P3,000. As creditor, he shall file his claim during
the testate proceedings just like any other creditor; as legatee, he
shall wait until all claims against the estate and expenses of administration had been paid in accordance with the Rules of Court.
The exception to the above rule is when the testator expressly declares that the legacy or devise must be applied to the credit.
Thus, if the testator is indebted to A for P10,000 and, in his will, he
states — “I give to A P10,000 in payment of the P10,000 which I borrowed from him in 1960,” it is clear that A can collect only P10,000

Ibid.
Art. 873, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
32
New provision.
30
31

355

ART. 940

SUCCESSION

as legatee if he is willing to accept the legacy since he is a creditor
for the same amount anyway.
The second paragraph of the article provides that if the testator
expressly declares that the legacy or devise shall be applied to the
credit, the creditor shall have the right to collect the excess, if any,
of the credit or of the legacy or devise. Consequently, if the legacy is
P10,000 and the debt is only P4,000, and the testator declares in his
will that the legacy shall be applied to the payment of the debt there
will still be an excess of P6,000 in the legacy which the creditor shall
still be able to collect. If the legacy is P5,000 and the debt is P7,000,
after applying the legacy to the payment of the debt, there will still
be a balance of P2,000 which the creditor can still collect from the
estate of the testator like any ordinary creditor.
Art. 940. In alternative legacies or devises, the choice is presumed to be left to the heir upon whom the obligation to give the
legacy or devise may be imposed, or the executor or administrator
of the estate if no particular heir is so obliged.
If the heir, legatee or devisee, who may have been given the
choice, dies before making it, this right shall pass to the respective heirs.
Once made, the choice is irrevocable.
In alternative legacies or devises, except as herein provided,
the provisions of this Code regulating obligations of the same
kind shall be observed, save such modifications as may appear
from the intention expressed by the testator.33
Alternative Legacies and Devises. — Alternative legacies
or devises refer to those where the testator bequeaths or devises two
or more things but which can be complied with by the delivery of
only one of them to the beneficiary. The most peculiar feature of this
type of legacy or devise is that a choice will have to be made upon
the death of the testator before it can be complied with. The testator may designate any one of the heirs, legatees or devisees, or even
the beneficiary himself, to make the choice. If no particular person
is designated, the right of choice pertains to the executor or admin-

33

Art. 874, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

356

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ARTS. 941-943

istrator of the estate. If the heir, legatee, or devisee who may have
been designated to make the choice dies before he is able to make it,
the right shall pass to his heirs. Once the choice is made, it becomes
irrevocable. The legacy or devise will no longer be alternative, but
simple. These principles, which are all enunciated in Art. 940 of the
Code may be illustrated by the following example: Before his death,
the testator executed a will. One of the testamentary dispositions
found in the will is a legacy, whereby the testator bequeaths to A
either his automobile or his champion race horse. It is clear that
this legacy is alternative since it can be complied with the delivery
of either the automobile or the horse. Since no person is designated in the will to make the choice, the executor or administrator of
the estate will, therefore, have to make the choice. If such executor
or administrator chooses the automobile, he must notify the court
which has jurisdiction over the settlement proceedings. From that
very moment, the choice is irrevocable. In other words, the legacy
ceases to be alternative; it has become a simple legacy to deliver the
automobile to A.
Art. 941. A legacy of generic personal property shall be valid
even if there be no things of the same kind in the estate.
A devise of indeterminate real property shall be valid only if
there be immovable property of its kind in the estate.
The right of choice shall belong to the executor or administrator who shall comply with the legacy by the delivery of a thing
which is neither of inferior nor of superior quality.34
Art. 942. Whenever the testator expressly leaves the right of
choice to the heir, or to the legatee or devisee, the former may give
or the latter may choose whichever he may prefer.35
Art. 943. If the heir, legatee or devisee cannot make the choice,
in case it has been granted him, his right shall pass to his heirs;
but a choice once made shall be irrevocable.36
Generic Legacies. — A generic legacy refers to a legacy consisting of personal property designated merely by its class or genus
Art. 875, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 876, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
36
Art. 877, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
34
35

357

ART. 943

SUCCESSION

without any particular designation or physical segregation from all
others of the same class. Thus, if the testator, in his will, bequeaths
“ten horses” to A, the legacy is generic. Even granting that there
are no horses in the estate of the testator after his death, the legacy
is valid.37 The obligation in such a case can be complied with by
the delivery to A of ten horses which must be neither of superior
nor inferior quality.38 As in the case of alternative legacies, a choice
must have to be made. The right of choice shall pertain to the person
designated by the testator. Anyone of the heirs, legatees, or devisees, or even the beneficiary himself may be designated to make the
choice.39 If the heir, legatee or devisee cannot make the choice, his
right shall pass to his own heirs.40 If no person is designated to make
the choice, the executor or administrator of the estate shall make
it.41 Once made, the choice becomes irrevocable.42 In other words, the
legacy ceases to be generic; it becomes determinate.
Generic Devises. — A generic devise refers to a devise consisting of real property designated merely by its class or genus without any particular designation or physical segregation from all others of the same class. Thus, if the testator devises five hectares of
“rice lands” or “sugar lands” to A, the devise is generic. In such case,
the same rules specified in the preceding comments are applicable.
The law, however, declares that a devise of indeterminate real
property shall be valid only if there be immovable property of its
kind in the estate of the testator.43 The reason for this is that, unlike
personal property, there is no such thing as a predetermined species with respect to real or immovable property, since its individualization, depends exclusively upon the will of man.44 Consequently,
if the testator devises five hectares of ricelands to A, but after his
death it is found out that his estate consists entirely of fish ponds, it
is clear that, under the law, the devise is void.

Art. 941, Civil Code.
Ibid.
39
Art. 942, Civil Code.
40
Art. 943, Civil Code.
41
Art. 941, Civil Code.
42
Art. 943, Civil Code.
43
41, Civil Code.
44
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 762-763.
37
38

358

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 944

Art. 944. A legacy for education lasts until the legatee is of
age, or beyond the age of majority in order that the legatee may
finish some professional, vocational or general course, provided
he pursues his course, provided he pursues his course diligently.
A legacy for support lasts during the lifetime of the legatee, if
the testator has not otherwise provided.
If the testator has not fixed the amount of such legacies, it
shall be fixed in accordance with the social standing and the circumstances of the legatee and the value of the estate.
If the testator during his lifetime used to give the legatee a
certain sum of money or other things by way of support, the same
amount shall be deemed bequeathed, unless it be markedly disproportionate to the value of the estate.45
Legacy for Education or Support. — According to Art. 879
of the Spanish Civil Code, a legacy for education shall last until
the legatee reaches the age of majority. This legacy is made more
extensive in Art. 944 of the New Civil Code which provides that “a
legacy for education last until the legatee is of age, or beyond the
age of majority in order that the legatee may finish some professional, vocational or general course, provided he pursues his course
diligently.46
The amount of the legacy, whether for education or for support,
shall depend upon the testator. If the amount is not fixed, it shall
be fixed in accordance with the circumstances and social standing of
the legatee and the value of the estate. The only limitation is that
the legacy must not impair the legitime of compulsory heirs.
The last paragraph particularizes the criterion to be followed
in case the testator did not fix the amount of the legacy, if during his
lifetime he had been in the habit of giving the legatee by way of support a certain sum of money. The law provides that in such case, the
same amount shall be deemed bequeathed, unless it be markedly
disproportionate to the value of the estate.

45
46

Art. 879, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Report of the Code Commission, p. 120.

359

ARTS. 945-947

SUCCESSION

Art. 945. If a periodical pension, or a certain annual, monthly, or weekly amount is bequeathed, the legatee may petition the
court for the first installment upon the death of the testator, and
for the following ones which shall be due at the beginning of each
period; such payment shall not be returned, even though the legatee should die before the expiration of the period which has commenced.47
Art. 946. If the thing bequeathed should be subject to a usufruct, the legatee or devisee shall respect such right until it is legally extinguished.48
Art. 947. The legatee or devisee acquires a right to the pure
and simple legacies or devises from the death of the testator and
transmits it to his heirs.49
When Right to Legacy or Devise Vests. — The rule stated
in the above article is merely a restatement of the general principle
declared in Art. 777 of the Code to the effect that the rights to the
succession are transmitted at the moment of the death of the decedent. Although the article mentions only pure and simple legacies
and devises, even those which are subject to a suspensive term or
period must be included within the purview of the rule. This is so
because in such legacies or devises, what is suspended by the term
or period is not the acquisition of the right but merely the demandability of the right. Consequently, even if the legatee or devisee, after the death of the testator, dies before the expiration of the term
or period, he can transmit his rights to his own heirs.50 In the case of
conditional legacies or devises, however, if the condition is suspensive, what is acquired upon the death of the testator by the legatee
or devisee is only a mere hope or expectancy. Such hope or expectancy is converted into a perfected right only from the moment of the
fulfillment of the condition. Consequently, if the legatee or devisee,
after the death of the testator, dies before the fulfillment of the condition, he cannot transmit his expectancy to his own heirs.

Art. 880, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 868, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
49
Art. 881, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
50
Art. 878, Civil Code.
47
48

360

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ARTS. 948-949

Art. 948. If the legacy or devise is of a specific and determinate thing pertaining to the testator, the legatee or devisee acquires the ownership thereof upon the death of the testator, as
well as any growing fruits, or unborn offspring of animals, or uncollected income; but not the income which was due and unpaid
before the latter’s death.
From the moment of the testator’s death the thing bequeathed
shall be at the risk of the legatee or devisee, who shall, therefore,
bear its loss or deterioration, and shall benefited by its increase or
improvement, without prejudice to the responsibility of the executor or administrator.51
Art. 949. If the bequest should not be of a specific and determinate thing, but is generic or of quantity, its fruits and interests
from the time of the death of the testator shall pertain to the legatee or devisee if the testator has expressly so ordered.52
Transmission of Right of Ownership. — The scope or purview of Arts. 948 and 949 must be distinguished from that of Art.
947. The latter article refers to the moment when the legatee or
devisee acquires a right to the legacy or devise, while Arts. 948 and
949 refer to the moment when the legatee or devisee becomes the
owner of the thing which is bequeathed or devised, depending upon
whether the legacy or devise is determinate or generic.
Idem; In determinate legacies or devises. — The rule stated in Art. 948 springs logically from the general principle enunciated in Art. 777 of the Code. It is, however, essential before the legatee
or devisee can acquire ownership of the thing bequeathed or devised
upon the death of the testator that the thing is determinate and that
the legacy or devise is pure and simple. If the legacy or devise is subject to a suspensive term or period or to a suspensive condition, the
rule cannot be applied. In the first, the legatee or devisee becomes
the owner of the thing bequeathed or devised only upon the expiration of the term or period; in the second, only upon the fulfillment of
the condition.
Hence, if the legacy or devise is pure and simple, from the moment of the testator’s death, the thing bequeathed or devised shall
51
52

Art. 882, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 884, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

361

ART. 950

SUCCESSION

be at the risk of the legatee or devisee, who shall, therefore, bear its
loss or deterioration, and shall be benefited by its increase or improvement, without prejudice to the responsibility of the executor or
administrator.53 This is an application of the principle that the thing
perishes for its owner. However, if such loss or deterioration of the
thing is through the fault or negligence of the executor or administrator, the latter can be held liable for damages.
Idem; In generic legacies and devises. — If the legacy or
devise is generic (or alternative), there is a right of choice governed
by the provisions of Arts. 941 to 943 of the Code. Once the choice or
selection has been made in accordance with these provisions, the
legacy or devise ceases to be generic; it becomes a pure and simple
legacy or devise. It will be only then that the legatee or devisee can
be considered as the owner of the thing which is chosen or selected.
Consequently, from that very moment, the legatee or devisee shall
be entitled to all of the fruits and interests of the thing, unless the
testator has expressly ordered in his will that such fruits and interests shall pertain to the legatee or devisee from the moment of his
death.54
Art. 950. If the estate should not be sufficient to cover all the
legacies or devises, their payment shall be made in the following
order:
(1)

Remuneratory legacies or devises;

(2) Legacies or devises declared by the testator to be preferential;
(3)

Legacies for support;

(4)

Legacies for education;

(5) Legacies or devises of a specific, determinate thing
which forms a part of the estate;
(6)

All others pro rata.55

Art. 948, Civil Code.
Art. 949, Civil Code.
55
Art. 887, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
53
54

362

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 950

Order of Payment of Legacies and Devises. — The order
of payment of legacies and devises which is specified in the above
article should be distinguished from the rule stated in Art. 911 of
the Code regarding the pro rata reduction of legacies and devises.
Art. 911 applies in the following cases: (1) When the reduction is
necessary to preserve the legitime of compulsory heirs from impairment, whether there are donations inter vivos or not; and (2) when,
although the legitime has been preserved by the testator himself
by leaving the compulsory heirs sufficient property to cover their
legitime, there are donations inter vivos concurring with the legacies
and devises within the free portion.56 In all other cases not included
within the scope of Art. 911, Art. 950 applies. More specifically, the
latter applies in all cases where the conflict is exclusively among
the legatees or devisees themselves. This is possible in either of two
cases:
(1) When there are no compulsory heirs and the entire estate
is distributed by the testator as legacies or devises; or
(2) When there are compulsory heirs, but their legitime has
already been provided for by the testator and there are no donations
inter vivos.
The application of the order of payment provided for in Art. 950
may be illustrated by the following problems:
Problem No. 1 — The testator, not having any compulsory
heir, made the following bequests in his will: P10,000 to R as
a reward for past services; P10,000 preferential legacy to P;
P15,000 to S for support; P15,000 to E for education, P15,000
and P5,000 to X and Y, respectively, as ordinary legacies. The
value of his estate at the time of his death is P100,000. There
are, however, debts amounting to P40,000. How shall the legacies be satisfied?
Answer — After deducting the debts of the testator, the
net value of the estate is only P60,000. It is evident that it is not
sufficient to satisfy all of the legacies, since the total amount bequeathed by the testator is P70,000. Consequently, we apply the
order of preference established in Art. 950. The legacies to R,
P, S, and E are paid in the order named leaving a remainder of
P10,000 which shall be divided pro rata (3:1) between X and Y.

56

3 Tolentino, Civil Code, 1956 Ed., p. 313.

363

ARTS. 951-954

SUCCESSION

Problem No. 2 — The testator gives P20,000 to his children A and B. He bequeaths P5,000 to a friend, R, as remuneration for past services, P10,000 to S for support, P15,000 to E for
education, and P10,000 to X as ordinary legacy. The net value of
his estate is only P40,000. How shall the estate be distributed?
Answer — Since the legitime of the two children has already been provided for by the testator, it is evident that the
conflict with regard to the disposable portion is exclusively
among the legatees. Hence, Art. 950 shall apply. The legacy to R
shall be satisfied ahead of the others. That leaves only P15,000
out of the free portion. The legacy to S shall then be satisfied.
That leaves only P5,000 out of the free portion, all of which,
shall go to E. Hence, nothing remains for X.

Art. 951. The thing bequeathed shall be delivered with all its
accessions and accessories and in the condition in which it may
be upon the death of the testator.57
Art. 952. The heir, charged with a legacy or devise, or the executor or administrator of the estate, must deliver the very thing
bequeathed if he is able to do so and cannot discharge this obligation by paying its value.
Legacies of money must be paid in cash, even though the
heir or the estate may not have any.
The expenses necessary for the delivery of the thing bequeathed shall be for the account of the heir or the estate, but
without prejudice to the legitime.58
Art. 953. The legatee or devisee cannot take possession of
the thing bequeathed upon his own authority, but shall request
its delivery and possession of the heir charged with the legacy or
devise, or of the executor or administrator of the estate should he
be authorized by the court to deliver it.59
Art. 954. The legatee or devisee cannot accept a part of the
legacy or devise and repudiate the other, if the latter be onerous.

Art. 883, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 886, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
59
Art. 885, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
57
58

364

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ARTS. 955-956

Should he die before having accepted the legacy or devise,
leaving several heirs, some of the latter may accept and the others may repudiate the share respectively belonging to them in the
legacy or devise.60
Art. 955. The legatee or devisee of two legacies or devises,
one of which is onerous, cannot renounce the onerous one and
accept the other. If both are onerous or gratuitous, he shall be free
to accept or renounce both, or to renounce either. But if the testator intended that the two legacies or devises should be inseparable from each other, the legatee or devisee must either accept or
renounce both.
Any compulsory heir who is at the same time a legatee or devisee may waive the inheritance and accept the legacy or devise,
or renounce the latter and accept the former, or waive or accept
both.61
Art. 956. If the legatee or devisee cannot or is unwilling to accept the legacy or devise, or if the legacy or devise for any reason
should become ineffective, it shall be merged into the mass of the
estate, except in cases of substitution and of the right of accretion.62
Effect of Ineffective Legacies or Devises. — There are
three cases or situations contemplated by the above article.
In the first place, the legatee or devisee may be incapacitated
to succeed the testator in accordance with the rules laid down in
Arts. 1024 to 1040 of the Code; in the second place, he may repudiate
the legacy or devise which is his perfect right in accordance with the
rules stated in Arts. 1041 to 1057; and in the third place, the legacy
or devise may become ineffective for some reason such as transformation, alienation or destruction of the object, or the non-fulfillment
of a suspensive, condition. In all of these cases, the legacy or devise
shall be merged with the mass of the hereditary estate, except in
cases of substitution or accretion.

Art. 889, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 890, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
62
Art. 888, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
60
61

365

ART. 956

SUCCESSION

Parish Priest of Roman Catholic Church
of Victoria, Tarlac vs. Rigor
89 SCRA 493
The record discloses that Fr. Pascual Rigor died in 1935.
He left a will which was duly admitted to probate. The project
of partition was also approved and implemented. Named as devisees were the testator’s nearest relatives, namely, his three
sisters and a first cousin. In addition, it contained the controversial devise or bequest of four parcels of land with a total area
of forty four hectares in favor of his nearest male relative who
would study for the priesthood and become a priest. Attached to
this conditional devise is the appointment of the parish priest
of Victoria, Tarlac as administrator of the four parcels of land
during the interval of time that no nearest male relative of the
testator was studying for the priesthood.
About thirteen years after the approval of the project of
partition, the parish priest of Victoria filed a petition in the
pending testate proceeding for the appointment of a new administrator because the old one died. A new administrator was appointed. Subsequently, the priest filed a petition for the delivery
of the four parcels of land to the Church as trustee. This petition
was opposed by the intestate heirs.
The petitioner contends that the intention of the testator
in case no nearest relative of his should become a priest is to
create a public charitable trust with the church as trustee or
substitute devisee. The intestate heirs, on the other hand, contend that since the devise became inoperative because of the
fact that no nearest relative of the testator became a priest, the
rules of intestacy should now apply with respect to the subject
matter of the devise.
Speaking through Justice Aquino, the Supreme Court
held:
“In this case, as in cases involving the law of contracts and statutory construction, where the intention of
the contracting parties or of the lawmaking body is to be
ascertained, the primary issue is the determination of the
testator’s intention which is the law of the case (dicat testator et erit lex). (Santos vs. Manarang, 27 Phil. 209, 215;
Rodriquez vs. Court of Appeals, L-28734, March 28, 1969,
27 SCRA 546).
“The will of the testator is the first and principal law
in the matter of testaments. When his intention is clearly

366

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 956

and precisely expressed, any interpretation must be in
accord with the plain and literal meaning of his words,
except when it may certainly appear that his intention
was different from that literally expressed (In re Estate of
Calderon, 26 Phil. 333).
“‘The intent of the testator is the cardinal rule in the
construction of wills.” It is “the life and soul of a will.” It is
“the first greatest rule, the sovereign guide, the polestar,
in giving effect to a will”. (See Dissent of Justice Moreland
in Santos vs. Manarang, 27 Phil. 209, 223, 237-8).
“One canon in the interpretation of the testamentary provisions is that “the testator’s intention is to be
ascertained from the words of the will, taking into consideration the circumstances under which it was made”, but
excluding the testator’s oral declarations as to his intention (Art. 789, Civil Code of the Philippines).
“To ascertain Father Rigor’s intention, it may be
useful to make the following restatement of the provisions
of his will:
1.
That he bequeathed the ricelands to anyone of
his nearest male relatives who would pursue an ecclesiastical career until his ordination as a priest.
2.

That the devisee could not sell the ricelands.

3.
That the devisee at the inception of his studies in sacred theology could enjoy and administer the ricelands, and once ordained as a priest, he could continue
enjoying and administering the same up to the time of his
death but the devisee would cease to enjoy and administer
the ricelands if he discontinued his studies for the priesthood.
4.
That if the devisee became a priest, he would
be obligated to celebrate every year twenty massess with
prayers for the repose of the souls of Father Rigor and his
parents.
5.
That if the devisee is excommunicated, he
would be divested of the legacy and the administration of
the ricelands would pass to the incumbent parish priest of
Victoria and his successors.
6.
That during the interval of time that there is
no qualified devisee, as contemplated above, the administration of the ricelands would be under the responsibility

367

ART. 956

SUCCESSION

of the incumbent parish priest of Victoria and his successors, and
7.
That the parish priest-administrator of the
ricelands would accumulate annually the products thereof,
obtaining or getting from the annual produce five percent
thereof for his administration and the fees corresponding
to the twenty masses with prayers that the parish priest
would celebrate for each year, depositing the balance of
the income of the devise in the bank in the name of his
bequest.
“From the foregoing testamentary provisions, it may
be deduced that the testator intended to devise the ricelands to his nearest male relative who would become a
priest, who was forbidden to sell the ricelands, who would
lose the devise if he discontinued his studies for the priesthood, or having been ordained a priest, he was excommunicated, and who would be obligated to say annually
twenty masses with prayers for the repose of the souls of
the testator and his parents.
“On the other hand, it is clear that the parish priest
of Victoria would administer the ricelands only in two situations: one, during the interval of time that no nearest
male relative of the testator was studying for the priesthood and two, in case the testator’s nephew became a
priest and he was excommunicated.
“What is not clear is the duration of “el intervalo
de tiempo que no haya legatario acondicionado”, or how
long after the testator’s death would it be determined that
he had a nephew who would pursue an ecclesiastical vocation. It is that patent ambiguity that has brought the
controversy between the parish priest of Victoria and the
testator’s legal heirs.
“Interwoven with that equivocal provision is the
time when the nearest male relative who would study for
the priesthood should be determined. Did the testator contemplate only his nearest male relative at the time of his
death? Or did he have in mind any of his nearest male
relatives at anytime after his death?
“We hold that the said bequest refers to the testator’s nearest male relative living at the time of his death
and not to any indefinite time thereafter. “In order to be
capacitated to inherit, the heir, devisee or legatee must

368

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 956

be living at the moment the succession opens, except in
case of representation, when it is proper” (Art. 1025, Civil
Code).
“The said testamentary provisions should be sensibly or reasonably construed. To construe them as referring
to the testator’s nearest male relative at anytime after his
death would render the provision difficult to apply and
create uncertainty as to the disposition of his estate. That
could not have been his intention.
“In 1935, when the testator died, his nearest legal
heirs were his three sisters or second-degree relatives,
Mrs. Escobar, Mrs. Manaloto and Mrs. Quiambao. Obviously, when the testator specified his nearest male relative, he must have had in mind his nephew or a son of his
sister, who would be his third-degree relative, or possibly
a grandnephew. But since he could not prognosticate the
exact date of his death or state with certitude what category of nearest male relative would be living at the time of
his death, he could not specify that his nearest male relative would be his nephew or grandnephews (the sons of his
nephew or niece) and so he had to use the term “nearest
male relative.”
“It is contended by the legal heirs that the said devise was in reality intended for Ramon Quiambao, the
testator’s nephew and godchild, who was the son of his
sister, Mrs. Quiambao. To prove that contention, the legal
heirs presented in the lower court the affidavit of Beatriz Gamalinda, the maternal grandmother of Edgardo
Cunanan, who deposed that after Father Rigor’s death,
her own son, Valentin Gamalinda, Jr., did not claim the
devise, although he was studying for the priesthood at the
San Carlos Seminary, because she (Beatriz) knew that Father Rigor had intended that devise for his nearest male
relative belonging to the Rigor family (pp. 105-114, Record
on Appeal).
“Mrs. Gamalinda further deposed that her own
grandchild, Edgardo G. Gunanan, was not the one contemplated in Father Rigor’s will and that Edgardo’s father
told her that he was not consulted by the parish priest
of Victoria before the latter filed his second motion for
reconsideration which was based on the ground that the
testator’s grandnephew, Edgardo, was studying for the
priesthood at the San Jose Seminary.

369

ART. 956

SUCCESSION

“Parenthetically, it should be stated at this juncture
that Edgardo ceased to be a seminarian in 1961. For that
reason, the legal heirs appraised the Court of Appeals that
the probate court’s order adjudicating the ricelands to the
parish priest of Victoria had no more leg to stand on (p. 84,
Appellant’s brief).
“Of course, Mrs. Gamalinda’s affidavit, which is tantamount to evidence aliunde as to the testator’s intention
and which is hearsay, has no probative value. Our opinion
that the said bequest refers to the testator’s nephew who
was living at the time of his death, when his succession
was opened and the successional rights to his estate became vested, rests on a judicious and unbiased reading of
the terms of the will.
“Had the testator intended that the “cualquier pariente mio varon mas cercano que estudie la carrera eclesiastica” would include indefinitely anyone of his nearest
male relatives born after his death, he could have so specified in his will. He must have known that such a broad
provision would suspend for an unlimited period of time
the efficaciousness of his bequest.
“What then did the testator mean by “el intervalo de
tiempo que no haya legatario acondicionado”? The reasonable view is that he was referring to a situation whereby
his nephew living at the time of his death, who would like
to become a priest, was still in grade school or in high
school or was not yet in the seminary. In that case, the
parish priest of Victoria would administer the ricelands
before the nephew entered the seminary. But the moment the testator’s nephew entered the seminary, then he
would be entitled to enjoy and administer the ricelands
and receive the fruits thereof. In that event, the trusteeship would be terminated.
”Following that interpretation of the will, the inquiry would be whether at the time Father Rigor died in 1935
he had a nephew who was studying for the priesthood or
who had manifested his desire to follow the ecclesiastical
career. That query is categorically answered in paragraph
4 of appellant priest’s petitions of February 19, 1954 and
January 31, 1957. He unequivocally alleged therein that
“no nearest male relative of the late (Father) Pascual Rigor has ever studied for the priesthood” (pp. 25 and 35, Record on Appeals).

370

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 956

“Inasmuch as the testator was not survived by any
nephew who became a priest, the unavoidable conclusion
is that the bequest in question was ineffectual or inoperative. Therefore, the administration of the ricelands by the
parish priest of Victoria, as envisaged in the will, was likewise inoperative.
“The appellant in contending that a public charitable
trust was constituted by the testator in his favor assumes
that he was a trustee or a substitute devisee. That contention is untenable. A reading of the testamentary provisions regarding the disputed bequest does not support the
view that the parish priest of Victoria was a trustee or a
substitute devisee in the event that the testator was not
survived by a nephew who became a priest.
“It should be understood that the parish priest of
Victoria could become a trustee only when the testator’s
nephew living at the time of his death, who desired to become a priest, had not yet entered the seminary or, having
been ordained a priest, he was excommunicated. Those
two contingencies did not arise, and could not have arise,
in this case because no nephew of the testator manifested any intention to enter the seminary or ever became a
priest.
“The Court of Appeals correctly ruled that this case
is covered by Article 888 of the old Civil Code, now Article
956, which provides that if “the bequest for any reason
should be inoperative, it shall be merged into the estate,
except in cases of substitution and those in which the right
of accretion exists” (“el legado x x x por qualquier causa,
no tenga efecto, se refundira en la masa de la herencia,
fuera de los casos de sustitucion y derecho de acrecer”).
“This case is also covered by Article 912 (2) of the old
Civil Code, now Article 960 (2), which provides that legal
succession takes place when the will “does not dispose of
all that belongs to the testator.” There being no substitution nor accretion as to the said ricelands, the same should
be distributed among the testator’s heirs. The effect is as
if the testator had made no disposition as to the said ricelands.
“The Civil Code recognizes that a person may die
partly testate and partly intestate, or that there may be
mixed succession. The old rule as to the indivisibility of
the testator’s will is no longer valid. Thus, if a conditional

371

ART. 957

SUCCESSION

legacy does not take effect, there will be intestate succession as to the property covered by the said legacy (Macrohon Ong Ham vs. Saavedra, 51 Phil. 267).
“We find no merit in the appeal. The Appellate
Court’s decision is affirmed. Costs against the petitioner.
“SO ORDERED.”

Art. 957. The legacy or devise shall be without effect:
(1) If the testator transforms the thing bequeathed in such a
manner that it does not retain either the form or the denomination
it had;
(2) If the testator by any title or for any cause alienates the
thing bequeathed or any part thereof, it being understood that in
the latter case the legacy or devise shall be without effect only
with respect to the part thus alienated. If after the alienation the
thing should again belong to the testator, even if it be by reason
of nullity of the contract, the legacy shall not thereafter be valid,
unless the reacquisition shall have been effected by virtue of the
exercise of the right of repurchase;
(3) If the thing bequeathed is totally lost during the lifetime
of the testator, or after his death without the heir’s fault. Nevertheless, the person obliged to pay the legacy of devise shall be liable
for eviction if the thing bequeathed should not have been determinate as to its kind, in accordance with the provisions of Article
928.63
Revocation of Legacies and Devises. — The different causes
for the revocation of legacies and devises enumerated in the above
article are examples of what is known as revocation by “implication
of law” within the meaning of No. 1 of Art. 830 of the Code. They
take effect automatically and by operation of law. The enumeration,
however, is not complete. We can add as a fourth cause or ground
the act of the testator in bringing an action against the debtor for
payment of the debt as applied to legacies of a credit or of remission
of a debt. Under Art. 936, such an action will also have the effect of
revoking the legacy.

63

Art. 869, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

372

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 957

Idem; Revocation by transformation. — If the testator
transforms the thing bequeathed in such a manner that it does not
retain both the form and the denomination it had, there is an implied revocation of the legacy or devise. It is essential, therefore,
that the transformation must be both with respect to the form and
denomination. Transformation with respect to the form only but not
with respect to the denomination is not sufficient. Neither is transformation with respect to the denomination but not with respect to
the form. The form refers to the external appearance of the thing bequeathed or devised; the denomination refers to the name by which
the thing is known. Thus, if the thing devised is a parcel of rice land,
and subsequently, the testator transforms it into a fish pond, there
is an implied revocation of the devise. If the thing bequeathed is a
diamond ring, and subsequently, the testator transforms it into a
bracelet, there is also an implied revocation of the legacy. However,
if there is a mere enlargement or a mere incorporation of the thing
to another — so that there is no change in either form or denomination, there can be no revocation. In the latter case, the rule of accession shall apply.64
It must also be noted that the transformation of the object
must have been made by the testator himself or by some other
person acting for him as agent. Otherwise, if it was made by a third
person without any authority from the testator, there would be no
revocation.65
Idem; Revocation by alienation. — If the testator by any
title, whether by sale or any other act of disposition inter vivos,
alienates the thing bequeathed or any part thereof, there is also an
implied revocation of the legacy or devise. If only a part of the thing
is alienated, the legacy or devise shall take effect with respect to the
part untouched. Hence, there would be only a partial revocation.
There can be no revival of the legacy or devise once revoked
impliedly by alienation. This is clear from a mere reading of the law.
The rule is applicable even when the thing alienated should again
belong to the testator even if it be by reason of the nullity of the contract. Obviously, “nullity of the contract” does not refer to want or

64
65

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 740-741.
Ibid., p. 741.

373

ART. 958

SUCCESSION

absence of consent, such as when violence, or intimidation, or fraud
has been used upon the testator. In these cases, there can never be
any intention of the testator to alienate. Hence, there can be no implied revocation of the legacy. If, therefore, the thing is returned to
the testator, the legacy is still valid. Therefore, when the law speaks
of the “nullity of the contract,” if refers to causes of nullity predicated upon the fact that the alienation is voluntary and absolute,
such as a sale made by a minor who has already made a will, or a
donation made by the testator subsequent to the execution of the
will but which is void as to form. What matters is that the presumed
intention of the testator to revoke has already been expressed or
manifested by a positive act. The mere reacquisition of the thing
does not mean that this intention has changed.66
There is, however, one exception to the rule. The law declares
that if after the alienation the thing should again belong to the testator, the legacy or devise shall not thereafter be valid, “unless the
reacquisition shall have been effected by virtue of the exercise of the
right of repurchase.” Hence, if the testator sells the thing which is
the subject matter of the legacy or devise with right of repurchase
subsequent to the execution of the will, the revocation is conditional.
If he exercises his right of redemption there is no revocation; the
legacy or devise will, therefore, take effect. If he does not exercise his
right of redemption, the revocation becomes absolute.
Idem; Revocation by loss or destruction. — If the thing
bequeathed is totally lost during the lifetime of the testator or after
his death without the heir’s fault, obviously, the legacy or devise
can no longer take effect. If the thing bequeathed or devised is determinate, there is no liability for eviction on the part of the person
obliged to pay or deliver the legacy or devise; if it is indeterminate
as to its kind, the latter shall be liable in accordance with the provision of Art. 928.
Art. 958. A mistake as to the name of the thing bequeathed or
devised, is of no consequence, if it is possible to identify the thing
which the testator intended to bequeath or devise.67

66
67

Ibid., pp. 743-744.
New provision.

374

TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
Legacies and Devises

ART. 959

Art. 959. A disposition made in general terms in favor of the
testator’s relatives shall be understood to be in favor of those
nearest in degree.68
Dispositions in Favor of Relatives. — The rule stated in
the above article is applicable not only to legacies and devises, but
also to institution of heirs. Therefore, if the testator states in his
will that he is leaving all of his properties to all of his relatives, or
that all of his personal or real properties shall be divided among his
relatives, according to the above article, the testamentary disposition shall be understood to be in favor of those nearest in degree. In
other words, there is only one rule that will apply and that is the
rule of proximity.69 Consequently, the other rules of intestate succession, such as the rule of preference between lines, the right of
representation and the rule of double share for full-blood collaterals
are not applicable.70 It must, however, be noted that the law speaks
only of dispositions made in general terms in favor of the testator’s
relatives. Thus, in Vda. de Singson vs. De Lim,71 where the testator
stated in his will that all of his properties not disposed of in the will
“shall be distributed in equal parts to all who are entitled thereto,”
it was held that the rule enunciated in what is now Art. 959 of the
Code cannot be applied. The testator, who was a lawyer, by referring to “all who are entitled thereto,” instead of his relatives, clearly
intends that the properties shall be given to those entitled thereto
in accordance with the rules of intestate succession. Therefore, not
only the rule of proximity, but other rules of intestate succession,
such as the right of representation, must be applied.
The application of the rule enunciated in Art. 959 may be illustrated by the following problem:
Problem — Before his death in an automobile accident, A
was able to execute a will. In the will he expressly stated that he
is leaving all of his properties to all of his relatives. During the
proceedings for the settlement of his estate, the following filed
their claims as heirs: (1) B, his widow; (2) C and D, his brothers;
and (3) E and F, his nephews, children of a deceased sister. The
net remainder of his estate is P60,000. How shall the distribution be made?

Art. 751, Spanish Civil Code.
See Art. 962, par. 1, Civil Code.
70
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 42-43.
71
74 Phil. 109.
68
69

375

ART. 959

SUCCESSION

Answer — It is clear that the case falls squarely within
the purview of Art. 959 of the Code. The disposition is made in
general terms in favor of the testator’s relatives. Hence, there is
only one rule that will apply and that is the rule of proximity.
E and F, nephews of the testator, cannot inherit by right of representation, not only because of the rule that only a compulsory
heir can be represented in testamentary succession (and certainly a brother or sister is not a compulsory heir), but also because of the fact that Art. 959 of the Code excludes the application of such right. Hence, they are excluded by C and D, brothers
of the testator. B, the widow of the testator, on the other hand,
is not a “relative” of the testator within the meaning of Art. 959.
Under this article, “relatives” refer to those who are related to
the testator by consanguinity, not by affinity. Therefore, B cannot participate in the inheritance, but only with respect to the
disposable free portion. Being a compulsory heir, her legitime
cannot be impaired. Consequently, the inheritance shall be distributed as follows:
B

..........................

P30,000, as a compulsory heir,

C

...........................

15,000, as a voluntary heir,

D

...........................

15,000, as a voluntary heir.

376

Chapter III

LEGAL OR INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Section 1. — General Provisions
Concept of Legal or Intestate Succession. — Legal or
intestate succession is that which is effected by operation of law in
default of a will. It is legal because it takes place by operation of law;
it is intestate because it takes place in the absence or in default of a
last will of the decedent.
Because of man’s tendency to make a will only when death
approaches and because death sometimes strikes without any
warning, even when a person intends to make a will, yet he dies
without one. Even when a will exists, it may be void or defective;
the instituted heirs may die before the testator, or be incapacitated
to inherit from such testator, or even repudiate their inheritance;
the condition attached may or may not be fulfilled resulting either
in the prevention of the birth of a right or in its extinguishment
depending upon the nature of the condition. In order to cope with
any of these possibilities, the Code has provided for what is known
as legal or intestate succession by designating the person or persons
who shall succeed the decedent. Its essential feature is that it is
the law which operates, not the will of the decedent, but even when
it is the law which designates the persons who are to succeed, the
basis of the designation is the presumed will of the decedent. It
proceeds on the principle that if the decedent had made a will he
would have provided, first, for his children or descendants, second,
for his parents or ascendants, and third, for his collaterals. Love or
affection, as a commentator once said, descends, then ascends, and
finally spreads. In the absence of the persons for whom the decedent
would have provided, it is presumed that he would have desired his
property to pass to the State.1

1

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 34-35.

377

ART. 960

SUCCESSION

Art. 960. Legal or intestate succession takes place:
(1) If a person dies without a will, or with a void will, or one
which has subsequently lost its validity;
(2) When the will does not institute an heir to, or dispose of
all the property belonging to the testator. In such case, legal succession shall take place only with respect to the property of which
the testator has not disposed;
(3) If the suspensive condition attached to the institution of
heir does not happen or is not fulfilled, or if the heir dies before the
testator, or repudiates the inheritance, there being no substitution,
and no right of accretion takes place;
(4) When the heir instituted is incapable of succeeding, except in cases provided in this Code.2
Causes of Intestacy. — The most common cause of intestacy
is if the decedent dies without a will. In such case, the law comes
into operation and disposes of his property in accordance with his
presumed will. But even where he has made a will there is always
the possibility that it is void because of the existence of any of the
grounds for the disallowance of wills enumerated in Art. 839 of the
Code, in which case, it cannot be admitted to probate by the probate
court. And even when the will was not defective at the time of its
execution, there is also the possibility that it might subsequently
lose its validity before the testator’s death, such as when there is a
revocation in accordance with the requisite formalities prescribed
by law. In such cases, in default of any other legal or intestate
succession shall take place.
Another common cause of intestacy is if the testator executes a
will but disposes of only a part of his properties. In such case, mixed
succession shall take place, because evidently, the rules of legal
intestate succession shall be applied with respect to those properties
not disposed of. This cause includes those cases where the institution
of heirs is void with respect to the disposition of certain properties
but valid with respect to the disposition of other properties.3

2
3

Art. 912, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 47.

378

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
General Provisions

ART. 960

Another cause of intestacy is if a testamentary disposition
becomes ineffective or inoperative, such as when the condition which
is attached is fulfilled or not fulfilled, or when the instituted heir, or
legatee, or devisee dies before the testator, or is incapacitated to
inherit from such testator, or repudiates his inheritance, legacy or
devise.
If a testamentary disposition is made to depend upon the
fulfillment of a suspensive condition and such condition does
not happen or is not fulfilled, the result is that the testamentary
disposition becomes ineffective. Consequently, the heir, legatee or
devisee acquires nothing. Hence, legal or intestate succession shall
take place. On the other hand, if the testamentary disposition is
subject to a resolutory condition and such condition is fulfilled,
the result is that the right of the heir, legatee or devisee which
he had already acquired at the time of the death of the testator is
extinguished. Although this is not included among the causes of
intestacy as enumerated in Art. 960, evidently, legal or intestate
succession shall also take place in such a case.
If the instituted heir, legatee or devisee dies before the testator,
or is incapacitated to inherit from the testator, or repudiates
the inheritance, legacy or devise, the result is a vacancy in the
inheritance. In such case, the rules of intestate succession shall be
applied to the portion or property which is rendered vacant. This is,
however, without prejudice to the following rights: first, the right of
the substitute if one has been designated by the testator; second, the
right of representation when it properly takes place; and third, the
right of accretion when it properly takes place.
Idem; Other causes of intestacy. — In addition to those
enumerated in Art. 960, there are other causes of intestacy, such
as (1) when there is a preterition in the testator’s will of one, or
some, or all of the compulsory heirs in the direct line, or (2) when
a testamentary disposition is subject to a resolutory condition and
such condition is fulfilled, or (3) when a testamentary disposition is
subject to a term or period and such term or period expires, or (4)
when a testamentary disposition is impossible of compliance or is
ineffective.4

4

Ibid., p. 53.

379

ARTS. 961-962

SUCCESSION

Art. 961. In default of testamentary heirs, the law vests the
inheritance, in accordance with the rules hereinafter set forth, in
the legitimate and illegitimate relatives of the deceased, in the
surviving spouse, and in the State.5
Order of Intestate Succession. — The above article states in
its general form the order of intestate succession. The order is based
on the presumed will of the decedent. In default of testamentary
heirs, it is presumed that he would have provided: first, for legitimate
relatives; second, for illegitimate relatives; third, for the surviving
spouse; and fourth, for the State.
The order of intestate succession is prescribed by law. Hence,
any agreement or partnership contract entered into by the parties
cannot affect the hereditary rights which belong to the relatives of
the deceased predecessor-in-interest nor alter the order prescribed
by law for intestate succession.6
Idem; Rule of preference between lines. – One of the
most important principles of legal or intestate succession is what is
sometimes known as the rule of preference between lines. According
to this principle, those in the direct descending line shall exclude in
the succession those in the direct ascending and collateral lines, and
those in the direct ascending line shall, in turn, exclude those in the
collateral line. This principle is clearly deducible from the provision
of Art. 961, defining the order of intestate succession. It is expressly
recognized in the provisions of Arts. 978, 985, 988, 995, 1003, and
1011 of the Code regulating the order of intestate succession.
Art. 962. In every inheritance, the relative nearest in degree
excludes the more distant ones, saving the right of representation
when it properly takes place.
Relatives in the same degree shall inherit in equal shares,
subject to the provisions of Article 1006 with respect to relatives of
the full and half blood, and of Article 987, paragraph 2, concerning
division between the paternal and maternal lines.7

Art. 913, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Rodriguez vs. Ravilan, 17 Phil. 63.
7
Art. 921, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
5
6

380

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
General Provisions

ART. 962

Rules of Proximity. — In every inheritance, whether testamentary or intestate, the relatives nearest in degree to the decendent shall exclude the more distant ones. Hence, a son excludes the
grandson, a father excludes the grandfather, a brother excludes the
nephew. It must be observed, however, that this rule presupposes
that all of the relatives belong to the same line. In other words, the
rule of proximity is subordinated to the rule of preference between
lines by virtue of which those in the direct descending line shall exclude those in the direct ascending and collateral lines, while those
in the direct ascending line shall exclude those in the collateral line.
Hence, although the son and the father of the decedent are both one
degree removed from the latter, the son shall exclude the father. The
grandson is two degrees removed from the decedent; so is the latter’s
brother; but the grandson shall exclude the decedent’s brother in the
succession.8
Idem; Exception. — The rule of proximity is modified by the
right of representation as defined in Art. 970 of the Code. As a general
rule, a grandson is excluded by a son. Representation, however,
prevents such exclusion. Thus, if the decedent is survived by his
son, A, and by his grandchildren, C and D, children of a deceased,
or incapacitated, or disinherited child, B under the law, C and D are
not excluded by A in the succession in spite of the rule of proximity,
because, by right of representation, they are raised to the place and
degree of their deceased or incapacitated, or disinherited father. As
a general rule, nephews and nieces are excluded by a brother, but
such exclusion is nullified by representation. Thus if the decedent
is survived by his brother, X, and his nephews, A and B, children
of a deceased brother, Y, such nephews shall still participate in the
succession by right of representation.9
Rule of Equal Division. — Another rule of fundamental importance in legal or intestate succession is the principle enunciated
in the second paragraph of Art. 962. Relatives of the same degree
shall inherit in equal shares. Like the rule of proximity, this rule
presupposes that all of the relatives belong to the same line. In other
words, it is subordinated to the rule of preference between lines.
Hence, although a grandson of the decedent is a relative of the latter

8
9

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 68; 6 Sanchez Roman.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 68-69.

381

ART. 962

SUCCESSION

in the second degree, while the father of such decedent is a relative
in the first degree, yet the former, who is in the direct descending
line, shall exclude the latter, who is in the direct ascending line.
Idem; Exceptions. — There are, however, three exceptions to
the rule that relatives of the same line and degree shall inherit in
equal shares. They are: first, when the inheritance is divided between
paternal and maternal grandparents; second, when the inheritance
is divided among brothers and sisters, some of whom are of the
full blood and others of the half blood; and third, in certain cases
when the right of representation takes place. In the first, when the
decedent is survived by two grandparents in the paternal line and
by one grandparent in the maternal line, the inheritance shall be
divided in such a way that one-half shall pass to the grandparents in
the paternal line, while the other one-half shall pass to the surviving
grandparent in the maternal line.10 In the second, those of the full
blood shall be entitled to double the share of those of the half blood.11
In the third, whenever there is succession by representation, the
division of the estate shall be made per stirpes, in such manner that
the representatives, although of the same degree, shall not inherit
more than what the person they represent would inherit, if he were
living or could inherit.12 This may be illustrated by the following
example:

X

A

B

D

Art. 987, par. 2, Civil Code.
Art. 1006, Civil Code.
12
Art. 974, Civil Code.
10
11

382

C

E

F

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Relationship

ARTS. 963-966

X is survived by his son, A, and his grandchildren, D, E and F.
D is the child of a deceased son of X (B); E and F are the children
of another deceased son of (C). It is clear that A shall inherit in
his own right, while the grandchildren shall inherit by right of
representation. D shall receive the share that would have gone to
his father if the latter were alive; E and F shall also receive the
share that would have gone to their father if the latter were also
alive. Hence, although they are all two degrees removed from the
decedent, D shall receive twice as much as either E or F.

Subsection 1. — Relationship
Art. 963. Proximity of relationship is determined by the
number of generations. Each generation forms a degree.1
Art. 964. A series of degrees forms a line, which may be either
direct or collateral.
A direct line is that constituted by the series of degrees
among ascendants and descendants.
A collateral line is that constituted by the series of degrees
among persons who are not ascendants and descendants, but
who come from a common ancestor.2
Art. 965. The direct line is either descending or ascending.
The former unites the head of the family with those who
descend from him.
The latter binds a person with those from whom he descends.3
Art. 966. In the line, as many degrees are counted as there are
generations or persons, excluding the progenitor.
In the direct line, ascent is made to the common ancestor.
Thus, the child is one degree removed from the parent, two from
the grandfather, and three from the great-grandparent.

Art. 915, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 916, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
3
Art. 917, Spanish Civil Code.
1
2

383

ART. 966

SUCCESSION

In the collateral line, ascent is made to the common ancestor
and then descent is made to the person with whom the computation
is to be made. Thus, a person is two degrees removed from his
brother, three from his uncle, who is the brother of his father, four
from his first cousin, and so forth.4
Computation of Degrees. — The rules for computation of
degrees may be illustrated by the following example:

A

B

E

I

M

C

F

J

K

D

G

H

L

N

A is the common ancestor; B, C and D are the children of A; E
and F are the children of B G and H are the children of D; I and J
are the children of E; K is the child of F; L is the child of H; and M
and N are the children of I. Let us assume that E is the propositus
or person with whom the computation is made.
In terms of degrees, how is E related to his grandson, M? In this
case, descent is made from E to M, counting the number of persons
from E to M — minus one. Therefore, E is two degrees removed
from his grandson, M. How is E related to his grandfather, A? The

4

Art. 918, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

384

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Relationship

ARTS. 967-969

same procedure is followed. Ascent is made from E to A, counting
the number of persons from E to A — minus one. Therefore, E is
two degrees removed from his grandfather, A. How is E related to
his brother, F? In this case, ascent is made from E to their common
ancestor, B, and then descent is made to F counting the number
of persons from E up to B down to F — minus one. Therefore, E is
two degrees removed from his brother, F. How is E related to his
uncle, C? The same procedure is followed. Ascent is made to E to
their common ancestor, A, and then descent is made to C, counting
the number of persons from E up to B to A down to C — minus one.
Therefore, E is three degrees removed from his uncle, C. How is E
related to his first cousin, H? The same procedure is again followed.
Ascent is made from E to their common ancestor, A, and then descent
is made to H, counting the number of persons from E up to B to A
down to D to H — minus one. Therefore, E is four degrees removed
from his first cousin H.
Art. 967. Full blood relationship is that existing between
persons who have the same father and the same mother.
Half blood relationship is that existing between persons who
have the same father, but not the same mother, or the same mother,
but not the same father.5
Art. 968. If there are several relatives of the same degree, and
one or more of them are unwilling or incapacitated to succeed, his
portion shall accrue to the others of the same degree, save the
right of representation when it should take place.6
Art. 969. If the inheritance should be repudiated by the
nearest relative, should there be one only, or by all the nearest
relatives called by law to succeed, should there be several, those
of the following degree shall inherit in their own right and cannot
represent the person or persons repudiating the inheritance.7
Effect of Incapacity or Repudiation. — Arts. 968 and 969
give the general effects of incapacity or repudiation upon the order
of intestate succession. It must.be noted that while Art. 968 refers to
Art. 920, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 922, Spanish Civil Code.
7
Art. 923, Spanish Civil Code.
5
6

385

ART. 969

SUCCESSION

a case where one or some of the surviving relatives of the decedent
of the same class and degree are incapacitated to inherit from him
or have repudiated their inheritance, Art. 969, on the other hand,
refers to a case where all of such relatives have repudiated their
inheritance.
Under Art. 968, in case of incapacity, the share or shares which
are rendered vacant shall pass to the co-heirs of the incapacitated
heir or heirs by right of accretion. This rule, however, is not absolute.
If the incapacitated heir happens to be a child or descendant of the
decedent and he has children or descendants of his own, then the
share which is rendered vacant by reason of incapacity shall pass
to such children or descendants by right of representation. It is,
therefore, evident that the right of representation is superior to the
right of accretion.
On the other hand, in case of repudiation by one or some of the
relatives, the share or shares which are rendered vacant shall pass
to the co-heirs of the renouncer or renouncers by right of accretion.
This rule is absolute, even assuming that the renouncer is a child or
descendant of the decedent and he has children or descendants of his
own. This is so because of the principle that an heir who repudiates
his inheritance may not be represented.8
Under Art. 969, all of the relatives of the decedent of the same
class and degree called by the law to succeed have repudiated their
inheritance. What is the effect of this total vacancy? According to the
law, those of the following degree shall inherit in their own right.
They cannot inherit by right of representation because of the principle that an heir who repudiates his inheritance may not be represented.9 Consequently, if the decedent is survived by, let us say,
four legitimate children, and all of them repudiate their inheritance,
the effect of such repudiation is that those of the following degree
shall be called to the succession. But such relatives shall inherit in
their own right and not by right of representation, even if they are
the grandchildren of the decedent. Hence, the inheritance shall be
distributed among them per capita. It would be different if instead
of repudiation by all of the heirs, all of them died before the decedent
or all of them are incapacitated to inherit. In such case, the grand-

8
9

Art. 977, Civil Code.
Ibid.

386

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Relationship

ART. 969

children shall inherit by right of representation and not in their own
right.10 Hence, the inheritance shall be distributed among them per
stirpes11 and not per capita.
Problem No. 1 — X died intestate survived by: (1) A, B, C,
D and E, his legitimate children; (2) F, G, H and I, legitimate
children of B; (3) J and K, legitimate children of C; (4) L and M,
legitimate children of D; and (5) N and O, legitimate children
of E. B, C, D and E, however, are incapacitated to inherit from
X. Once upon a time, they were all convicted of frustrated parricide. If the net value of the estate of X is P400,000, how shall
it be divided? Reasons.
Answer — A shall inherit in his own right, while the legitimate children of B, C, D and E shall inherit by right of representation (Arts. 968, 981, 982, 1035, Civil Code). Consequently, the
estate shall be divided per stirpes (Art. 974, Civil Code). In other
words, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N and O shall be subrogated to the
rights of their parents had the latter not been incapacitated.
Therefore, the division shall be as follows:
A

........................

P80,000, in his own right

F

.........................

20,000, as representative of B

G

.........................

20,000, as representative of B

H

.........................

20,000, as representative of B

I

.........................

20,000, as representative of B

J

.........................

40,000, as representative of C

K

.........................

40,000, as representative of C

L

.........................

40,000, as representative of D

M

.........................

40,000, as representative of D

N

.........................

40,000, as representative of E

O

.........................

40,000, as representative of E

Estate .......................

P400,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem B,
C, D and E have the required capacity to inherit from X, but
they all repudiated their inheritance, how shall the estate be
divided.

10
11

See Art. 982, Civil Code.
Art. 974, Civil Code.

387

ART. 969

SUCCESSION

Answer — In such a case, since B, C, D and E cannot be
represented by their children (Art. 977, Civil Code), their shares
which are rendered vacant will pass to A by right of accretion
(Arts. 978, 1018, Civil Code).
Problem No. 3 — Suppose that in the above problem, all
of the children of X are incapacitated to inherit from him, how
shall the P400,000 estate be divided?
Answer — In such a case, the grandchildren shall inherit
by right of representation (Arts. 982, 1015, Civil Code). Consequently, the division of the estate shall be per stirpes and not
per capita (Art. 974, Civil Code). Disregarding A altogether because his share which is rendered vacant by incapacity will be
merged in the hereditary estate, the division is as follows:
F

........................

P25,000, in his own right

G

.........................

25,000, as representative of B

H

.........................

25,000, as representative of B

I

.........................

25,000, as representative of B

J

.........................

50,000, as representative of B

K

.........................

50,000, as representative of C

L

.........................

50,000, as representative of C

M

.........................

50,000, as representative of D

N

.........................

50,000, as representative of D

O

.........................

50,000, as representative of E
P400,000

Problem No. 4 — Suppose that in the above problem, all
of the children of X have the necessary capacity to inherit from
him but all of them repudiated their inheritance, how shall the
P400,000 estate be divided?
Answer — This is the only exceptional case where grandchildren can inherit in their own right and not by right of representation. Representation in the instant case is, of course, impossible because of the principle that an heir who repudiates his
inheritance cannot be represented (Arts. 969, 977, Civil Code).
Therefore, the division of the P400,000 estate shall be per capita
and not per stirpes. Consequently, each of the grandchildren
shall inherit P40,000.

388

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ARTS. 970-971

Subsection 2. — Right of Representation
Art. 970. Representation is a right created by fiction of law,
by virtue of which the representative is raised to the place and
the degree of the person represented, and acquires the rights
which the latter would have if he were living or if he could have
inherited.1
Art. 971. The representative is called to the succession by the
law and not by the person represented. The representative does
not succeed the person represented but the one whom the person
represented would have succeeded.2
Concept of Representation. — In every inheritance, the
relative nearest in degree excludes the more remote ones. This is
known as the rule of proximity which is one of the guiding principles
of our system of compulsory succession in both testamentary and
intestate succession. It is primarily a rule of exclusion. Thus, the
son excludes the grandson, the father excludes the grandfather,
the brother excludes the uncle or nephew. As a matter of fact, in
legal or intestate succession, it is one of the bases of the order of
succession. However, it is not absolute in character. There is one
very important exception. This exception is what is known as the
right of representation. By virtue of this right, the relative nearest
in degree does not always exclude the more remote ones, because,
by fiction of law, more distant relatives belonging to the same class
as the person represented, are raised to the place and degree of such
person, and acquire the rights which the latter would have acquired
if he were living or if he could have inherited.3
Characteristics. – The most important characteristics of
the right of representation are the following: first, it is a right of
subrogation; second, it constitutes an exception to the rule of proximity
and the rule of equal division among relatives of the same class and
degree; third, the representative is called to the succession by the
law and not by the person represented; fourth, the representative
succeeds the decedent and not the person represented; fifth, it can

Art. 924, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
New provision.
3
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 73-74.
1
2

389

ART. 971

SUCCESSION

only take place when there is a vacancy in the inheritance brought
about by either predecease, or incapacity, or disinheritance of an
heir; and sixth, as a general rule, the right can be exercised only by
grandchildren or descendants of the decedent.
Probably, the most significant among these characteristics are
the third and the fourth which are now expressly stated in Art. 971 of
the New Civil Code. The representative does not succeed the person
represented but the one whom the person represented would have
succeeded. Thus, a grandson is called to succession by law because
of his blood relationship. He does not succeed his father (the person
represented) who predeceased his grandparent. The grandson
succeeds his grandparent whom his father would have succeeded.4
Because of the principle that the representative inherits from
the decedent and not from the person represented, the following
consequences will necessarily follows: first, the representative
must be capable of succeeding the decedent;5 second, even if the
representative is incapable of succeeding the person represented, he
can still inherit by right of representation so long as he is capable of
succeeding the decedent; and third, even if the representative had
repudiated his inheritance coming from the person represented, he
can still inherit from the decedent by right of representation.6
When Representation Takes Place. — In testamentary
succession, the right of representation can take place only in the
following cases: first, when the person represented dies before
the testator; second, when the person represented is incapable of
succeeding the testator; and third, when the person represented is
disinherited by the testator. In all of these cases, since there is a
vacancy in the inheritance, the law calls the children or descendants
of the person represented to succeed by right of representation. It
must be noted, however, that in testamentary succession the person
represented must be a compulsory heir of the testator in the direct
descending line. It will be recalled that under Art. 856 of the Code,
a voluntary heir cannot transmit any right to his own heirs in case
he dies before the testator. The same rule can also be applied if
he is incapable of succeeding the testator. This rule is absolute in

Rosales vs. Rosales, G.R. No. 40789, February 27, 1987.
Art. 973, Civil Code.
6
Art. 976, Civil Code.
4
5

390

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ART. 972

character. A compulsory heir in the direct descending line on the
other hand, can transmit his rights, but only with respect to the
legitime. In other words, if a compulsory heir in the direct line
dies before the testator, his own children or descendants shall still
participate in the succession, not in their own right, but by right
of representation. The same rule can also be applied if such heir is
incapable of succeeding the testator or is disinherited.
In legal or intestate succession, the right of representation
can take place only in the following cases: first, when the person
represented dies before the decedent; and second, when the person
represented is incapable of succeeding the decedent. In both of these
cases, since there is a vacancy in the inheritance, the law calls the
children or descendants of the person represented to succeed by right
of representation to the entire portion which is rendered vacant.
From what has been stated, it is clear that the principle of
representation is applicable whenever there is a vacancy in the
inheritance brought about by their predecease, or incapacity, or
disinheritance. In all of these cases, the basis like that of other rights
of succession which take effect by operation of law, is the presumed
will of the decedent. As far as the decedent is concerned, the son or
daughter who is unworthy or who has been disinherited is dead. As
a penalty, the law or the paternal will, therefore, deprives such child
of his inheritance. This penalty, however, must not be vested upon
the grandchildren. On the contrary, the decedent must be drawn to
them more for the misfortune of having such an unworthy father or
mother.7
Art. 972. The right of representation takes place in the direct
descending line, but never in the ascending.
In the collateral line, it takes place only in favor of the children
of brothers or sisters, whether they be of the full or half blood.8
Representation in Direct Descending Line. — According
to the above article, the right of representation takes place in the
direct descending line, but never in the ascending line. This is

7
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 75-76. For the effect of disinheritance incapacity upon
the right of representation, see Arts. 923 and 1035, Civil Code.
8
Art. 925, Spanish Civil Code.

391

ART. 972

SUCCESSION

the general rule. As Laurent expresses it, affection, like a river,
descends; it does not ascend. This is the law of human nature which
the lawmaker must respect. This law is crystallized in the concept
of representation.9
Thus, the right of representation in the direct line takes place in
the following cases: first, when children concur with grandchildren,
the latter being the children of other children who died before the
decedent or who are incapable of succeeding the decedent; second,
when all the children are dead or are incapable of succeeding the
decedent and grandchildren concur with great-grandchildren, the
latter being the children of other grandchildren who died before
the decedent or are incapable of succeeding the decedent; and
third, when all children are dead or are incapable of succeeding the
decedent leaving children or descendants of the same degree.10
Representation in Collateral Line. — As a rule, the right
of representation takes place only in the direct descending line.
However, there is an exceptional case where the right does not take
place in the direct descending line but in the collateral line in favor
of children of brothers and sisters of the decedent, whether they be
of the full blood or half blood. The right, however, is subject to the
following limitations:
(1) The right can be exercised only by nephews and nieces of
the decedent. This is clear from the provisions of Arts. 972 and 975
of the Code. Consequently, it cannot be exercised by grandnephews
and grandnieces.
(2) The right can be exercised by the nephews or nieces of
the decedent if they will concur with at least one brother or sister of
the decedent. This limitation is expressly provided for in Art. 975.
Otherwise, if they are the only survivors, they shall inherit in their
own right and not by right of representation.11
Problem No. 1 — X died intestate survived by the following: A and B, nephews through a predeceased sister, Y and M
and N, grandnieces through a predeceased nephew, Z, M and N
claim the right to inherit one-third of the estate of X by repre-

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 87.
Ibid.
11
Pavia vs. Iturralde, 5 Phil. 176; Sarita vs. Candia, 23 Phil. 443.
9

10

392

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ART. 972

sentation of their parent, Z. Is their claim legally tenable? Reasons. (1971 Bar Problem)
Answer — The claim of M and N to inherit one-third of
the estate of X by representation of their parent, Z, is untenable. It must be observed that they are merely grandnieces of
the decedent, X. Under the Civil Code, representation in the collateral line can only take place in favor of nephews and nieces
(Art. 972), never in favor of grandnephews and grandnieces. As
a matter of fact, nephews and nieces can inherit from the decedent by right of representation only when they survive or concur
with at least one uncle or aunt, who is a brother or sister of said
decedent (Art. 975). Even this condition is not present in the
instant case. It is clear from the facts that the only survivors are
nephews (A and B) and grandnieces (M and N). Therefore, since
the only possible way by which such survivors can inherit would
be in their own right, the rule of proximity is applicable. Only A
and B can inherit from X.
Problem No. 2 — A and B are C’s brothers. D is the child
of A, and E of B, while F is the child of D. C died without leaving a will. A, B and D are likewise dead. May F inherit from C?
Explain. (1973 Bar Problem)
Answer — F cannot inherit from C. True, he is a fourth
degree relative by blood of the decedent, but he is excluded by
E, a nephew, and therefore, a third degree relative by blood of
said decedent.
Actually, the right of representation does not take place
in the instant case. In the collateral line, representation takes
place only in favor of the children of brothers and sisters, whether they be of the full or half blood (Art. 972), and only if they
survive with at least one uncle or aunt who is a brother or sister
of the decedent (Art. 975). Both conditions are not present here.
F is a grandnephew of the decedent C, not a nephew. He concurs with a nephew of the decedent, not with a brother or sister.
Therefore, the only way by which he can inherit would be in his
own right. Unfortunately for him, under the principle of proximity recognized in Art. 962 of the Civil Code, he is excluded by E.

(3) The right of representation in the collateral line is possible
only in intestate succession; in other words, it cannot possibly
take place in testamentary succession. Although the law does not
include this limitation in this subsection of the Civil Code, yet it
can easily be inferred from the provisions of Art. 856. According to
393

ARTS. 973-974

SUCCESSION

this article, a voluntary heir cannot transmit any right to his own
heirs in case he dies before the testator; in other words, (and this
can also be applied to incapacity), if a voluntary heir dies before the
testator, survived by children or descendants of his own, he cannot
be represented in the succession by such children or descendants.
From these principles which are enunciated in Art. 856 of the
Code, two conclusions can be inferred. In the first place, the right
of representation in testamentary succession is possible only when
the person represented is a compulsory heir in the direct descending
line; in the second place, the right of representation in testamentary
succession pertains only to the legitime, which is rendered vacant by
either predecease, incapacity or disinheritance, and never to the free
portion. Consequently, since brothers and sisters of the testator are
voluntary heirs and not compulsory heirs, if some or all of them are
instituted as heirs in the testator’s will, and one of them dies before
the testator or is incapable of succeeding the testator, such brother or
sister cannot transmit any right at all to his own heirs. The portion
of the inheritance which is rendered vacant shall, therefore, pass to
his co-heirs by right of accretion.12
Art. 973. In order that representation may take place, it is
necessary that the representative himself be capable of succeeding
the decedent.13
Capacity of Representative. — The above rule is a logical
consequence of the principle enunciated in Art. 971 of the Code to
the effect that the representative succeeds the decedent and not
the person represented. Consequently, even if the representative is
incapable of succeeding the person represented, he can still inherit
by right of representation, provided that he is capable of succeeding
the decedent.
Art. 974. Whenever there is succession by representation, the
division of the estate shall be made per stirpes, in such manner that
the representatives shall not inherit more than what the person
they represent would inherit, if he were living or could inherit.14

Arts. 1015, et seq., Civil Code.
New provision.
14
Art. 926, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
12
13

394

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ART. 974

Effect Upon Division of Estate. — The most fundamental
effect of succession by representation is that the representative is, by
legal fiction, raised to the place and degree of the person represented.
As a consequence, such representative is subrogated to all of the
rights to which the person represented would have been entitled by
operation of law if he were living or if he could have inherited. Thus,
in testamentary succession, the representative acquires all of the
rights which the person represented had with respect to his legitime,
while in legal or intestate succession he acquires all of the rights
which the person represented had with respect to his entire legal
portion. In both cases, according to Art. 974, the division of the estate
shall be made per stirpes, in such manner that the representative or
representatives shall not inherit more than what the person they
represent would inherit, if he were living or could inherit.
It must be observed that the essential difference between representation in testamentary succession and representation in intestate succession is that in the former, the right which is acquired by
the representatives is the right to the legitime of the compulsory
heir who dies before the testator, or who is unworthy to succeed, or
who is disinherited, while in the latter, the right which is acquired
is the right to the legal portion which is rendered vacant by reason
of the fact that the legal heir dies before the decedent or is unworthy
to succeed. In other words, in testamentary succession, the right of
representation refers to the legitime, while in intestate succession,
the right refers to the whole share with would have been acquired
by the person represented.
The above principles may be illustrated by the following
problems:
Problem No. 1 — X executed a will instituting his three legitimate children, A, B and C, as sole heirs — A to inherit 1/2 of
the free portions, B, 1/4 of the free portion, and C, 1/ 4 of the free
portion. B and C, however, were both killed in an accident before
the death of the testator. The latter died a few days later without changing his will. B is survived by his legitimate children,
D, E, F, and G, while C is survived by his legitimate children,
H and I. The net remainder of the estate is P48,000. How shall
such estate be divided among the heirs?
Answer — If the instituted heirs, A, B and C, were all living at the time of the death of X and they could all inherit, the
division of the inheritance would have been as follows:

395

ART. 974

SUCCESSION

A

....................... P 8,000, as compulsory heir
....................... 12,000, as voluntary heir

B

.......................

8,000, as compulsory heir
6,000, as voluntary heir

C

.......................

8,000, as compulsory heir
6,000, as voluntary heir

However, the shares which would have passed to B and C are
now vacant. What will happen to these vacant shares? Under
the law, D, E, F, and G shall now represent their father, B, but
only with respect to the legitime of P8,000. The P6,000 which
would have passed to B as a voluntary heir shall accrue to A
(Arts. 1015, 1016). H and I shall also represent their father,
C, but only with respect to the legitime of P8,000. The P6,000
which would have passed to C as a voluntary heir shall also accrue to A (Arts. 1015, 1016). Consequently, the division shall be
as follows:
A

D
E
G
F
H
I

.................... P 8,000, as compulsory heir
12,000, as voluntary heir
12,000, by right of accretion
....................
2,000, by right of representation
....................
2,000, by right of representation
....................
2,000, by right of representation
....................
2,000, by right of representation
....................
4,000, by right of representation
....................
4,000, by right of representation
P48,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem, X
died without a will, how shall the division be made?
Answer — The division of the estate shall be as follows:
A

......................

16,000, in his own right

D

.......................

4,000, by right of representation

E

.......................

4,000, by right of representation

F

.......................

4,000, by right of representation

G

.......................

4,000, by right of representation

H

.......................

8,000, by right of representation

I

.......................

8,000, by right of representation
P 48,000

396

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ART. 974

Problem No. 3 — X died testate in 1980. In his will, he
instituted as heirs his four legitimate children A, B, C, and D
to inherit in equal shares. B and C, however, died before X. B
is survived by two legitimate children, E and F, while C is also
survived by two legitimate children, G and H. D, on the other
hand, survived, but repudiated his inheritance. He has two legitimate children of his own, I and J. The net value of the estate
is P120,000. How shall this estate be distributed?
Answer — Had all the instituted heirs survived the testator and accepted their inheritance, the distribution would have
been as follows:
A

...................... P15,000, as compulsory heir

B

....................... P15,000, as compulsory heir

P15,000, as voluntary heir
P15,000, as voluntary heir
C

....................... P15,000, as compulsory heir
P15,000, as voluntary heir

D

....................... P15,000, as compulsory heir
P15,000, as voluntary heir

B and C, however, died before the testator and D repudiated his
inheritance. There are, therefore, three vacant portions in the
inheritance. These vacant portions shall now be distributed as
follows:
(1) Share of B —The legitime of P15,000 to which B
would have been entitled shall be given to his children, E and
F, by right of representation, while the free portion of P15,000
to which he would have been entitled as voluntary heir shall be
given to his co-heir. A, by right of accretion. (See Arts. 856, 972,
1015, 1016, Civil Code.)
(2) Share of C — The legitime of P15,000 to which C
would have been entitled shall be given to his children, G and
H, by right of representation, while the free portion of P15,000
to which he would have been entitled as voluntary heir shall be
given to his co-heir, A, by right of accretion. (Ibid.).
(3) Share of D — Since D has repudiated his inheritance, the effect of such repudiation is as follows: The legitime
of P15,000 to which he would have been entitled cannot be given
to his children, I and J, because of the principle that an heir
who repudiates his inheritance cannot be represented (Art. 977,

397

ART. 974

SUCCESSION

Civil Code). Consequently, it shall pass to the legal heirs of X by
right of intestate succession (Art. 1021, Civil Code). These legal
heirs are A, the children of B, and the children of C. The division
shall be as follows: A shall be entitled to 1/3, or P5,000; E and F
shall also be entitled to 1/3, or P5,000, which they shall divide
equally; and C and H shall also be entitled to 1/3, or P5,000,
which they shall also divide equally. As far as the free portion
of P15,000 to which D would have been entitled as a voluntary
heir is concerned, the entire portion shall be given to his co-heir,
A, by right of accretion (Arts. 1015, 1016, Civil Code).
Therefore, the distribution shall be as follows:
A .............. P15,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir
5,000, as legal heir to D’s legitime
15,000, by right of accretion from B’s share
15,000, by right of accretion from C’s share
15,000, by right of accretion from D’s share
E ..............

7,500, by right of representation
2,500, as legal heir to D’s legitime

F .............

7,500, by right of representation
2,500, as legal heir to D’s legitime

G ..............

7,500, by right of representation
2,500, as legal heir to D’s legitime

H ..............

7,500, by right of representation
2,500, as legal heir to D’s legitime

I

.............

None

J

.............

None

Estate

P120,000

Problem No. 4 — Suppose that X in the above problem,
died intestate, how shall the distribution be made?
Answer — Had all of the children survived and accepted
their inheritance, the distribution would have been as follows:
A

.......................

P30,000

B

.......................

P30,000

C

.......................

P30,000

D

.......................

P30,000

398

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Right of Representation

ART. 975-976

B and C, however, predeceased X and D repudiated his inheritance thus creating three vacant portions in the inheritance.
These vacant portions shall now be distributed as follows:
(1) Share of B — The entire P30,000 to which B would
have been entitled shall be given to his children, E and F, by
right of representation.
(2) Share of C — The entire P30,000 to which C would
have been entitled shall be given to his children, G and H, by
right of representation.
(3) Share of D — Since D repudiated his inheritance, his
children, I and J, cannot represent him (Art. 977, Civil Code).
Consequently, the entire P30,000 which he has repudiated shall
now accrue to his co-heirs (Art. 1018, Civil Code). A is the only
co-heir. It is obvious that E, F, G and H are not co-heirs; they are
merely representatives of B and C.
Therefore, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

....................... P30,000, as legal heir
30,000, by right of accretion

E

.......................

15,000, by right of representation

F

.......................

15,000, by right of representation

G

.......................

15,000, by right of representation

H

.......................

15,000, by right of representation

Estate ..................... P120,000

Art. 975. When children of one or more brothers or sisters
of the deceased survive, they shall inherit from the latter by
representation, if they survive with their uncles or aunts. But if
they alone survive, they shall inherit in equal portion.15
Art. 976. A person may represent him whose inheritance he
has renounced.16
Repudiation by Representative. — Thus, under the above
article, if a child renounces or repudiates his inheritance when his
father died, he may still represent the latter, when subsequently,
15
16

Art. 927, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 928, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

399

ART. 977

SUCCESSION

his grandfather dies. Let us make the example more concrete. In
1960, B died, survived by his son, X, X repudiated his inheritance.
Subsequently in 1970, A, father of B, died, survived by his son, C,
and his grandson, X. May X represent his father, B, with respect to
the inheritance coming from A? Under Art. 976, he may.
The provision of Art. 976 is a necessary consequence of the rule
stated in Art. 971. If the Code had not provided for such a rule,
the principle involved would still apply by necessary implication.
It must be remembered that the representative does not inherit
from the person represented; he inherits from the decedent or the
person from whom the person represented would have inherited if
he were living or had the capacity to succeed. Hence, his capacity
or incapacity to inherit from the person represented is immaterial;
the same is true with regard to his acceptance or repudiation of the
inheritance coming from the person he is supposed to represent.
What is material, therefore, is his capacity to inherit from the
decedent and his acceptance of the inheritance coming from such
decedent.
The situation is different if it is the person is supposed to be
represented who repudiates the inheritance. In such case, Art. 977
applied. There can be no right of representation.
Art. 977. Heirs who repudiate their share may not be represented.17
Effect of Repudiation by Heir. — When an heir called
either by will or by law to succeed repudiates his inheritance, the
circumstances are different from that of predecease, incapacity or
disinheritance. He deprives, by his own positive act, his children or
descendants of the right of representation. This is logical because
a person cannot transmit a right which he does not have. The
basis of the exercise of the right of representation by the children
or descendants of the person who dies before the decedent, or is
unworthy to succeed, or is disinherited is the fact that the person
represented is dead or, at least, presumed to be dead as far as the
decedent is concerned. This is not possible in case of renunciation or

17

Art. 929, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

400

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Order of Intestate Succession

ART. 977

repudiation, because, in this case, by renouncing the right which the
law has accorded to him, he gives a positive proof of his existence.18
Consequently, according to the law, he cannot be represented. Hence,
in conformity with the presumed will of the decedent, the share
which is rendered vacant as a consequence of such repudiation shall
pass to the other heirs by right of intestate succession or by right of
accretion depending upon the circumstances of each case.19

Section 2. — Order of Intestate
Succession
Order of Intestate Succession in General. — In enumerating the order of succession to the estate of the decedent, we must
distinguish between the normal or regular order of intestate succession and the abnormal or irregular one. The first refers to the order
of succession if the decedent is a legitimate person, while the second
refers to the order of succession if the decedent is an illegitimate
person.
The regular order of intestate succession is as follows:
(1)

Legitimate children or descendants;

(2)

Legitimate parents of ascendants;

(3)

Illegitimate children or descendants;

(4)

Surviving spouse;

(5)

Brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces;

(6)

Other collateral relatives within the fifth degree; and

(7)

The State.

The irregular order of intestate succession is as follows:

18
19

(1)

Legitimate children or descendants;

(2)

Illegitimate children or descendants;

(3)

Illegitimate parents;

(4)

Surviving spouse;

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 100-101.
See Art. 1015, et seq., Civil Code.

401

ART. 977

SUCCESSION

(5)

Brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces; and

(6)

The State.

The provisions of the Civil Code which relate to the order of
intestate succession (Arts. 978 to 1014) enumerate with meticulous
exactitude the intestate heirs of a decedent, with the State as the
final intestate heir. The conspicuous absence of a provision which
makes a daughter-in-law an intestate heir of the deceased all the
more confirms this observation. If the legislature intended to make
the surviving spouse an intestate heir of the parent-in-law, it would
have so provided in the code.1
If the decedent is an adopted person, the above orders of intestate
succession are still followed, but with a difference in connection with
parents or ascendants. According to the Child and Youth Welfare
Code, “the adopter shall not be a legal heir of the adopted person,
whose parents by nature shall inherit from him, except that if the
latter are both dead, the adopting parent or parents take the place
of the natural parents in the line of succession, whether testate or
intestate” (Art. 39, No. 4, P.D. No. 603). Thus, if the adopted person
is legitimate and his natural parents are both dead, the adopter shall
then occupy the second position in the line or order of succession
by substitution; if he is illegitimate and his natural parents are
both dead, the adopter shall then occupy the third position in the
line or order of succession by substitution. (Please observe that the
foregoing was repealed by Art. 190 of the Family Code where the
new rule is that when parents, legitimate or illegitimate, or the
legitimate ascendants of the adopted concur with the adopters, they
shall divide the entire estate, one-half to be inherited by the parents
or ascendants and the other half by the adopters.)
Can the widow whose husband predeceased his mother inherit
from the latter (her mother-in-law)?
There is no provision in the Civil Code which states that a
widow (surviving spouse) is an intestate heir of her mother-in-law.
The entire Code is devoid of any provision which entitles her to
inherit from her mother-in-law either by her own right or by the
right of representation.2

1
2

Rosales vs. Rosalaes, supra.
Rosales vs. Rosalaes, supra.

402

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Descending Direct Line

ART. 977

Nature and Basis. — Under the Spanish Code, the order of
intestate succession is based primarily on the principle of exclusion.
Hence, the first in the order of succession excludes the second and all
of the others, the second excludes the third and all of the others, the
third excludes the fourth and all of the others, and so on. Of course,
this rule must be applied in such a way that the legitime of those
legal or intestate heirs who are also primary compulsory heirs at the
same time shall not be impaired. In other words, even if a legal or
intestate heir is excluded in conformity with the order of intestate
succession, if it so happens that he is a primary compulsory heir at
the same time, he will still be entitled to his legitime. Hence, where
primary compulsory heirs are involved, the principle of exclusion is
applied only to the disposable portion of the hereditary estate. In the
other cases, the principle is applied literally.
Under our Code, although the order of intestate succession
found in the Spanish Code is preserved, the philosophy underlying
such order has been modified to a certain extent. Probably, it would
be more accurate to say that it is based both on the principle of
exclusion and the principle of concurrence. This can be inferred or
deduced from an examination of the provisions of Art. 978 to 1014
of the Code. Evidently, the principle of exclusion is still applied
literally to the case of parents or ascendants, collateral relatives,
and the State. Such heirs are totally excluded by those who precede
them in the order of intestate succession. But in the case of the
others, the principle of concurrence is applied. We have, therefore,
preserved the system of compulsory succession found in the Spanish
Code, but with certain changes on modifications. The position of
illegitimate children and the surviving spouse, who are not only
legal or intestate heir but are also primary compulsory heirs, has
been improved. Under the principle of concurrence as applied in
the new Code, even where they concur with legitimate children or
descendants or with legitimate parents or ascendants, they are not
only entitled to their legitime, but they are also given a share in the
disposable free portion.

403

ARTS. 978-979

SUCCESSION

Subsection 1. — Descending Direct Line
Art. 978. Succession pertains, in the first place, to the descending direct line.1
Art. 979. Legitimate children and their descendants succeed
the parents and other ascendants, without distinction as to sex or
age, and even if they should come from different marriages.
An adopted child succeeds to the property of the adopting
parents in the same manner as a legitimate child.2
Legitimate Children or Descendants. — The first in the
order of intestate succession are legitimate children or descendants.
This class includes not only legitimate children or descendants
proper, but also legitimated children or descendants and adopted
children. Consequently, what had been stated under Art. 887 of the
Code regarding legitimate children or descendants as compulsory
heirs are also applicable here.
It must be noted, however, that although Art. 978 declares that
succession pertains, in the first place, to those in the descending
direct line, this rule must be understood to be without prejudice to
the concurrent rights of illegitimate children or descendants and the
surviving spouse.
It must also be noted that in the case of adopted children,
although the second paragraph of Art. 979 declares that an adopted
child succeeds to the property of the adopting parents in the same
manner as a legitimate child this rule is not absolute in character.3
According to Art. 343 of the Code (now Art. 39, No. 4, P.D. No. 603),
if the adopter is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants and
by an adopted person, the latter shall not have more successional
rights than an acknowledged natural child. Furthermore, an adopted
child cannot inherit from the legitimate parents or ascendants of
the adopter either by right of representation or in his own right.
Neither can his legitimate children or descendants inherit by right
of representation or in their own right from the adopter. The reason
for this is that although adoption creates a relationship between
Art. 930, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 931, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
3
See Art. 39, P.D. No. 603, Child and Youth Welfare Code.
1
2

404

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Descending Direct Line

ARTS. 980-982

the adopter and the adopted child which is similar to that which
results from legitimate paternity and filiation,4 it does not create
any relationship between the adopted child and the legitimate
relatives of the adopter or between the adopter and the legitimate
relatives of the adopted child. Besides, the provisions of Arts. 971
and 973 of the Code preclude the right of children or descendants of
the adopted child from inheriting from the adopting parent by right
of representation.
Art. 980. The children of the deceased shall always inherit
from him in their own right, dividing the inheritance in equal
shares.5
Art. 981. Should children of the deceased and descendants
of other children who are dead, survive, the former shall inherit in
their own right, and the latter by right of representation.6
Art. 982. The grandchildren and other descendants shall
inherit by right of representation, and if any one of them should
have died, leaving several heirs, the portion pertaining to him shall
be divided among the latter in equal portions.7
Rules of Division. — The above articles enunciate the different
rules which must be followed in the division of the inheritance if
the decedent is survived by legitimate children or descendants. The
rules may be restated as follows:
(1) If all of the survivors are legitimate children, such children shall inherit in their own right. Consequently, the inheritance
shall be divided among them per capita or in equal shares.
(2) If some of the survivors are legitimate children and the
others are legitimate descendants of other legitimate children who
died before (or who are incapable of succeeding) the decedent, the
former shall inherit in their own right and the latter shall inherit
by right of representation. Consequently, the inheritance shall be
divided among them per stirpes. Hence, if the decedent, for instance,

Prasnick vs. Rep. of the Phil., 52 Off. Gaz. 3030.
Art. 932, Spanish Civil Code.
6
Art. 934, Spanish Civil Code.
7
Art. 933, Spanish Civil Code.
4
5

405

ART. 983

SUCCESSION

is survived by two legitimate children, A and B, and by two legitimate
grandchildren, D and E, children of C, another legitimate child who
is already dead or who is incapable of succeeding, the inheritance
shall be divided in such a way that A and B shall be entitled to
1/3 each in their own right, while D and E shall be entitled to the
remaining 1/3 by right of representation which they shall divide in
equal shares.
(3) If all of the survivors are legitimate grandchildren, such
grandchildren shall inherit by right of representation. Similarly,
if some of the survivors are legitimate grandchildren and the
others are legitimate children or descendants of other legitimate
grandchildren who died before or who are incapable of succeeding
the decedent, such grandchildren and descendants shall inherit
by right of representation. In both cases, the inheritance shall be
divided among them per stirpes. Hence, if the only survivors, for
instance, are A and B, children of a deceased son, C and D, children
of another deceased son, and E, child of a deceased daughter, since
all of them are grandchildren of the decedent, and, as a consequence,
shall inherit by right of representation, the inheritance must be
divided among them in such a way that 1/3 shall be given to A and
B, another 1/3, to B and C, and the remaining 1/3, to E.
It must be observed, however, that grandchildren do not
always inherit by right of representation. There is one exceptional
case where they are called to inherit in their own right. If all of
the children should repudiate their inheritance, according to Art.
969 of the Code, those of the following degree shall inherit in their
own right. Hence, if there are grandchildren surviving, they shall
be called to the inheritance because they are next in degree and
not because of representation. This is, of course, in conformity with
the principle that heirs who repudiate their inheritance cannot be
represented.8
Art. 983. If illegitimate children survive with legitimate children, the shares of the former shall be in the proportions prescribed by Article 895.9

8
9

Art. 977, Civil Code.
New provision.

406

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Descending Direct Line

ART. 983

Legitimate and illegitimate Children. — If illegitimate
children should survive with legitimate children, according to the
above article, the inheritance shall be divided among them in accordance with the proportion prescribed in Art. 895 of the Code, as
repealed by the second sentence of Art. 176 of the Family Code. The
proportion referred to is 10:5. In other words, the share of an acknowledged natural child by legal fiction or an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural is 1/2 of that of a legitimate child.
It must be noted, however, that in distributing the estate
in accordance with the above proportions, one very fundamental
rule must be observed. The legitime of compulsory heir must
never be impaired. Under our system of compulsory succession,
whether testamentary or intestate, it is axiomatic that the legitime
of compulsory heirs must be preserved. As a rule, it cannot
be impaired by the will of the decedent whether expressed or
presumed. Consequently, if the decedent dies intestate, survived
only by legitimate and illegitimate children, the distribution of the
inheritance in accordance with the proportions prescribed in Art.
895 as repealed by the second sentence of Art. 176 of the Family
Code must be made in such a way that the legitime of the survivors
will not be impaired. This limitation is necessary especially if the
decedent is survived by only one or two legitimate children and by
many illegitimate children. In such a case, if the distribution of the
inheritance is made directly in accordance with the proportion of
10:5 as prescribed in Art. 176 of the Family Code, evidently, there
would be an impairment of the legitime of the legitimate child or
children. Thus, if the decedent is survived by only one legitimate
child and eight acknowledged natural children the proportion of
distribution, if made directly, would be 2:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1. That means
that the legitimate child whose legitime is supposed to be 1/2 of
the entire estate would be entitled to only 2/10 or 1/5 of the entire
estate, while each of the acknowledged natural children would be
entitled to 1/10. Certainly, such a possibility, or situation cannot
be countenanced by our law. Therefore, in the distribution of the
inheritance in accordance with the proportions referred to, it is
absolutely necessary that the legitime of the survivors must first be
satisfied.

407

ART. 983

SUCCESSION

The method of distribution may be illustrated by the following
problems:
Problem No. 1 — X died intestate, survived by one legitimate child, A, two acknowledged natural children, B and C, and
two acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural,
D and E. The estate is P72,000. How shall the distribution be
made?
Answer — According to Art. 983 of the Code, the distribution shall be made in accordance with the proportions prescribed
in Art. 895. Since there is a concurrence of one legitimate child,
two acknowledged natural child, and two acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural in the succession, the proportion of 10:5:5:4:4 must, therefore, be observed. To apply this proportion directly would result in the impairment of the legitime of
A. Consequently, we must first satisfy the legitime of the survivors. A shall therefore, be entitled to 1/2 of P72,000, or P36,000.
Now, if we are going to give to B and C 1/2 each of P36,000, or
P18,000 each, nothing will remain for D and E. Hence, the remainder or balance of P36,000 shall be divided among B, C, D
and E in the proportion of 5:5:4:4. Therefore, B and C shall be
entitled to 5/18 each of P36,000, or P10,000 each, while D and E
shall be entitled to .4/18 each of P36,000, or P8,000 each. Consequently, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

.......................

P36,000

B

.......................

10,000

C

.......................

10,000

D

.......................

8,000

E

.......................

8,000
P72,000

Under the new provisions of the Family Code, more particularly the second sentence of Art. 176, both acknowledged
natural children and acknowledged illegitimate children who
are not natural are simply classified as illegitimate children
and the legitime of such illegitimate children consists of onehalf of the legitime of the legitimate child. Thus, the proportion
of 10:5:5:5:5 must, therefore be observed. The distribution of the
estate shall be as follows:
A

.......................

P36,000

B

.......................

9,000

408

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Descending Direct Line

C

.......................

9,000

D

.......................

9,000

E

.......................

9,000

ART. 983

P72,000
Problem No. 2 — X died intestate, survived by two legitimate children, A and B, and one acknowledged natural child, C.
The estate is P80,000. How shall the distribution be made?
Answer — Two different theories have been advanced in
order to solve the above problem. The first theory is based upon
the principle of exclusion, while the second is based upon the
principle of concurrence. Hence, for the sake of convenience, we
shall call the first the exclusion theory and the second the concurrence theory.
Under both theories, the legitime of the survivors must
be satisfied first. Hence, since A and B are legitimate children
of the decedent, they shall be entitled to 1/2 of P80,000. Consequently, each of them shall be given P20,000. On the other
other hand, since C is an acknowledged natural child, he shall
be entitled to 1/2 of P20,000, or P10,000. There is, therefore, a
balance of P30,000. How shall this balance be divided? It is here
where there is a conflict between the two theories.
According to the exclusion theory, the balance of P30,000
shall be given to A and B, in conformity with the order of intestate succession. Consequently, under this theory, the share of
each survivors shall be as follows:
A

....................... P 35,000

B

.......................

P35,000

C

.......................

P10,000
P80,000

According to the concurrence theory,10 the balance of
P30,000 shall be divided among the three survivors in the proportion of 2:2:1, in conformity with the provision of Art. 983
Proponents of the concurrence theory normally solve this problem directly by
using the proportion of 2 is to 2 is to 1 (2:1:1) since it is obvious that there can be
no possible impairment of the legitime of the legitimate children. Thus, A shall be
entitled to 2/5 of P80,000, or P32,000; B to 2/5 of P80,000, or P32,000; and C to 1/5 of
P80,000, or P16,000. See discussion under Art. 999 (infra.).
10

409

ART. 984

SUCCESSION

of the Code. A and B shall, therefore, be entitled to 2/5 each
of P30,000, or P12,000 each, while C shall be entitled to 1/5 of
P30,000, to P6,000. Consequently, under this theory, the share
of each survivor shall be as follows:
A

.......................

P32,000

B

.......................

32,000

C

.......................

16,000
P80,000

It is submitted that the solution according to the concurrence theory is the correct solution. The provision of Art. 983
is explicit. Where there is a concurrence of legitimate and illegitimate children in the succession, the article declares that the
“proportions prescribed by Art. 895” shall be observed. Under
the exclusion theory, such proportions are not observed; as a
matter of fact, they are discarded altogether. Besides, we must
not lose sight of the philosophy underlying the application of
the order of intestate succession. As a result of the changes or
innovations in the New Civil Code, it would be more accurate
to say that the order of intestate succession is now based on the
principle of exclusion but subject to the principle of concurrence
whenever legitimate children, illegitimate children and the surviving spouse are the survivors. Consequently, the old method of
distribution whereby acknowledged natural children (and under
the present Code, acknowledged illegitimate children who are
not natural) would be entitled only to their legitime has no longer any place under our law.

Art. 984. In case of the death of an adopted child leaving no
children or descendants, his parents and relatives by consanguinity
and not by adoption, shall be his legal heirs.11
Rules governing the legal or intestate succession to the estate
of the adopted under Art. 190 of the Family Code, legal or intestate
succession to the estate of the adopted shall be governed by the
following rules:

11

New provision.

410

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Descending Direct Line

ART. 984

(1) Legitimate and illegitimate children and descendants and
the surviving spouse of the adopted shall inherit from the adopted in
accordance with the ordinary rules of legal or intestate succession;
(2) When parents, legitimate or illegitimate, or the legitimate
ascendants of the adopted concur with the adopters, they shall
divide the entire estate, one-half to be inherited by the parents or
ascendants and the other half by the adopters;
(3) When the surviving spouse or the illegitimate children of
the adopted concur with the adopters, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-half to be inherited by the spouse or
the illegitimate children of the adopted and the other half by the
adopters;
(4) When the adopters concur with the illegitimate children
and the surviving spouse of the adopted, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-third to be inherited by the illegitimate
children, one-third by the surviving spouse, and one-third by the
adopters;
(5) When only the adopters survive, they shall inherit the
entire estate; and
(6) When only collateral blood relatives of the adopted
survive, then the ordinary rules of legal or intestate succession shall
apply.
The foregoing rules repealed the rule stated in Art. 984 of
the Civil Code which states that in case of the death of an adopted
child, leaving no children or descendants, his parents and relatives
by consanguinity and not by adoption shall be his legal heirs. The
purpose of the repealed rule was to prevent adoption with an ulterior
motive because if the parents by adoption were the ones to inherit
from the adopted child, many would adopt rich children in order to
inherit from them, and not for sentimental purposes or reasons.12
The only exceptions then to the repealed rule where the adopter may
inherit by operation of law from the adopted should the latter die
intestate as found in Art. 39, No. 4, of the Child and Youth Welfare
Code (P.D. No. 603) are the following:

12

2 Capistrano, Civil Code, 1950 Ed. p. 467.

411

ART. 984

SUCCESSION

First: Where the adopted had received during his lifetime
any property from the adopter by gratuitous title. According
to the Welfare Code, such property shall revert to the adopter
should the adopted predecease the former without legitimate
issue unless the adopted had, during his lifetime, alienated
such property. This is, however, subject to the following limitations should the adopted leave no property other than that
received from the adopter:
(1) If the adopted is survived not only by the adopter
but also by illegitimate children or his or her spouse, such
illegitimate children collectively or spouse shall receive onefourth (1/ 4) of the property; and
(2) If he is survived not only by the adopter but also
by illegitimate children and his or her spouse, then the
illegitimate children collectively shall receive one-fourth (1/4)
of the property, while the spouse shall also receive one-fourth
(1/4).
In both cases, the balance of the property shall revert to
the adopter. In the case of illegitimate children, the proportion
provided for in Art. 895 of the Civil Code was always then
observed.
(Under the Family Code, however, the legal reversion
recognized in P.D. No. 603 was eliminated. Thus, Art. 190 of
the Family Code is now applicable.)
Second: Where the parents by nature of the adopted are
both dead. In such a case, the adopter shall take the place of
the natural parents in the line of succession, whether testate
or intestate. It must be observed that this is a very exceptional
example of succession by legal substitution which makes the
position of the adopter very attractive.
The above exceptions are illustrated by the following:
Problem No. 1 — A, an adopted person, died intestate, survived by the adopter, X, and his natural parents, F and M. His
entire estate consists of several properties valued at P400,000,
which he had acquired by gratuitous title during his lifetime
from X. Distribute the estate.

412

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Ascending Direct Line

ART. 984

Answer — Although F and M are the legal heirs of A, nevertheless, the above properties shall revert to the adopter, X.
This is so because of the legal reversion (reserva adoptiva) which
is expressly recognized in No. 4 of Art. 39 of Child and Youth
Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603). According to the law, any property
received gratuitously by the adopted from the adopter shall revert to the adopter should the former predecease the latter without legitimate issue unless the adopted has, during his lifetime,
alienated such property.
However, as above-stated, under the Family Code, the legal reversion recognized in P.D. No. 603 was eliminated. Art.
190(2) of the Family Code is now applicable. The entire estate,
although consisting of the properties acquired by A during his
lifetime from X by gratuitous title shall be divided as follows:
one-half to be inherited by F and M, and the other half, by X.
Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem, in
addition to the properties which A had acquired by gratuitous
title from X, A left other properties valued at P200,000 which he
had acquired through his own effort or industry, how shall you
distribute the estate?
Answer — The properties which A had acquired by gratuitous title from X shall all revert to the latter pursuant to No. 4
of Art. 39 of the Child and Youth Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603),
while the other properties which A had acquired through his
own effort or industry shall pass to F and M in accordance with
the normal rules of intestate succession. It must be observed
that under our law on adoption (Arts. 27-42, P.D. No. 603, which
have repealed Arts. 334-348, Civil Code), although the adopted
becomes a legal heir of the adopter, the adopter, as a rule, does
not become a legal heir of the adopted. In the instant case, the
legal heirs of A are his natural parents, F and M.
The foregoing law was repealed by the rules on legal or
intestate succession provided for by the Family Code. Hence,
pursuant to Art. 190(2) of the Family Code, all the properties,
although consisting of those acquired by gratuitous title from
X and those acquired through A’s effort or industry, shall be
divided as follows: one-half to be inherited by F and M, and the
other half by X. (Please note that the adopter gets a share of the
estate of the adopted although both parents by nature are still
alive).
Problem No. 3 — X adopted A, legitimate child of F and
M. Two years later, both F and M were killed in a vehicular
accident. A died recently, survived by X and his two paternal

413

ART. 985

SUCCESSION

grandparents, Y and Z. His net estate is P200,000 cash which
he had acquired through his own effort and industry. Distribute
the estate.
Answer — According to the last paragraph of No. 4 of Art.
39 of the Child and Youth Welfare Code, “the adopter shall not
be legal heir of the adopted person, whose parents by nature
shall inherit from him, except that if the latter are both dead, the
adopting parent or parents take the place of the natural parents
in the line of succession, whether testate or intestate.” Thus, the
entire estate shall pass to X. A’s paternal grandparents, Y and
Z, cannot inherit from him because they are excluded by X. This
is clear from the Child and Youth Welfare Code.
Art. 190 (2) of the Family Code repealed the foregoing law.
Pursuant to the new rules on legal or intestate succession to
the estate of the adopted, when the legitimate ascendants of the
adopted concur with the adopters, they shall divide the entire
estate, one-half to be inherited by the ascendants and the other
half by the adopters. Thus, distribution of the estate shall be as
follows:
(1) Y and Z shall be entitled to one-half of the estate, or
P100,000;
(2) X shall be entitled to one-half of the estate, or
P100,000.

Subsection 2. — Ascending Direct Line
Art. 985. In default of legitimate children and descendants of
the deceased, his parents and ascendants shall inherit from him,
to the exclusion of collateral relatives.1
Legitimate Parents or Ascendants. — The second in the
order of intestate succession are legitimate parents or ascendants. It
must be noted that they are called to the succession only in default
of legitimate children or descendants. They cannot, however, be
excluded by an adopted child.2 It must also be noted that, although
they can exclude collaterals, they cannot exclude illegitimate
children and the surviving spouse.

1
2

Art. 935, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 343, Civil Code.

414

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Illegitimate Children

ARTS. 986-988

Art. 986. The father and mother, if living, shall inherit in equal
shares.
Should only one of them survive, he or she shall succeed to
the entire estate of the child.3
Art. 987. In default of the father and mother, the ascendants
nearest in degree shall inherit.
Should there be more than one of equal degree belonging to
the same line they shall divide the inheritance per capita; should
they be of different lines but of equal degree, one-half shall go to
the paternal and the other half to the maternal ascendants. In each
line the division shall be made per capita.4
Rules of Division. — The above articles enunciate the different
rules which must be followed in the division of the inheritance if the
decedent is survived only by legitimate parents or ascendants.
In default of the father and mother, the rule of proximity shall
be applied; in other words, the ascendants nearest in degree shall
inherit.5 Should there be more than one equal degree belonging to
the same line they shall divide the inheritance per capita; should
they be of different lines but of equal degree, one-half shall pass to
the paternal and the other half to the maternal lines. In each line
the division had be per capita.6 Thus, if the decedent is survived only
by A, paternal grandfather, and B and C, maternal grandparents,
1/2 of the entire inheritance shall be given to A, while the other half
shall be given to B and C, which they shall divide per capita.

Subsection 3. — Illegitimate Children
Art. 988. In the absence of legitimate descendants or ascendants, the illegitimate children shall succeed to the entire estate
of the deceased.1

Art. 936, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 937, Spanish Civil Code.
5
Art. 987, Civil Code.
6
Ibid.
3
4

1

Art. 939, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

415

ARTS. 989-990

SUCCESSION

Illegitimate Children. — The third in the order of intestate
succession are illegitimate children. It must be noted that even in
the presence of legitimate children or descendants or legitimate
parents or ascendants or the surviving spouse, such children, under
the principle of concurrence, always participate in the division of the
inheritance. Like legitimate children or descendants and legitimate
parents or ascendants, they exclude collaterals. In this sense, they
are superior to the surviving spouse since the latter cannot exclude
brothers and sisters or nephews and nieces.
Art. 989. If together with illegitimate children, there should
survive descendants of another illegitimate child who is dead, the
former shall succeed in their own right and the latter by right of
representation.2
Art. 990. The hereditary rights granted by the two preceding
articles to illegitimate children shall be transmitted upon their death
to their descendants, who shall inherit by right of representation
from their deceased grandparent.3
Rules of Division. — It is clear that in default of legitimate
children or descendants, legitimate parents or ascendants, and the
surviving spouse, the entire inheritance shall pass to the illegitimate children. But suppose that some of the survivors are acknowledged natural children or natural children by legal fiction and the
others are acknowledged illegitimate children who are not natural,
how shall the inheritance be divided among them? The law is silent
with respect to this point. Under the Civil Code, however, it can be
inferred from its provision stated in Art. 983 that the proportions
prescribed in Art. 985 must still be preserved. In other words, the
share of an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural must
still be 4/5 of the share of an acknowledged natural child. Hence, if
the decedent, for instance, is survived by two acknowledged natural
children, A and B, and by two acknowledged illegitimate children
who are not natural, C and D, and the estate is P36,000, the division
must be made in the proportion of 5:5:4:4. Consequently, A and B
shall each be entitled to 5/18 of P36,000, or P10,000 each, while C
and D shall each be entitled to 4/18 of P36,000, or P8,000 each. The

2
3

Art. 940, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 941, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

416

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Illegitimate Children

ART. 991

5:5:4:4 proportion is no longer applicable under the Family Code.
Thus, the entire estate shall be divided among all the four children
equally, that is, A, B, C and D shall be entitled to P9,000.00 each.
Idem; Right of representation. — It is also clear from the
provisions of Arts. 989 and 990 that the descendants of illegitimate
children can inherit by right of representation. As a matter of fact,
the word “descendant” as used in these articles can refer to any kind
of descendant, whether legitimate or illegitimate. This is obvious
from the provisions of Arts. 998 and 999. In other words, it is immaterial whether the representative is legitimate or illegitimate; what
is material is that the person to be represented is illegitimate.
There must, therefore, be a distinction between the right of
representation when the person to be represented is a legitimate
person and the right of representation when the person to be represented is an illegitimate person. If the person to be represented
is legitimate, then it is indispensable that the representative must
also be legitimate. Otherwise, there would be a violation of the prohibition stated in Art. 992. However, if the person to be represented
is illegitimate, then it is immaterial whether the representative is
legitimate or illegitimate.
Art. 991. If legitimate ascendants are left, the illegitimate
children shall divide the inheritance with them, taking one-half of
the estate, whatever be the number of the ascendants or of the
illegitimate children.4
Illegitimate Children and Legitimate Ascendants. — If
legitimate parents or ascendants concur with illegitimate children,
the share of the former shall be 1/2, while the share of the latter
shall also be 1/2. The number of legitimate ascendants or illegitimate
children is immaterial.
The application of the rule stated in Art. 991 may be illustrated
by the following problems:
Problem No. 1— X died intestate, survived by his legitimate parents, A and B, his adopted child, C, and an acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural, D. His estate is
P36,000. How shall the distribution be made?
4

Art. 942, 841, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

417

ART. 991

SUCCESSION

Answer — According to No. 4 of Art. 39 of the Child and
Youth Welfare Code, if the adopted is survived by legitimate
parents or ascendants and by an adopted child, the latter shall
not have more successional rights than an acknowledged natural child. Hence, in this exceptional instance, the adopted child
shall be placed in the same category as an acknowledged natural child. Therefore, the provision of Art. 991 shall apply 1/2 of
P36,000, or P18,000, shall be given to A and B, which they shall
divide equally, while the other 1/2 shall be given to C and D,
which they shall divide in the proportion of 5:4. C shall be entitled to 5/9 of P18,000, or P10,000, while D shall be entitled to
4/9 of P18,000, or P8,000. Consequently, the distribution shall
be as follows:
A

.......................

P 9,000

B

.......................

9,000

C

.......................

10,000

D

.......................

8,000
P36,000

As abovestated, the 5:4 proportion is no longer applicable
under the Family Code. Hence the distribution shall be as follows:
A

.......................

P 9,000

B

.......................

9,000

C

.......................

9,000

D

.......................

9,000
P36,000

Problem No. 2 — Before his death, X executed a will bequeathing P10,000 to his friend, Y. There is no other disposition
found in the will. He is survived by his legitimate father, A,
and an acknowledged natural son, B. His estate is P40,000. How
shall be distribution be made?
Answer — It is evident that mixed succession shall take
place in this case. There is of course no question that the legacy
of P10,000 in favor of Y shall have to be satisfied. After all, it
is not inofficious. How shall the balance of P30,000 be divided? Shall the provision of Art. 991 now be applied literally so
that A shall be entitled to P15,000 and B shall also be entitled
to P15,000? It is evident that if this solution is followed, there

418

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Illegitimate Children

ART. 992

would be an impairment of the legitime of A. Under the law on
legitime, he is entitled to 1/2 of P40,000, or P20,000, by operation of law. Such legitime cannot be impaired whether by the
expressed or presumed will of the decedent. Consequently, the
distribution must be as follows:
A

.......................

P20,000

B

.......................

10,000

C

.......................

10,000
P40,000

Art. 992. An illegitimate child has no right to inherit ab
intestato from the legitimate children and relatives of his father
or mother; nor shall such children or relatives inherit in the same
manner from the illegitimate child.5
Separation of Legitimate and Illegitimate Families. —
The above article enunciates what is known as the “principle of absolute separation between the legitimate family and the illegitimate
family.” Under this principle, an impassable barrier exists separating or dividing the members of the legitimate family from those of
the illegitimate family. Although in reality an illegitimate child is
related by blood to the members of the legitimate family, the law
ignores it; hence, such illegitimate child cannot inherit by intestate
succession from the legitimate children or relatives of his father or
mother; neither can such legitimate children or relatives inherit in
the same manner from the illegitimate child. Thus, applying this
principle, it has been held that natural children cannot represent
their natural father or mother with regard to the inheritance coming from the legitimate ascendants of the latter.6 Neither can such
natural children inherit in their own right from their first cousins7
or from the other legitimate relatives of their natural parents.8
The reason for this impregnable barrier between the two
families is obviously the intervening antagonism and incompatibility
between members of the legitimate family and those of the
Arts. 943, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Llorente vs. Rodriguez, 10 Phil. 585; Oyao vs. Oyao, 94 Phil. 204.
7
Grey vs. Fabe, 68 Phil. 128.
8
Anuran vs. Aquino, 38 Phil. 29; Dir. of Lands vs. Aguas, 63 Phil. 279; Rodriguez
vs. Reyes, 51 Off. Gaz. 5188.
5
6

419

ART. 992

SUCCESSION

illegitimate family.9 Although an illegitimate child is related by
blood to the legitimate children or relatives of his father or mother,
in legal contemplation it does not exist. This attitude of the law is
based on the fact that the members of the legitimate family always
look down at the illegitimate child as the product of sin, a palpable
evidence of a blemish upon the honor of the family; the illegitimate
child, in turn, always look up with envy at the privileged position of
the members of the legitimate family.10
In the Spanish Civil Code of 1889, the right of representation
was admitted only within the legitimate family, so much so that Art.
943 of that Code prescribed that an illegitimate child cannot inherit
ab intestato from the legitimate children and relatives of his father
and mother.
The Civil Code of the Philippines apparently adhered to this
principle since it reproduced Art. 943 of the Spanish Civil Code in its
Art. 992, but with fine inconsistency in subsequent articles (990, 995
and 998). Our Code allows the hereditary portion of the illegitimate
child to pass to his own descendants, whether legitimate or
illegitimate. So that while Art. 992 prevents the illegitimate issue of
a legitimate child from representing him in the intestate succession
of the grandparent, the illegitimate issue of an illegitimate child can
now do so.
This difference being indefensible and unwarranted, in the
future revisions of the Civil Code, we shall have no choice and
decide either that the illegitimate issue enjoys in all cases the right
of representation, in which case Art. 992 must be suppressed; or
contrarywise, maintain said article and modify Arts. 995 and 998.
The first solution would be more in accord with an enlightened
attitude vis-a-vis illegitimate children.11
The principle may be illustrated by the following problem:
Problem — A died intestate survived by the following children:
(a)

B, legitimate child of a deceased legitimate son;

Cuartico vs. Cuartico, (CA), 52 Off. Gaz. 1489.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 139-140.
11
Diaz vs. Pamuti, G.R. No. L-66574, February 21, 1990.
9

10

420

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Illegitimate Children

ARTS. 993-994

(b)

C, illegitimate child of a deceased legitimate daugh-

(c)

D, legitimate child of a deceased illegitimate son;

(d)

E, illegitimate child of a deceased illegitimate daugh-

ter;
and
ter.
Can such grandchildren inherit from A by right of representation
Answer — B, D and E can inherit from A by right of representation, but C cannot. C is excluded from the succession
because under Art. 992 of the Civil Code, an illegitimate child
cannot inherit ab intestato from the legitimate relatives of his
natural parents.

Art. 993. If an illegitimate child should die without issue,
either legitimate or illegitimate, his father or mother shall succeed
to his entire estate; and if the children’s filiation is duly proved as
to both parents, who are both living, they shall inherit from him
share and share alike.12
Art. 994. In default of the father or mother, an illegitimate child
shall be succeeded by his or her surviving spouse, who shall be
entitled to the entire estate.
If the widow or widower should survive with brothers and
sisters, nephews and nieces, she or he shall inherit one-half of the
estate, and the latter the other half.13
Order of Intestacy in Illegitimate Filiation. — As stated
previously, if the decedent is an illegitimate person, the order of
intestate succession as far as his hereditary estate is concerned is as
follows: first, legitimate children or descendants; second, illegitimate
children; third, illegitimate parents; fourth, the surviving spouse
subject to the concurrent rights of brothers and sisters, nephews and
nieces; fifth, illegitimate brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces;
and sixth, the State. This irregular order of intestate succession is
not expressly stated in the Code. However, it can be inferred from the
provisions of the above articles as well as from other provisions.

12
13

Art. 944, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 995, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

421

ART. 994

SUCCESSION

Idem; Children or descendants. — Legitimate children or
descendants are, of course, the first in the order of succession to the
estate of the illegitimate child. Since the same rules stated in Arts.
979 to 984 are also applicable here, it is, therefore, unnecessary to
repeat them. It must, however, be observed that illegitimate children
occupy the second position in the order of intestate succession. This
is clear from the provision of Art. 993. Consequently, if the decedent
is survived by his illegitimate children and his illegitimate parents
or parents by nature, the latter are excluded by the former. The
same rule is also followed in testamentary succession with respect to
the legitime. This rule, however, must not be confused with the rule
stated in Art. 991. Art. 991 refers to a decedent who is legitimate,
while Art. 993 refers to one who is illegitimate.
Idem; Illegitimate parents. — In default of children or descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate, the illegitimate parents or parents by nature shall succeed to the entire estate of the
illegitimate child, without prejudice to the concurrent rights of the
surviving spouse. It must be noted, however, that this right is subject to proof of filiation. If the decedent’s filiation is duly proved as
to both parents, who are living, such parents shall inherit from him
share and share alike. Consequently, the provisions of the Civil Code
with respect to proof of paternity and filiation must also be considered. As a matter of fact, we submit that in order that such parents
will be able to inherit from their illegitimate child, it is essential
that the latter should have recognized them either voluntarily or by
means of a final judgment of a competent court (if this is possible).
If such a requirement is imposed upon the illegitimate child in order
that he will be able to inherit from the presumed or putative parent,
there is no reason why it should not be imposed also upon the parent
in order that he will be able to inherit from the child.
It must also be noted that the succession to the estate of the
illegitimate child does not go beyond the parents by nature. In other
words, other ascendants are not considered as legal or intestate
heirs of the illegitimate child. This is, of course, logical because,
otherwise, there would be a violation of the principle of absolute
separation between the legitimate family and the illegitimate family
as enunciated in Art. 992.
Idem; Surviving spouse. — In default of children or
descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate, and the illegitimate
422

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Illegitimate Children

ART. 994

parents, the surviving spouse shall succeed to the entire estate,
without prejudice to the concurrent rights of brothers and sisters,
nephews and nieces. It must be observed that Art. 993 specifically
provides that “if an illegitimate child should die without issue,
either legitimate or illegitimate, his father or mother shall succeed
to his entire estate.” Does this provision mean that if the decedent
who is illegitimate is survived only by his parents by nature and
his spouse, the former shall exclude the latter? We believe that this
interpretation could never have been intended by the law. In the first
place, the surviving spouse is a primary compulsory heir, and it is an
incontestable fact that a legal heir who is a primary compulsory heir
at the same time can never be excluded in intestate succession. In
the second place, it would indeed be absurd if the surviving spouse
can be excluded by illegitimate parents and yet he or she cannot
be excluded by legitimate parents or ascendants. And in the third
place, Art. 993 of the Code refers only to a case where the decedent
is survived by his illegitimate parents; consequently, its scope must
not be extended in such a way as to include the surviving spouse,
especially where such extension will result in an interpretation that
is evidently absurd.
It must be admitted, however, that the failure of the law to
provide for a situation where there is a concurrence between the
illegitimate parents and the surviving spouse in the succession
has created a void in our law which is difficult to solve. We cannot
directly apply the provision of Art. 997 because this provision refers
to a case where there is a concurrence in the succession of legitimate
parents or ascendants and the surviving spouse. Consequently, if the
decedent is survived by his illegitimate parents and his spouse, how
shall the inheritance be divided? Two theories have been advanced
in order to solve this problem. As in the case of the concurrence
of legitimate and illegitimate children under Art. 983, one theory
is based upon the principle of exclusion, while the other is based
upon the principle of concurrence. According to the first theory, the
illegitimate parents are entitled not only to their legitime of 1/4,
but also to the entire disposable portion of 1/2, while the surviving
spouse is entitled only to his or her legitime of 1/4. The basis of
this solution is, of course, the principle of exclusion. Since the law
is silent, the general order of intestate succession must be applied.
According to the second theory, the illegitimate parents are entitled
to 1/2 of the entire estate, while the surviving spouse is entitled to
423

ART. 994

SUCCESSION

the other 1/2. The basis of this solution is, of course, the principle of
concurrence. We believe that this solution is more acceptable than
the first. In the first place, in a case where there is a concurrence
of parents and the surviving spouse in the succession, it would
indeed be absurd if the law would give 3/4 of the entire inheritance
if the parents are illegitimate and only 1/2 if they are legitimate.
In the second place, where there is an omission in the law (and the
omission in this case is evidently unintentional) it would be more
in conformity with the rules of statutory construction to apply by
analogy the provisions of Arts. 997 and 903 rather than the general
order of succession especially since the general order of succession
with respect to the estate of an illegitimate child is not even specified
in the law itself. And in the third place, if the new provisions of the
Code regarding successional rights of illegitimates are designed to
improve the condition of such illegitimates, certainly, if those who
are responsible for the illegitimacy of the decedent are given 3/4 of
the inheritance and the one who decided to cast his or her lot with
such decedent is given only 1/4, exactly the opposite effect would be
attained. If the decedent is survived by his adulterous father and his
widow, undoubtedly, it would be unjust to give 3/4 of the inheritance
to the former and only 1/4 to the latter.
If the surviving spouse, however, concurs with brothers and
sisters, nephews and nieces, the law is definite with regard to the
division of the estate. One-half shall be given to the brothers and
sisters, nephews and nieces.14
Idem; Brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces. — In default of children or descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate,
parents, and the surviving spouse, the brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces, of the decedent shall succeed to the entire estate.
Although this is not specifically provided by the law, it can easily
be inferred from the provision of the second paragraph of Art. 994
of the Code. It would indeed be illogical if such brothers and sisters,
nephews and nieces, are allowed to inherit 1/2 of the entire estate if
they concur with the surviving spouse, but they are not allowed to
inherit anything if they are the only survivors.

14

Art. 994, Civil Code.

424

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 995

What is meant by the law when it speaks of brothers and sisters,
nephews and nieces, as legal or intestate heirs of an illegitimate
child? It must be noted that under Art. 992 of the Code, there is a
barrier dividing members of the illegitimate family from members
of the legitimate family. It is clear that by virtue of this barrier,
the legitimate brothers and sisters as well as the children, whether
legitimate or illegitimate, of such brothers and sisters, cannot
inherit from the illegitimate child. Consequently, when the law
speaks of “brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces,” as legal heirs
of an illegitimate child, it refers to illegitimate brothers and sisters
as well as to the children, whether legitimate or illegitimate, of such
brothers and sisters. As far as the distribution of the estate among
such brothers and sisters, or nephews and nieces, is concerned, the
rules specified in Arts. 1003 to 1008 must be applied.15 In default
of brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces, the law does not go
any farther. Other collaterals are not allowed to inherit by intestate
succession from the illegitimate child. Consequently, the entire
estate shall pass to the State.

Subsection 4. — Surviving Spouse
Art. 995. In the absence of legitimate descendants and ascendants, and illegitimate children and their descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate, the surviving spouse shall inherit the entire estate, without prejudice to the rights of brothers and sisters,
nephews and nieces, should there be any, under Article 1001.1
Surviving Spouse. — Under the present Civil Code, the surviving spouse is now raised to the fourth position in the order of
intestate succession. Furthermore, he or she is now entitled, not
only to the usufruct, but also to the ownership of his or her share in
the inheritance. In the words of the Code Commission, this measure
seems to be more acceptable and more in conformity with Filipino
family life.2

15
1
2

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 147-149.

Art. 946, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Report of the Code Commission, p. 115.

425

ART. 996

SUCCESSION

Art. 995 must not be construed to mean that the surviving
spouse shall inherit from the decedent only in default of legitimate
descendants and ascendants, and illegitimate children and their descendants. As already stated in previous articles, he or she shall always inherit. Under our system of compulsory succession, whether
in testamentary or in intestate succession, the universal rule is that
a legal heir who is also a primary compulsory heir at the same time
is always entitled to the legitime which the law has reserved for
him. Such legitime to which he or she is entitled in testamentary
succession is the “irreducible minimum” to which he or she is entitled in intestate succession. He or she might be given more, but,
certainly, he or she cannot be given less.
Art. 996. If a widow or widower and legitimate children or
descendants are left, the surviving spouse has in the succession
the same share as that of each of the children.3
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate Descendants. — If the
decedent is survived by the widow or widower and legitimate children or descendants, the share of the widow or widower shall be the
same as the share of each of the children. It is here where the principle of concurrence is applied in full force. The surviving spouse is
placed in the same category as each of the legitimate children. Consequently, if the decedent, for instance, is survived by his widow and
four legitimate children, and the inheritance is P60,000, the method
of distribution would be merely to divide the P60,000 by five. The
result would be P12,000 for each, of the survivors.
But if the decedent is survived by the widow or widower
and only one legitimate child, we come across, probably, the most
controversial question of succession. The controversial aspect can
be better illustrated by means of an example. Let us suppose that
A died without a will. He is survived by his widow, B, and by one
legitimate son, C. The estate is P60,000. How shall the distribution
be made? Four different solutions have been advanced to solve this
problem. They are as follows:
(1) C shall be entitled to 1/2 of P60,000, while B shall be
entitled to the other 1/2. Consequently, the share of C shall be

3

Art. 834, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

426

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 996

P30,000, while the share of B shall be the same. The basis of this
solution is, of course, the provision of Art. 996 itself.
(2) C shall be entitled to 3/4 of P60,000, while B shall be
entitled to only 1/4. Consequently, the share of C shall be P45,000,
while the share of B shall be P15,000. This solution is based upon
the principle of exclusion. Since Art. 996 speaks only of the widow
or widower surviving with legitimate children or descendants,
therefore, according to the exponents of this theory, the rule stated
in the article cannot be applied to a case where the widow or widower
survives with only one legitimate child. Hence, the general order of
intestate succession shall apply. This is effected by satisfying the
legitime of the two and then giving the disposable portion to the one
who is preferred in the order of succession.
(3) C shall be entitled to 2/3 of P60,000, while B shall be
entitled to 1/3. Consequently, the share of C shall be P40,000, while
the share of B shall be P20,000. This principle is based upon the
principle of concurrence. Like the second solution, it proceeds on the
proposition that the rule stated in Art. 996 cannot be applied to a case
where the widow or widower survives with only one legitimate child.
Therefore, according to the exponents of this theory, we must now
apply by analogy the proportion prescribed by the first paragraph of
Art. 892. This is effected by satisfying the legitime of the two and
then dividing the disposable portion of 1/4 in the proportion of 2:1.
(4) C shall be entitled to P37,500, while B shall be entitled
to P22,500. This division is obtained by satisfying the legitime of
the two and then dividing the disposable portion of 1/4, or P15,000,
equally between the two in accordance with the provision of Art.
996.
It is submitted that the first solution is more in conformity
with the rules of statutory construction. Art. 996 expressly declares
that the share of the widow or widower shall be the same as that of
each of the children. It is, of course, well known that the plural must
be understood to include the singular. Consequently, the provision
can be applied even to a case where the surviving spouse concurs
with only one legitimate child. It must, however, be admitted that
the third solution is the most equitable. Unfortunately, it lacks
statutory basis.

427

ART. 996

SUCCESSION

The above was written in 1959. Several years later, the Court
of Appeals, in a case similarly situated (Eraso, et al. vs. Hansen, 3
C.A. Rep. 1121), choose the first solution. According to the Court:
“We now come to the issue of determining the share of the
widower surviving with one legitimate child of the decedent. On
this matter, four theories have been suggested under Article 996
of the new Civil Code which provides:
‘If a widow or widower and legitimate children on descendants are left; the surviving spouse has in the succession the
same share as that of each of the children.’
(a) Professors Tolentino, Paras and Jurado believe that
the case is governed by Article 996 under the rule of statutory
construction that the plural can be understood to include the
singular (50 Am. Jur., p. 251, Sec. 256), despite the apparent
unfairness to the child, as acknowledged by Tolentino, who does
not get increase over his legitime, while the spouse receives
double his legitime which, moreover, has been converted from
usufruct to full ownership. Hence, “both will get equal intestate
shares, in accordance with the clear intent of the law to consider
the spouse as a child.” Under this view, the widower and the
child each gets 1/2 of the estate.
(b) Professors Padilla and Caguioa, like Justice J.B.L.
Reyes and Professor Puno, opine that the instant case is not
covered by Article 996, which governs only where the surviving
spouse concurs with legitimate children or descendants, that is
more than one. In other words, in intestate succession, “there is
no provision where there is only one legitimate child concurring
with the surviving spouse, as was done in testamentary succession where there is specific provision for legitime of the widow or
widower when concurring with one legitimate child” (Art. 892).
However, these authors are not unanimous on how the property shall be distributed. According to the first two, “compulsory
succession takes place in every succession. Consequently, you
must first apply the rule of compulsory succession and the law
provides that the legitime of the surviving spouse concurring
with one legitimate child is one fourth of the estate and since
the legitime of the legitimate child is one half, there, therefore,
remains a vacant portion of one fourth” which should go “to the
legitimate child because he is the first in the order of intestate
succession.” Thus, the widower gets one-fourth and the child,
three-fourths of the entire estate. This solution has been criticized as violative of the principle of concurrence and unfair to
the spouse who receives no increase in his legitime.

428

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 996

(c)
Justice Reyes and Professor Puno favor the following solution:
Legitimate child gets 1/2 (legitime) plus 1/8 (share in intestacy) equals 5/8 of estate, and the spouse, 1/4 (legitime) plus
1/8 (share in intestacy) equals 3/8 of estate. It is claimed that
this proportion complies with the spirit of Article 996 and also
provides equal increase over the respective legitimes. “In reality, intestate succession rules do not apply to legitimes which are
due to forced succession unless otherwise expressly provided.
Compare Arts. 996 and 999, with Arts. 997, 998 and 1000. The
last three use the term ‘of the inheritance’ or ‘of the estate’ (as a
whole); but the first two do not use the same referent (3 J.B.L.
Reyes and Puno, Outline of Philippine Civil Law, p. 159).
(d) The fourth theory would give the legitimate child
1/ 2 (legitime) plus 2/12 (share in intestacy) equals 2/3 of estate;
while the spouse gets 1/4 (legitime) plus 1/2 (share in intestacy)
equals 1/3 of entire estate. Objection to this theory is that the
proportion follows the ratio of the legitimes, but is not authorized by, and is violative of, the text of Article 996.
After a careful consideration of the different theories, we
are constrained to adopt the first theory as more acceptable and
with statutory basis. Its seeming unfairness to the child can
only be corrected by legislative amendment.”

The above doctrine was confirmed by the Supreme Court in
Santillan vs. Miranda (G.R. No. L-19281, June 3, 1965, 14 SCRA
563). In this case, the Court, speaking through Chief Justice Bengzon, declared:
“Petitioner rests his claim to 3/4 of his father’s estate on
Art. 892 of the New Civil Code which provides that: ‘If only the
legitimate child or descendant of the deceased survives, the widow or widower shall be entitled to one-fourth of the hereditary
estate.’ As she gets one-fourth, therefore, I get 3/ 4, says Claro.
Perfecta, on the other hand, cites Art. 996 which provides: ‘If a
widow or widower and legitimate children or descendants are
left, the surviving spouse has in the succession the same share
as that of each of the children.’
“Replying to Perfecta’s claim, Claro says the article is
unjust and ‘inequitable to the extent that it grants the widow
the same share as that of the children in intestate succession,
whereas in testate, she is given 1/4 and the only child 1/2.

429

ART. 996

SUCCESSION

“Oppositor Perfecta Miranda, on the other hand, contends
that Art. 996 should control, regardless of its alleged inequity,
being as it is, a provision on intestate succession involving a
surviving spouse and a legitimate child, inasmuch as in statutory construction, the plural word ‘children’ includes the singular ‘child’.
“Art. 892 of the New Civil Code falls under the chapter
on Testamentary Succession; whereas Art. 996 comes under
the chapter on Legal or Intestate Succession. Such being the
case, it is obvious that Claro cannot rely on Art. 892 to support
his claim to 3/4 of his father’s estate. Art. 892 merely fixes the
legitime of the surviving spouse and Art. 888 thereof, the legitime of children in testate succession. While it may indicate the
intent of the law with respect to the ideal shares that a child
and a spouse should get when they concur with each other, it
does not fix the amount of shares that such child and spouse are
entitled to when intestacy occurs. Because if the latter happens,
the pertinent provision on intestate succession shall apply, i.e.,
Art. 996.
“Some commentators of our New Civil Code seem to support Claro’s contention; at least, his objection to fifty-fifty sharing. But other confirm the half and half idea. x x x.
“The theory of those holding otherwise seems to be premised on these propositions: (a) Art. 996 speaks of ‘children,’
therefore, it does not apply when there is only one ‘child’; consequently Art. 892 (and Art. 888) should be applied thru a process of judicial construction and analogy; (b) Art. 996 is unjust
or unfair because, whereas in testate succession, the widow is
assigned one-fourth only (Art. 892), she would get one-half in
intestate.
“It is a maxim of statutory construction that words in plural include the singular (82 C.J.S. 675, 676). So Art. 996 could
or should be read (and so applied): ‘If the widow or widower and
a legitimate child are left, the surviving spouse has the same
share as that of the child.’ Indeed, if we refuse to apply the article in this case on the ground that ‘child’ is not included in
‘children,’ the consequences would be tremendous, because ‘children’ will not include ‘child’ in the following articles: Art. 887
and Art. 896. In fact, those who say ‘children’ in Art. 996 does
not include ‘child’ seem to be inconsistent when they argue from
the premise that “in testate succession the only legitimate child
gets one-half and the widow, one-fourth.’ The inconsistency is
clear, because the only legitimate child gets one-half under Art.

430

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 997

888, which speaks of ‘children’, not ‘child.’ So if ‘children’ in Art.
888 includes ‘child,’ the same meaning should be given to Art.
996.
“On the point (of unfairness of Art. 996), it is not correct
to assume that in testate succession the widow or widower ‘gets
only one-fourth.’ She or he may get one-half — if the testator so
wishes. So, the law virtually leaves it to each of the spouses to
decide (by testament), whether his or her only child shall get
more than his or her survivor.
“Our conclusion (equal shares) seems a logical inference
from the circumstance that whereas Art. 834 of the Spanish
Civil Code, from which Art. 996 was taken, contained two paragraphs governing two contingencies, the first, where the widow
or widower survives with legitimate children (general rule), and
the second, where the widow or widower survives with only one
child (exception), Art. 996 omitted to provide for the second situation, thereby indicating the legislator’s desire to promulgate
just one general rule to both situations.
“The resultant division may be unfair as some writers explain — and this we are not called upon to discuss — but it is the
clear mandate of the statute, which we are bound to enforce.”

Art. 997. When the widow or widower survives with legitimate
parents or ascendants, the surviving spouse shall be entitled to
one-half of the estate, and the legitimate parents or ascendants to
the other half.4
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate Ascendants. — Should
the surviving spouse survive with legitimate parents or ascendants,
the estate shall be divided in such a way that 1/2 shall be given to
the former, while the other 1/2 shall be given to the latter. It must
be remembered that in testamentary succession, the legitime of the
surviving spouse is only 1/ 4, while the legitime of legitimate parents
or ascendants is 1/ 2 of the estate.5 In intestate succession, the law
has allotted the disposable portion to the surviving spouse, thus
equalizing the shares of the two.

4
5

Art. 836, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 893, Civil Code.

431

ARTS. 998-999

SUCCESSION

Art. 998. If a widow or widower survives with illegitimate
children, such widow or widower shall be entitled to one-half of
the inheritance, and the illegitimate children or their descendants,
whether legitimate or illegitimate, to the other half.6
Surviving Spouse and Illegitimate Children. — Should
the surviving spouse survive with illegitimate children or their descendants, the estate shall also be divided in such a way that 1/2
shall be given to the former, while the other 1/2 shall be given to
the latter. Thus, if A dies intestate, survived by his widow, B, an
acknowledged natural child, C, and an acknowledged illegitimate
child who is not natural, D, and the estate is P36,000, B shall be
entitled to 1/2 of P36,000, or P18,000, while C and D shall also be entitled to the other 1/2 of P36,000, or P18,000. How shall this amount
of P18,000 be divided between the two illegitimate children? The
law is silent. However, since according to Art. 983, should legitimate
children or descendants survive with illegitimate children, the estate shall be divided among them in accordance with the proportions
prescribed in Art. 895, the same proportions must still be applied
here in order to maintain a uniformity of division where different
classes of illegitimate children should concur in the succession. Consequently, the amount of P18,000 shall be divided between C and
D in the proportion of 5:4. Therefore, C shall be entitled to 5/9 of
P18,000, or P10,000, while D shall be entitled to 4/9 of P18,000, or
P8,000. (This is no longer true under the provisions of the Family
Code. Considering that C and D are both classified as illegitimate
children, C and D shall be entitled to P9,000 each.)
Art. 999. When the widow or widower survives with legitimate
children or their descendants and illegitimate children or their descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate, such widow or widower shall be entitled to the same share as that of a legitimate
child.7
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate and Illegitimate Descendants. — If the decedent is survived by the widow or widower,
legitimate children or their descendants, and illegitimate children
or their descendants, whether legitimate or illegitimate, three re6
7

New provision.
New provision.

432

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 999

lated provisions must be applied. These provisions are those found
in Arts. 999, 983 and 895. According to the first provision, the share
of the widow or widower is equal to the share of a legitimate child;
according to the second provision, the estate shall be divided in accordance with the proportions prescribed in Art. 895 but which was
repealed by the second sentence of Art. 176 of the Family Code, and
according to the third provision, this new proportion is 10:5. Since
the widow or widower has the same share as that of a legitimate
child, the proportions are, therefore, 10 for the legitimate child, 10
for the widow or widower, 5 for the acknowledged natural child, for
the natural child by legal fiction, or the acknowledged illegitimate
child who is not natural, now all simply classified as illegitimate
children. In other words, the distribution of the estate must be
made, using the share of the legitimate child as the basis of computation, in such a way that the share of the widow or widower shall
be the same as that of the legitimate child, that of the acknowledged
natural child or natural child by legal fiction or the acknowledged illegitimate child who is not natural (now all classified as illegitimate
children), 1/2 the share of the legitimate child.
However, as we have observed in the discussion under Art. 983,
this method of proportionate division is subject to the principle of
compulsory succession by virtue of which the legitime of compulsory
heirs must never be impaired. Consequently, the distribution cannot
be made directly; otherwise, there would be an impairment of the
legitime of the legitimate children, especially where there is only one
or two surviving. Therefore, in distributing the estate, we must first
satisfy the legitime of the survivors. If after satisfying the legitime
of the legitimate children, the balance of 1/2 should not be sufficient
to cover the legitime of the surviving spouse and the illegitimate
children, we shall then apply the rule stated in Art. 895. The legitime
of the surviving spouse must first be fully satisfied and what is left
shall be divided equally among the illegitimate children.
Re: Mario V. Chanliongco
79 SCRA 364
Atty. Mario V. Chanliongco, an employee of the Supreme
Court, died intestate, survived by his widow, Fidela, a legitimate son, Mario II, and two illegitimate children, Angelina and
Mario, Jr., whom he had duly recognized. The records show that
he failed to state in his application for membership with the
GSIS the beneficiary or beneficiaries of his retirement benefits.

433

ART. 999

SUCCESSION

How shall such benefits be divided? The Supreme Court, speaking through Mr. Justice Makasiar, held:
“The retirement benefits shall accrue to his (Atty. Chanliongco) estate and will be distributed among his legal heirs in
accordance with the law on intestate succession, as in the case
of a life insurance if no beneficiary is named in the insurance
policy (Vda. de Consuegra vs. GSIS, 37 SCRA 315, 325).
“Insofar, therefore, as the retirement benefits are concerned, We adopt in toto, for being in accordance with law, the
GSIS determination of the amount of retirement gratuity, the
legal heirs and their respective shares x x x, to wit:
“(a)

“(b)

“(c)

Amount of retirement gratuity:
1.

Total creditable service .................... P37.57169 years

2.

Highest rate of salary ....................... P1,558.33333/mo.

3.

Gratuity in terms of months ............ 50.14336 mo.

4.

Amount of gratuity (higher salary) x
(highest x (No. of gratuity months) . P78,140.10

Legal heirs:
1.

Fidela .............................................. Widow

2.

Mario II ........................................... legitimate son

3.

Ma. Angelina ................................... illegitimate child

4.

Mario Jr. ......................................... illegitimate child

Distribution:
1.

8/16 share to Mario II .................... P39,070.050

2.

4/16 share to widow, Fidela salary)
P19,535.025

3.

2/16 share, or P9,767.5125 each
to Angelina and Mario Jr... ........... P19,535.025
Total ................................................ P78,140.10”

The raison d’etre for the above distribution is very well explained by Mr. Justice Aquino in his concurring opinion, thus:
“I concur. The provisions on legitime are found under the
rubric of testamentary succession. That does not mean that the
legitime is taken into account only in testamentary succession.

434

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 999

The legitime must also be taken into consideration in legal succession.
“There may be instances, like the instant case, where in
legal succession the estate is distributed according to the rules
on legitime without applying the rules on intestate succession.
The reason is that sometimes the estate is not even sufficient to
satisfy the legitimes. The legitimes of the primary compulsory
heirs, like a child or descendant, should first be satisfied.
“In this case the decedent’s legal heirs are his legitimate
child, his widow and two illegitimate children. His estate is
partitioned among those heirs by giving them their respective
legitimes.
“The legitimate child gets one-half of the estate as his
legitime which is regarded as his share as a legal heir (Art. 888,
Civil Code).
“The widow’s legitimate is one-fourth of the estate. That
represents also her share as a legal heir (Art. 892, 1st sentence,
Civil Code).
“The remaining one-fourth of the estate, which is the free
portion, goes to the illegitimate children in equal shares, as their
legitime, pursuant to the provision that “the legitime of the illegitimate children shall be taken from the portion of the estate
at the free disposal of the testator, provided that in no case shall
the total legitime of such illegitimate children exceed that free
portion, and that the legitime of the surviving spouse must first
be fully satisfied.” (Last par., Art. 895, Civil Code).
“The rule in Santillon vs. Miranda, L-19281, June 30,
1965, 14 SCRA 563, that when the surviving spouse concurs
with only one legitimate child, the spouse is entitled to one-half
of the estate and the child gets the other half, pursuant to Article 996 of the Civil Code, does not apply to this case because
here illegitimate children concur with the surviving spouse and
the legitimate child.
“In this case, to divide the estate between the surviving
spouse and the legitimate child would deprive the illegitimate
children of their legitime.
“So, the decedent’s estate is distributed in the proportion
of 1/2 for the legitimate child, 1/4 for the widow and 1/8 each for
the two illegitimate children.
“Also not of possible application to this is the rule that the
legitime of an acknowledged natural child is 1/2 of the legitime

435

ART. 999

SUCCESSION

of the legitimate child and that the legitime of the spurious child
is 2/5 of that of the legitime of the legitimate child or 4/5 of that
of the acknowledged natural child.
“That rule cannot be applied because the estate is not sufficient to cover the legitimes of all the compulsory heirs. That is
one of the flaws of the law of succession.
“A situation, as in the instant case, may arise where the
illegitimate children get less than their legitime.”

The following problems are illustrative:
Problem No. 1 — X died, survived by: (1) his widow, W; (2)
his two legitimate children, A and B; (3) is two acknowledged
natural children, C and D; and (4) his two acknowledged spurious children, E and F. The net value of his estate is P288,000.
(a)

How much is the legitime of the above survivors?

(b)

If X died intestate, how shall his estate be divided?

Answer — (a) The legitime of A and B is one-half (1/2) of
the hereditary estate, or P140,000, or P72,000 each (Art. 888,
Civil Code). The legitime of W is the same as that of each of
the legitimate children, or P72,000 (Arts. 892, 897, 898, Civil
Code). That leaves a balance of P72,000 in the free portion. Now,
according to the Code, the legitime of C or D, who are acknowledged natural children, shall be one-half (1/ 2) of the legitime of
A or B, who are legitimate children, while the legitime of E or
F, who are acknowledged spurious children, shall be four-fifths
(4/5) of the legitime of C or D, or two-fifths (2/5) of the legitime
of A or B (Art. 895, pars. 1 & 2, Civil Code). It is obvious that
if we apply the law literally, the balance of P72,000 in the free
portion will not be sufficient to satisfy such legitimes. Consequently, such balance shall be divided among C, D, E, and F in
the proportion of 5 is to 5 is to 4 is to 4 (5:5:4:4) (Art. 895, par. 3,
Civil Code). C shall be entitled to a legitime of 5/18 of P72,000,
or P20,000; D, 5/18 of P72,000, or P20,000; E, 4/18 of P72,000,
or P16,000; and F, 4/18 of P72,000, or P16,000. Nothing remains
for free disposal.
Thus, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

...................................

P72,000

B

...................................

72,000

W

...................................

72,000

C

...................................

20,000

436

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

D

...................................

20,000

E

...................................

16,000

F

...................................

16,000

For free disposal................

none

Estate .................................

P286,000

ART. 999

Under the Family Code, C, D, E and F are all simply classified as illegitimate children. Hence, the proportion of 5 is to 5
is to 4 is to 4 (5:5:4:4) shall be inapplicable. Thus, the distribution of the estate shall be:
A
...................................
B
...................................
W
...................................
C
...................................
D
...................................
E
...................................
F
...................................
For free disposal................

P72,000
72,000
72,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
18,000
none

Estate .................................

P288,000

(b) If X died intestate, his estate shall be divided in exactly the same way as that mentioned above. In other words,
the survivor shall be entitled only to their legitime. It is in cases
such as this where the legitime of compulsory heirs must also
be taken into consideration in legal or intestate succession. The
reason is that the entire hereditary estate is already reserved
by operation of law for the benefit of the legal heirs who are all
primary compulsory heirs. As a matter of fact, it is not even sufficient to satisfy the legitimes of the four illegitimate children.
Problem No. 2 — X died, survived by: (1) his widow, W;
(2) his two legitimate children, A and B; (3) his four acknowledged natural children, C, D, E, and F; and (4) his two acknowledged spurious children, G and H. The net value of his estate
is P224,000. If he died intestate, how shall such estate be divided?
Answer — It is obvious in the instant case that the entire
estate of P224,000 is already reserved by law for the benefit of
the survivors who are all primary compulsory heirs. As a matter
of fact, it is not even sufficient to satisfy the legitimes of the six
illegitimate children. Hence, following the doctrine applied in
Chanliongco (79 SCRA 364), the best that we can do is to give to
the survivors their respective legitimes. Thus:

437

ART. 999

SUCCESSION

The legitime of A and B is one-half (1/2) of the entire estate,
or P112,000, or P56,000 each (Art. 888, Civil Code). The legitime
of W is the same as that of A or B, or P56,000 (Arts. 892, 897,
898, Civil Code). That leaves a balance of P56,000. Now, if we
give to C one-half (1/2) of the legitime of which either A or B is
entitled, or P28,000, and D another one-half (1/2) of the legitime
to which either A or B is entitled, or P28,000, nothing will be
left for the other illegitimate children. Hence, we shall now apply the rule stated in the last paragraph of Art. 895 of the Civil
Code. The balance of P56,000 shall be divided among the six
illegitimate children in the proportion of 5:5:5:5:4:4. C shall be
entitled to 5/28 of P56,000, or P10,000; D, to 5/28 of P56,000, or
P10,000; E, to 5/28 of P56,000, or P10,000; F, to 5/28 of P56,000,
or P10,000; G, to 4/28 of P56,000, or P8,000; and H, to 4/28 of
P56,000, or P8,000; and H, to 4/28 of P56,000, or P8,000.
Thus, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

...................................

P56,000

B

...................................

56,000

W

...................................

56,000

C

...................................

10,000

D

...................................

10,000

E

...................................

10,000

F

...................................

10,000

G

...................................

8,000

H

...................................

8,000

Estate .................................

P224,000

In view of the new provisions of the Family Code, C, D,
E and F as well as G and H are all simply classified as illegitimate children. The share, therefore, of P56,000 shall be divided
among the 6 illegitimate children equally and not in the proportion of 5:5:5:5:4:4.
Thus, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

...................................

P56,000

B

...................................

56,000

W

...................................

56,000

C

...................................

9,333

D

...................................

9,333

E

...................................

9,333

438

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

F

...................................

9,333

G

...................................

9,333

H

...................................

9,333

Estate .................................

P224,000

ART. 999

However, in those cases where there is still a balance remaining
out of the free portion, such as when there is only one acknowledged
illegitimate child concurring in the succession, the division of such
balance is controversial. As we have seen in the discussion under
Art. 983, there are two views advanced by commentators on the New
Civil Code. According to one view (the exclusion theory), the balance
must be given to the legitimate children in conformity with the
general order of succession, while according to the other view (the
concurrence theory), we must still apply the proportions prescribed
in Art. 895. The controversy may be illustrated by the following
problem: X died intestate, survived by the following: (1) his widow,
Y; (2) his legitimate children, A and B; and (3) his acknowledged
natural child, C. The estate is P140,000. How shall the distribution
be made? According to both concurrence and exclusion theory, the
legitime of all the survivors must first be satisfied. The legitime
of A is P35,000, B, P35,000, Y, P35,000, and C, P17,500. There is,
therefore, a balance of P17,500. How shall this balance be divided or
to whom shall it be adjudicated? According to the exclusion theory,
it must be adjudicated to A and B. Consequently, the distribution
shall be as follows:
A

B
Y
C

..................... P 43,750
..................... 43,750
.................... 35,000
.................... 17,500
P140,000

On the other hand, according to the concurrence theory, it must
be divided among A, B, Y and C in the proportion of 2:2:2:1. A, B and
Y shall, therefore, be entitled to 2/7 each of P17,500, or P5,000 each,
while C shall be entitled to 1/7 of P17,500, or P2,500. Adding these
amounts to their respective legitimes, the distribution shall be as
follows:
A

....................... P 40,000

B

..................... P 40,000
439

ART. 1000

SUCCESSION

Y

.................... P 40,000

C

.................... P 40,000
P140,000

Most of the proponents of the concurrence theory, however, prefer
to apply the proportion of 2:2:2:1 directly considering the fact that
under this situation, there can be no possible impairment of the
legitime of the survivors. Thus, A, B and Y shall be entitled to 2/7
each of P140,000, or P40,000 each, while C shall be entitled to 1/7 of
P140,000, or P20,000.
It is submitted that the concurrence theory is correct. In the
first place, it is conformity with Art. 983 which declares that “if
illegitimate children survive with legitimate children, the shares of
the former shall be in the proportions prescribed by Article 895.”
Under this theory, the proportions prescribed by Art. 895 are
observed; under the exclusion theory, they are disregarded. In the
second place, it is in conformity with Art. 999 which declares that
the “widow or widower shall be entitled to the same share as that
of a legitimate child.” Under this theory, this mandate of the law is
observed; under the exclusion theory, it is violated.
Art. 999 does not support the position that a widow (surviving
spouse) is an intestate heir of his or her parent-in-law. The estate
contemplated therein is the estate of the deceased spouse and not
the estate of the widow’s (or widower’s) parent-in-law. Thus, in a
case where the widow insisted in getting a share of the estate in her
capacity as the surviving spouse of the son of her mother-in-law, the
Court held that a surviving spouse is not an intestate heir of his or
her parent-in-law. The widow is considered a third person as regards
the estate of the parent-in-law. The contingent or inchoate right of
the deceased spouse to the properties of the parent as the latter’s
compulsory heir was extinguished by his death. That is why it is
the son of the deceased spouse (grandson of the parent-in-law) and
the surviving spouse who succeed from the parent-in-law by right
of representation. The grandson did not succeed from his deceased
father.
Art. 1000. If legitimate ascendants, the surviving spouse and
illegitimate children are left, the ascendants shall be entitled to
one-half of the inheritance, and the other half shall be divided be440

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 1000

tween the surviving spouse and the illegitimate children so that
such widow widower shall have one-fourth of the estate, and the
illegitimate children the other fourth.8
Surviving Spouse, Legitimate Ascendants, and Illegitimate Children. — Under this article, the surviving spouse is placed
in the same level or category as the illegitimate children. Thus, if the
decedent is survived by his legitimate father and mother, the widow,
one acknowledged natural child, and one acknowledged illegitimate
child who is not natural, and the estate is P72,000, 1/2 of P72,000 or
P36,000, shall be given to the parents or ascendants, 1/4 of P72,000,
or P18,000, shall be given the widow, while the remaining 1/4 of
P72,000, or P18,000, shall be given to the two illegitimate children
which they shall divide in the proportion of 5:4. Consequently, the
distribution shall be as follows:
Legitimate father ..............................
Legitimate mother .............................
Widow.................................................
Acknowledged natural child .............
Acknowledged illegitimate
child who is not natural ................

P18,000
18,000
18,000
10,000
18,000
P72,000

(The proportion of 5:4 is no longer applicable in view of the new
provisions of the Family Code. Please note that the acknowledged
natural child and the acknowledged illegitimate child who is not
natural are both classified as illegitimate children. Thus, distribution shall be as follows:
Legitimate father ..............................
Legitimate mother .............................
Widow.................................................
Acknowledged natural child .............
Acknowledged illegitimate
child who is not natural ................

P18,000
18,000
18,000
9,000
9,000
P72,000

8

Art. 841, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

441

ART. 1000

SUCCESSION

Suppose, however, that the decedent is survived by a legitimate parent, the surviving spouse and an adopted child shall the
legitimate parent be excluded by the adopted child or shall we apply the rule stated in the above article considering the provision of
No. 4 of Art. 39 (formerly, Art. 343 of the Civil Code) of the Child
and Youth Welfare Code (P.D. No. 603), which states “that if the
adopter is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants and by an
adopted person, the latter shall not have more successional rights
than an acknowledged natural child?’’ This question was taken up
and resolved in Del Rosario vs. Cunanan (76 SCRA 136). In this
case, it was contended that the provisions which should be applied
are Arts. 341 (now Art. 39, P.D. No. 603), 978 and 979 of the Civil
Code and not Arts. 343 (now No. 4, Art. 39, P.D. No. 603) and 1000
of the Civil Code. The Supreme Court, however, speaking through
Justice Makasiar, held that the governing provision is Art. 343 of
the New Civil Code (now No. 4, Art. 39, P.D. No. 603), in relation
to Arts. 893 and 1000 of said law, which directs that if the adopter
is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants, the latter shall not
have more successional rights than an acknowledged natural child.
There are three reasons for this. In the first place it would be most
unfair to accord more successional rights to the adopted, who is only
related artificially by fiction of law to the deceased, than those who
are naturally related to him by blood in the direct ascending line. In
the second place, in intestate succession, where legitimate parents
or ascendants concur with the surviving spouse of the deceased, the
latter does not necessarily exclude the former from the inheritance.
This is affirmed by Art. 893 of the New Civil Code. In the third place,
Art. 343 (now No. 4 of Art. 39 of the Child and Youth Welfare Code)
does not require that the concurring heirs should be the adopted
child and legitimate parents or ascendants only. The language of the
law is clear, and a contrary view cannot be presumed. Thus, Art. 343
should be made to apply, consonant with the cardinal rule in statutory construction that all of the provisions of the New Civil Code
must be reconciled and given effect. Consequently, the respective
shares of the surviving spouse, ascendant and adopted child should
be determined by Art. 1000 of the New Civil Code.
It is interesting to note that the above case became the basis
of the following problem which was asked in the Bar Examinations
of 1979:
442

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Surviving Spouse

ART. 1001

Problem — H died intestate leaving his legal wife, W, and
his legally adopted son, AS. In the proceedings for the settlement of his estate, M, the widowed mother of H, intervened and
claims for a share in the estate of H. AS opposes the claim of M
contending that since under the law he is given the same rights
as if he were a legitimate child, he excludes M from the estate of
H. Should this opposition be sustained? Why?
Answer — The opposition of AS should not be sustained.
Under our law, an adopted child shall be entitled to the same
successional rights as a legitimate child, but there is an exception. If the adopter is survived by legitimate parents or ascendants and by an adopted child, the latter shall not have more
successional rights than an acknowledged natural child. This
merely means that the adopted child cannot exclude the legitimate parents or ascendants of the decedent from the succession
and that his legitime or legal share shall be the same as that to
which an acknowledged natural child shall be entitled; in other
words, he shall be placed in the same category as an acknowledged natural child. The reason behind this is that it would be
most unfair to accord more successional rights to the adopted,
who is only related artificially by fiction of law to the deceased,
than those who are naturally related to him by blood in the direct ascending line. True, the law speaks only of the concurrence
of legitimate parents or ascendants and the adopted child in the
succession; it does not include the surviving spouse. In the instant case, W, the legal wife of H, also survives. But this is of no
moment; the law declaring that the adopted child shall not have
more successional rights than an acknowledged natural child
is still applicable; otherwise, the purpose of the law would be
defeated. Besides, the law does not require that the concurring
heirs should be the legitimate parents or ascendants and the adopted child only. The language of the law is clear, and a contrary
view cannot be presumed. Consequently, the pertinent provisions of the law of intestate succession, where the survivors are
the legitimate parents or ascendants, the surviving spouse and
illegitimate children, are directly applicable. (See Del Rosario
vs. Cunanan, 76 SCRA 136).

Art. 1001. Should brothers and sisters or their children survive
with the widow or widower, the latter shall be entitled to one-half
of the inheritance and the brothers and sisters of their children to
the other half.9

9

Arts. 853, 837, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

443

ART. 1002

SUCCESSION

Surviving Spouse and Brothers and Sisters, Nephews
and Nieces. — The rule stated in the above article may be illustrated
by the following problems:
Problem No. 1 — A died without a will survived by: (a) his
widow, W, (b) his legitimate brothers, B and C; and (c) his nephews, E and F, who are the children of a deceased sister, D. The
net remainder of his estate is P24,000. How shall such estate be
distributed?
Answer — According to Art. 1001 of the Civil Code, “should
brothers and sisters or their children survive with the widow or
widower, the latter shall be entitled to one-half of the inheritance and the brothers and sisters or their children to the other
half.” Consequently, the estate shall be divided as follows:
W
B
C
E
F

....................... P12,000, in her own right
.......................
4,000, in his own right
.......................
4,000, in his own right
.......................
2,000, by right of representation
.......................
2,000, by right of representation
P24,000

Problem No. 2 — A died without a will survived by: (a)
his widow, W; (b) X and Y, children of a deceased legitimate
brother, B; and (c) Z, child of a deceased legitimate sister, C. The
net remainder of his estate is P24,000. How shall such estate
distributed?
Answer — According to Art. 1001 of the Civil Code, 1/ 2 of
the estate shall pass to the widow, while the other 1/2 shall pass
to the three nephews in their own right. Hence, the estate shall
be divided as follows:
W
X
Y
Z

....................... P12,000, in her own right
.......................
4,000, in his own right
.......................
4,000, in his own right
.......................
4,000, by right of representation
P24,000

Art. 1002. In case of a legal separation, if the surviving spouse
gave cause for the separation, he or she shall not have any of the
right granted in the preceding articles.10
10

New provision.

444

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Collateral Relatives

ARTS. 1003-1004

Subsection 5. — Collateral Relatives
Art. 1003. If there are no descendants, ascendants, illegitimate
children, or a surviving spouse, the collateral relatives shall
succeed to the entire estate of the deceased in accordance with
the following articles.1
Collateral Relatives. — Collateral relatives shall succeed to
the entire estate in the absence of legitimate descendants, legitimate
ascendants, illegitimate children, and the surviving spouse.
When there are legitimate descendants, legitimate ascendants, or
illegitimate children, such collateral relatives do not participate in
the inheritance; they are excluded altogether from the succession.
When they concur with the surviving spouse only, they are also
excluded as a general rule. There is, however, an exception, and that
is when brothers and sisters or nephews and nieces concur in the
succession. In such case, according to Art. 1001, 1/2 of the estate
shall be given to the surviving spouse and the other 1/2 shall be
given to the surviving spouse and the other 1/2 shall be given to the
brothers and sisters or nephews and nieces.
Furthermore, there are certain principles that must always be
borne in mind whenever collaterals are called to the inheritance.
In the first place, when the law speaks of collateral relatives, it can
only refer to those within the fifth degree. In the second place, where
two or more collateral relatives concur in the succession, the rule of
proximity by virtue of which the nearest in degree shall exclude the
more remotes ones is applicable. In the third place, as an exception to
the rule of proximity, the right of representation is also recognized,
but it is a right which is extended only to nephews and nieces. And
in the fourth place, where the survivors are of the same degree, the
rule of preference by reason of relationship by the whole blood is also
recognized, but it is a rule which can be applied only to brothers and
sisters or nephews and nieces and not to other collaterals.
Art. 1004. Should the only survivors be brothers and sisters
of the full blood, they shall inherit in equal shares.2

1
2

Art. 946, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 947, Spanish Civil Code.

445

ARTS. 1005-1008

SUCCESSION

Art. 1005. Should brothers and sisters survive together
with nephews and nieces, who are the children of the decedent’s
brothers and sisters of the full blood, the former shall Inherit per
capita, and the latter per stirpes.3
Art. 1006. Should brothers and sisters of the full blood,
survive together with brothers and sisters of the half blood, the
former shall be entitled to a share double that of the latter.4
Art. 1007. In case brothers and sisters of the half blood,
some on the father’s and some on the mother’s side, are the only
survivors all shall inherit in equal shares without distinction as to
the origin of the property.5
Art. 1008. Children of brothers and sisters of the half blood
shall succeed per capita or per stirpes, in accordance with the
rules laid down for brothers and sisters of the full blood.6
Brothers and Sisters. — Should the only survivors be brothers
and sisters of the full blood, they shall inherit in equal shares or per
capita.7 The same rule shall also apply should the only survivors be
brothers and sisters of the half blood.8
Brothers and Sisters, Nephews and Nieces. — Should
brothers and sisters survive together with nephews and nieces,
who are the children of the decedent’s brothers and sisters of the
full blood, the former shall inherit per capita, and the latter per
stirpes.9 In other words, the former shall inherit in their own right,
while the latter shall inherit by right of representation.10 Thus, if
the decedent is survived by A and B, brothers of the full blood, and
D and E, children of C, another brother of the full blood who had
predeceased him, the inheritance shall be divided into three equal
parts — one part to be given to A, another to B, and the rest to D and
E in representation of their deceased father, C. If all of the brothers
A, B and C had predeceased the decedent, the inheritance shall, of
Art. 948, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 949, Spanish Civil Code.
5
Art. 950, Spanish Civil Code.
6
Art. 915, Spanish Civil Code.
7
Art. 1004, Civil Code.
8
Art. 1008, Civil Code.
9
Art. 1005, Civil Code.
10
Arts. 972, 975, Civil Code.
3
4

446

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Collateral Relatives

ART. 1008

course, be given to D and E, which they shall divide per capita, but
they would be inheriting in their own right and no longer by right
of representation. It must be remembered that the only case where
the right of representation may take place in the collateral line is
when nephews and nieces of the decedent concur with the decedent’s
brothers and sisters.11
The above rules are illustrated by the following case:
Government Service Insurance System vs. Custodio
26 SCRA 658
Simeon Custodio, a government retiree, died intestate,
survived by his sister Susana Custodio and several nephews and
nieces. These nephews and nieces are children of his brothers
Vicente, Crispin and Jacinto who had predeceased him. Susana
and her nephews and nieces, with the exception of Macario, only
child of Crispin, and Luisa and David, two of the six children
of Jacinto, entered into an extrajudicial agreement recognizing
Susana as sole beneficiary of the retirement benefits of Simeon.
How shall such retirement benefits be divided?
Held: The intestate heirs who did not sign the deed of extrajudicial settlement cannot be considered as having recognized
Susana Custodio as the only beneficiary of Simeon’s retirement
money. There is no evidence, the case having been submitted
for decision below solely on a stipulation of facts, that these
non-signatory heirs had accepted other benefits under the deed
of partition, as appellee now claims. These three heirs should
inherit per stirpes in accordance with Article 1005 of the Civil
Code. As Macario C. Custodio is the only child of Crispin, he
inherits by representation the one-fourth (1/4) share pertaining
to his father, while Luisa Custodio and David Custodio, being
two of six children of Jacinto, are each entitled to a sixth of onefourth (1/6 x 1/4) equivalent to 1/24 of the hereditary mass.

The same rules shall also be applied should brothers and
sisters of the half blood survive together with nephews and nieces,
who are the children of the decedent’s brothers and sisters of the
half blood.12

11
12

Ibid.
Arts. 1007, 1008, Civil Code.

447

ART. 1008

SUCCESSION

However, if some of the survivors are brothers and sisters of
the full blood and the others are brothers and sisters of the half
blood, the rules that shall be applied would then be different. In
such case, the former shall be entitled to a share double that of the
latter.13 Thus, if the decedent is survived by A and B, brothers of
the full blood, and by C and D, brothers of the half blood, and the
estate is P30,000, the distribution shall be made in the proportion
of 2:2:1:1. A shall be entitled to 2/6 of P30,000, or P10,000; B, 2/6
of P30,000, or P10,000; C, 1/6 of P30,000, or P5,000; and D, 1/6 of
P30,000, or P5,000. Should the brothers and sisters survive together
with nephews and nieces, who are the children of the decedent’s
brothers and sisters who predeceased him, such nephews and nieces
shall also inherit but by right of representation. This may be illustrated by the following example:
W1

H

X

A

A2

B

D

C

E

F

G

In the above diagram, let us suppose that the decedent, X, is
survived by (1) A, a brother of the full blood; (2) D and E, nephews
of the full blood, children of B, another brother of the full blood who
had predeceased X; and (3) F and G, nephews of the half blood,
children of C, a brother of half blood, who also had predeceased
X. The decedent’s estate is P25,000. How shall it be distributed?
According to Art. 975, when children of one or more brothers and
sisters of the deceased survived, they shall inherit from the latter by
right of representation, if they survive with their uncles and aunts.
According to Art. 1005, should brothers and sisters survive together
with nephews and nieces, who are children of the decedent’s brothers
and sisters of the full blood, the former shall inherit per capita, and
the latter per stirpes. According to Art. 1006, should brothers and
13
Art. 1006, Civil Code. For illustrative case — see Alviar vs. Alviar, G.R. No.
L-22402, June 30, 1967, 28 SCRA 610.

448

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Collateral Relatives

ART. 1008

sisters of the full blood survive together with brothers and sisters of
the half blood, the former shall be entitled to a share double that of
the latter. In the light of these three provisions, the P25,000 shall
be divided into three shares in the proportion of 2:2:1. A shall be
entitled to 2/5 of P25,000, or P10,000; D and E shall also be entitled
to 2/5 of P25,000 or P10,000, by right of representation; while F and
G shall be entitled to only 1/5, or P5,000, by right of representation.
Consequently, the distribution shall be as follows:
A

........................ P10,000, in his own right

D

........................

5,000, by right of representation

E

........................

5,000, by right of representation

F

........................

2,500, by right of representation

G

........................

2,500, by right of representation
P25,000

Nephews and Nieces. — If the only survivors are nephews and
nieces of the full or of the half blood, such nephews and nieces shall
succeed to the entire inheritance in their own right. Consequently,
the division of the estate shall be per capita.14 However, if some of
them are of the full blood and the others are of the half blood, the
rule of preference by reason of whole blood relationship shall be
applied. In other words, those of the full blood shall be entitled to
a share double that of those of the half blood. Although this rule
is not expressly stated by the Code, it can be inferred from Art.
1009, paragraph 2, which declares that in the absence of brothers
and sisters or children of brothers and sisters, the other collateral
relatives shall succeed to the estate without distinction of lines or
preference among them by reason of relationship by the whole blood.
From this provision, we can deduce the rule that if there are nephews
and nieces surviving the decedent, relationship by the whole or half
blood becomes material in the distribution of the estate. This view
advocated by Manresa15 has been applied by our Supreme Court in
Padura vs. Baldovino and in Bicomong vs. Almanza.16
Art. 1008, Civil Code.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 158-159.
16
In Padura vs. Baldovino (104 Phil. 1065), the Supreme Court did not spell out
the reason or reasons for the application of the rule of double share for bull blood
collaterals to the case of nephews and nieces. It was not necessary. In Bicomong vs.
14
15

449

ART. 1009

SUCCESSION

Problem – Don died after executing a Last Will and Testament leaving his estate valued at P12 Million to his commonlaw wife Roshelle. He is survived by his brother Ronie and his
half-sister Michelle.
(1) If Don failed to execute a will during his lifetime, as
his lawyer, how will you distribute his estate? Explain.
(2) Assuming he died intestate survived by his brother
Ronie, his half-sister Michelle, and his legitimate son Jayson,
how will you distribute his estate? Explain. (2006)
Answer – (1) After paying the legal obligations of the estate, I will give Ronie, as full-blood brother of Don, 2/3 of the
net estate, twice the share of Michelle, the half-sister who shall
receive 1/3. Roshelle will not receive anything as she is not a
legal heir [Art. 1006, NCC].
(2) Jayson will be entitled to the entire P12 Million as
the brother and sister will be excluded by a legitimate son of
the decedent. This follows the principle of proximity where the
nearer excludes the farther” (Suggested Answers to the 2006 Bar
Examination Questions, PALS).

Art. 1009. Should there be neither brothers and sisters, nor
children of brothers or sisters, the other collateral relatives shall
succeed to the estate.
The latter shall succeed without distinction of lines or
preference among them by reason of relationship by the whole
blood.17

Almanza (80 SCRA 421), it did. According to the Court, the provisions of Arts. 975,
1006 and 1008 are applicable. Frankly, we do not see any interence or implication
either from Art. 975 or from Art. 1008 or from a combination of both in relation to
Art. 1006 that where only nephews and nieces will concur in the succession and some
of them are children of brothers and sisters of the full blood and others are children
of brothers and sisters of the half blood, those of the full blood should be entitled
to double the shares of those of the half blood. Art. 1008, for instance, speaks only
of children of brothers and sisters of the half blood; it does not speak of children of
brothers and sisters of the full blood concurring in the succession. It is different in the
case of Art. 1009. In this article, there is a clear inference or implication that so long
as the heirs are brothers and sisters or nephews and nieces, and some of them are of
the full blood and others are of the half blood, the rule of double share for full blood
collaterals is applicable.
17
Art. 954, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

450

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Collateral Relatives

ART. 1010

In the recent case of Celedonia Solivio vs. The Honorable
Court of Appeals, et al., G.R. No. 83484, February 12, 1990, the
Court ruled that since the deceased, Esteban Javellana, Jr. died
without descendants, ascendants, illegitimate children, surviving
spouse, brothers, sisters, nephews or nieces, what shall apply in the
distribution of his estate are Arts. 1003 and 1009 of the Civil Code.
Therefore, the Court of Appeals correctly held that: “Both plaintiffappellee and defendant-appellant being relatives of the decedent
within the third degree in the collateral line, each, therefore, shall
succeed to the subject estate ‘without distinction of line or preference
among them by reason of relationship by the whole blood’, and is
entitled to one-half (1/2) share and share alike of the estate.
Art. 1010.The right to inherit ab intestato shall not extend
beyond the fifth degree of relationship in the collateral line.18
Other Collateral Relatives. — In the absence of brothers
and sisters or nephews and nieces of the decedent, whether they be
of the full or half blood, other collateral relatives shall succeed to the
entire estate, subject to the rule of proximity19 and the rule that the
right to inherit ab intestato shall not extend beyond the fifth degree
of relationship in the collateral line.20
According to the Code Commission, limiting the right of succession to the collateral relatives within the fifth degree of relationship from the decedent, instead of within the sixth degree (under the
Spanish Civil Code), is in accordance with national economy and social welfare and in keeping with the underlying philosophy of socialization of ownership of property.21 We might add as another reason
the fact that beyond the fifth degree of relationship, the relationship
is already so remote that it would be stretching human nature too
much to presume that the decedent can still be bound by the bonds
of affection to such relatives. Hence, in default of collateral relatives
within the fifth degree, the whole estate shall pass to the State.22

Art. 955, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 962, Civil Code.
20
Art. 1010, Civil Code.
21
Report of the Code Commission, p. 116.
22
Art. 1011, Civil Code.
18
19

451

ARTS. 1011-1012

SUCCESSION

Subsection 6. — The State
Art 1011. In default of person entitled to succeed in accordance
with the provisions of the preceding Sections, the State shall
inherit the whole estate.1
The State. — In default of legitimate children or descendants,
legitimate parents or ascendants, illegitimate children or
descendants, the surviving spouse, and collateral relatives within
the fifth degree, the State shall inherit the whole estate. Hence,
according to our theory of intestate succession, the State is a legal
heir called to the succession by operation of law as in the case of
other legal heirs. We have, therefore, discarded the American theory
of escheat by the State by which the property of the decedent reverts
to its original owner — the State.
Art. 1012. In order that the State may take possession of
the property mentioned in the preceding article, the pertinent
provisions of the Rules of Court must be observed.2
Procedure for Escheat. — The above article provides that the
pertinent provisions of the New Rules of Court must be observed.
These provisions are the following:
Rule 91, Rules of Court
SECTION 1. When and by whom petition filed. — When
a person dies intestate, seized of real or personal property in
the Philippines, leaving no heir or person by law entitled to the
same, the Solicitor General or his representative in behalf of the
Republic of the Philippines, may file a petition in the Court of
First Instance of the province where the deceased last resided or
in which he had estate, if he resided out of the Philippines, setting forth the facts, and praying that the estate of the deceased
be declared escheated.
SECTION 2. Order for hearing. — If the petition is sufficient in form and substance, the court, by an order reciting the
purpose of the petition, shall fix a date and place for the hearing
1
2

Art. 956, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 958, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

452

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
The State

ART. 1012

thereof, which date shall be not more than six (6) months after
the entry of the order, and shall direct that a copy of the order
be published before the hearing at least once a week for six (6)
successive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation published in the province, as the court shall deem best.
SECTION. 3. Hearing and judgment. — Upon satisfactory proof in open court on the date fixed in the order that such
order has been published as directed and that the person died
intestate, seized of real or personal property in the Philippines,
leaving no heir or person entitled to the same, and no sufficient
cause being shown to the contrary, the court shall adjudge that
the estate of the deceased in the Philippines, after the payment
of just debts and charges, shall escheat; and shall pursuant to
law, assign the personal estate to the municipality or city where
he last resided in the Philippines, and the real estate to the municipalities or cities, respectively, in which the same is situated.
If the deceased never resided in the Philippines, the whole estate may be assigned to the respective municipalities or cities
where the same is located. Such estate shall be for the benefit
of the public schools, and public charitable institutions and centers in said municipalities or cities.
The court, at the instance of an interested party, or on its
own motion, may order the establishment of a permanent trust,
so that only the income from the property shall be used.
SECTION 4.When and by whom claim to estate filed. — If
a devisee, legatee, heir, widow, widower, or other person entitled
to such estate appears and files a claim thereto with the court
within five (5) years from the date of such judgment, such person shall have possession of and title to the same, or if sold, the
municipality or city shall be accountable to him for the proceeds,
after deducting reasonable charges for the care of the estate; but
a claim not made within said time shall be forever barred.
SECTION 5. Other actions for escheat. — Until otherwise
provided by law, actions for reversion or escheat of properties
alienated in violation of the Constitution or of any statute shall
be governed by this rule, except that the action shall be instituted in the province where the land lies in whole or in part.

Requisites for Escheat. — It is clear from the provisions of
Sec. 1 of Rule 91 of the Rules of Court that the following requisites
must concur in order that the escheat proceedings may be commenced:
first, that the decedent dies intestate; second, that he dies seized of
real and/or personal property located in the Philippines; and third,
453

ARTS. 1013-1014

SUCCESSION

that he leaves no heir or person entitled to such real and personal
property.3
Art. 1013. After the payment of debts and charges, the
personal property shall be assigned to the municipality or city
where the deceased last resided in the Philippines, and the real
estate to the municipalities or cities, respectively, in which the
same is situated.
If the deceased never resided in the Philippines, the whole
estate shall be assigned to the respective municipalities or cities
where the same is located.
Such estate shall be for the benefit of public schools, and
public charitable institutions and centers, in such municipalities
or cities. The court shall distribute the estate as the respective
needs of each beneficiary may warrant.
The court, at the instance of an interested party, or on its own
motion, may order the establishment of a permanent trust, so that
only the income from the property shall be used.4
Art. 1014. If a person legally entitled to the estate of the
deceased appears and files a claim thereto with the court within
five years from the date the property was delivered to the State,
such person shall be entitled to the possession of the same, or if
sold, the municipality or city shall be accountable to him for such
part of the proceeds as may not have been lawfully spent.5
TABLE OF INTESTATE SUCCESSION
Survivors

Share

Division

1. Any class alone

Whole estate

Rule of Proximity (Art. 962)

2. (a) Leg. children

Whole estate
Excluded

Rule of proximity (Art. 962)

(b) Leg. parents

For illustrative cases, see In re Estate of Liao Sayco, 21 Phil. 445; City of Manila vs. Arch. of Manila, 36 Phil. 815; Mun. of San Pedro vs. Colegio de San Jose, 65
Phil. 318.
4
Art. 956, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
5
New provision.
3

454

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
The State

3. (a) Leg. Children
(b) Illeg. Children
4. (a) Leg. Children
(b) Surviving
spouse

ART. 1014

Concurrence or Concurrence theory – Satisfy
Exclusion Theory their legitimes, and then
distribute the disposable porSurviving
tion, if any, to the preferred
Spouse entitled
heir in the order of intestate
to same share or
succession. (Arts. 895, 961,
each legitime
983, 996, 999)
Exclusion theory — Satisfy
their legitime, and then give
the disposable portion, if any,
to the preferred heir in the
order of intestate succession.
(Arts. 895, 961, 983, 996,
999).

Concurrence or
Exclusion
theory
(b) Illeg. Children

5. (a) Leg. Children
(c) Surviving
spouse
6. (a) Leg. Parents

(b) Illeg. Children

1/2
1/2 (5:4)

7. (a) Leg. Parents

1/2

(b) Surviving
spouse

1/2

8. (a) Leg. Parents

1/2

(b) Illeg. Children

(Art. 991). If decedent is an
illegitimate person, his natural parents are excluded by
presence of any illegitimate
child.
(Art. 997). Same shares even
if decedent is an illegitimate
person.
(Art. 1000).

1/4 (5:4)

(c) Surviving
spouse

1/4

9. (a) Illeg. Children

1/2 (5:4)

(b) Surviving
spouse

1/2

10. (a) Surviving
spouse

1/2

(Art. 998).

(Art. 1001).

(b) Brother
and sister,
nephews and
nieces

455

ART. 1014

SUCCESSION

11. Collaterals

Whole estate

(Arts. 1003-1010). Principle
of proximity.

12. State

Whole estate

(Arts. 1011-1014). Escheat
proceedings. Rule 92, Rules
of Court).

TABLE OF INTESTATE SUCCESSION UNDER THE
FAMILY CODE
Survivors

Share

Division

1. Any class alone

Whole estate

Rule of Proximity (Art.
962, CC)

2. (a) Leg. Children

Whole estate xcluded

Rule of proximity (Art.
962, CC)

Concurrence or
Exclusion Theory

Concurrence theory –
Satisfy their legitimes,
and then distribute the
disposable portion, if
any pro-rata (10:5).
(Arts. 895, 983, 996,
999, CC: Art. 176, 2nd
sentence, FC)

(b) Leg. Parents
3. (a) Leg. Children
(b) Illeg. Children

4. (a) Leg. Children
(b) Surviving
spouse
5. (a) Leg. Children
(b) Illeg. Children
(c) Surviving
spouse

6. (a) Leg. Parents
(b) Illeg. Children

Surviving spouse
entitled to same share
or each legitimate
child
Concurrence or
Exclusion theory
Note: The legitime
of each illegitimate
child shall consist of
1/2 of the legitime of a
legitimate child (Art.
176, Family Code.)
1/2

Exclusion theory –
Satisfy their legitimes,
and then give the
disposable portion, if
any, to the preferred
heir in the order of
intestate succession.
(Art. 895, 961, 983,
996, 999, CC)
If decedent is an
illegitimate person, his
natural parents are
excluded by presence
of illegitimate child.
(Art. 991).

1/2

456

INTESTATE SUCCESSION
The State

ART. 1014

7. (a) Leg. Parents

1/2

(b) Surviving
spouse

1/2

Same share event
if decedent is an
illegitimate person
(Art. 997, CC).

8. (a) Leg. Parents

1/2

(Art. 1000, CC)

(b) Illeg. Children

1/2

(c) Surviving
spouse

1/4

9. (a) Illeg. Children

1/2

(b) Surviving
spouse

1/2

10. (a) Surviving
spouse

1/2

(b) Brothers
and sisters,
nephews and
nieces

(Art. 998, CC)

(Art. 1001, CC)

1/2

11. Collaterals

Whole state

(Arts. 1003-1010, CC).
Principle of proximity.

12. State

Whole state

(Arts. 1011-1014, CC)
Escheat proceedings.
Rule 92, Rules of
Court.

457

SUCCESSION

Chapter IV

PROVISIONS COMMON TO TESTATE
AND INTESTATE SUCCESSIONS
Section 1. — Right of Accretion
Art. 1015. Accretion is a right by virtue of which, when two or
more persons are called to the same inheritance, devise or legacy, the part assigned to one who renounces or cannot receive his
share, or who died before testator, is added or incorporated to that
of his co-heirs, co-devisees, or co-legatees.1
Concept of Accretion. — The right of accretion, according to
the definition given in the above article, occurs when two or more
persons are called to the same inheritance, legacy or devise, but,
by reason of (1) predecease, or (2) incapacity, or (3) repudiation, a
vacancy is created in the inheritance. The effect of such a situation
is that the vacant portion which had been previously assigned to the
one who died before the decedent, or who is incapacitated to succeed,
or who repudiated his inheritance, legacy or devise, is added or
incorporated to that of his co-heirs, co-legatees, or co-devisees.
The right takes place both in testamentary and in intestate
succession. It is based on the presumed will of the decedent. When
a portion of the inheritance, legacy or devise is rendered vacant as a
result of predecease, incapacity, or repudiation, in the absence of any
expressed will of the decedent, the law presumes that had he been
able to express his will, he would have given such vacant portion to
the co-heirs, co-legatees, or co-devisees.2
Idem; Conflict of rights. —When the portion or share reserved for a certain heir either by will of the testator or by operation of law becomes vacant by reason of predecease, incapacity, or
1
2

New provision.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 311-312.

458

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1016

repudiation, a problem arises because of the possible conflict or concurrence of several rights. In testamentary succession, for instance,
shall the vacant share pass to the substitute by right of substitution
which is based on the testator’s will, or shall it pass to the children
or descendants of the original heir by right of representation, or
shall the share accrue to the co-heirs by right of accretion? Actually,
under our law, the scope or sphere of each right is well defined. If
the heir who dies before the testator or who cannot accept his share
because of incapacity is a compulsory heir, the only conflict that can
possibly arise is one between the substitute and the co-heirs with
regard to the free portion, because of the fact that the legitime shall
pass to the children or descendants of the compulsory heir by right
of representation. This conflict is of course resolved in favor of the
substitute because substitution is based on the expressed will of the
testator, while accretion is not. However, if no substitute has been
designated by the testator, the free portion shall accrue to the coheirs, provided that the conditions prescribed in Art. 1016 are present. If on the other hand, the heir happens to be a voluntary heir,
it is clear that he cannot transmit any right whatsoever to his own
children or descendants.3 Hence, if no substitute has been designated by the testator, the whole vacant share shall pass to the co-heirs
by right of accretion. In intestate succession, the rules are much
simpler. If a conflict arises between the descendants of the heir who
dies before the decedent or who cannot accept his share and the coheirs, it is always resolved in favor of the former. The right of representation in such case is always superior to the right of accretion.
In case of repudiation, however, the vacant share shall pass to the
co-heirs by right of accretion.4
Art. 1016. In order that the right of accretion may take place in
a testamentary succession, it shall be necessary:
(1) That two or more persons be called to the same inheritance, or to the same portion thereof, pro indiviso; and
(2) That one of the persons thus called die before the
testator, or renounce the inheritance, or be incapacitated to receive
it.5
Art. 856, Civil Code.
Art. 1018, Civil Code.
5
Art. 982, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
3
4

459

ART. 1017

SUCCESSION

Art. 1017. The words “one-half for each” or “in equal shares”
or any others which, though designating an aliquot part, do
not identify it by such description as shall make each heir the
exclusive owner of determinate property, shall not exclude the
right of accretion.
In case of money or fungible goods, if the share of each heir
is not earmarked, there shall be a right of accretion.6
Accretion in Testamentary Succession. — In order that
the right of accretion will take place in testamentary succession,
the following requisites or conditions must concur: first, that two
or more persons must have been called in the testator’s will to the
same inheritance, legacy or devise, or to the same portion thereof,
pro indiviso; and second, that there must be a vacancy in the inheritance, legacy or devise as a result of predeceased, incapacity or
repudiation.7
Idem; Plurality of subjects, unity of object. — As a consequence of the first requisite, the following circumstances are, therefore, necessary: first, plurality of subjects; and second, unity of object. “Plurality of subjects” merely means that two or more persons
must be instituted as heirs, legatees or devisees. “Unity of object,” on
the other hand, means that such person must be called to the same
inheritance, legacy or devise, or to the same portion thereof, pro indiviso. In other words, such persons must be instituted jointly in the
testator’s will in such a manner that a state of indivision or co-ownership is created among them with respect to the same inheritance,
legacy or devise, or with respect to the same portion thereof. It is
immaterial whether the testator designates the aliquot or fractional
parts or portions which will be given to each of them or not so long as
a state of indivision or co-ownership exists among them with respect
to the same inheritance, legacy or devise or with respect to the same
portion thereof. Using the language of the Code, so long as the designation made by the testator “does not identify the shares of each
by such description as shall make each heir the exclusive owner of
determinate property,” the right of accretion shall still take place.
Consequently, the words “one-half for each” or “in equal shares” or

6
7

Art. 983, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 1016, Civil Code.

460

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1017

any others shall not exclude the right of accretion.8 As a matter of
fact, even where the heirs, legatees or devisees are instituted to unequal aliquot or fractional parts or portions of the same inheritance,
legacy or devise or of the same portion thereof, since such inequality of distribution does not make each heir, legatee or devisee “the
exclusive owner of determine property,” the right of accretion shall
still take place. Thus, if the testator states in his will that he is leaving his entire estate to A, B, and C, in such a way that “they shall
inherit in equal shares,” or “that A shall inherit 1/2, B, 1/4, and C,
the remainder,” it is clear that if the testator dies, a state of indivision or co-ownership shall exist among the instituted heirs with
respect to the same inheritance. In other words, the designation of
the shares of each heir will not result in making each of them the
exclusive owner of determinate property. Consequently, if a vacancy
is created in the inheritance by reason of predecease, or incapacity,
or repudiation, the portion or share which is rendered vacant shall
accrue to the co-heirs.
However, if the property bequeathed consists of money or
fungible goods, according to the second paragraph of Art. 1017, there
shall be a right of accretion only if the share of each heir or legatee is
not “earmarked.” This provision resolves some of the doubts which
existed under the old Code. “Earmarked” simply means that there
must be a particular designation or a physical segregation from all
others of the same class. Consequently, if the shares of the legatees
in the money or fungible goods are not particularly designated or
physically segregated from each other, the right of accretion shall
take place; conversely, if the shares of the legatees are particularly
designated or physically segregated from each other the right of
accretion shall not take place. Thus, if the testator bequeaths the
balance of his current account at a certain bank to A, B, and C, in
such a way that A shall be entitled to 1/2, B, 1/4, and C, 1/4, it is
clear that if a vacancy is created by reason of predecease, incapacity
or repudiation in any of the designated shares, such vacant share
shall accrue to the co-legatees. The reason is that the shares given
to each of the legatees are not earmarked. It would be different,
however, if the testator states in his will that he is giving to A the
P20,000 which he had deposited at a certain bank, to B, the P10,00
which is kept in his safe at his office, and to C, the P10,000 which
8

Art. 1017, Civil Code.

461

ART. 1017

SUCCESSION

he had buried under his house. Since the shares given to each of the
legatees are earmarked, accretion shall not take place in case any of
them is rendered vacant by predecease, incapacity or repudiation.
(Note: There are some authorities, who, following a view
advocated by most Spanish commentators, maintains that in order that two or more persons shall be considered as being called
to the some inheritance, or to the same portion thereof, pro
indiviso, it is essential that they should be instituted without
designation of their quota or share, or if there is a designation,
at least, their respective quotas or shares should be aliquot or
fractional and equal at the same time. It is submitted that this
restrictive interpretation of the term pro indiviso is not sound.
We believe that even if the aliquot parts or fractional shares of
the co-heirs are unequal, accretion may still take place for the
following reasons:
1. Applying the test stated in Art. 1017, it is clear that
the designation of the aliquot parts or fractional shares to which
the co-heirs are called, although unequal, do not identify such
parts or shares by such description as shall make each co-heir
the exclusive owner of determinate property. In other words, the
designation will still result in a state of co-ownership or indivision.
2. Even the very text of Art. 1017 gives rise to the inference that the aliquot parts or fractional shares may be unequal.
The article says: The words “one-half for each” or “in equal
shares” or any others x x x shall not exclude the right of accretion. From the phrase “any others”, we can deduce the fact that
even if the parts or shares are unequal, accretion may still take
place.
3. Besides, according to Art. 1019 of the Code, which is
a new provision, the heirs to whom the portion goes by right of
accretion take it in the same proportion that they inherit. From
this provision it can be inferred that even if the parts or shares
of each heir are unequal, accretion may still take place.
4. Finally, to apply the rules of accretion is more in accordance with the presumed will of the testator.
Probably, a revisit to the equivalent provisions of the
Spanish Civil Code, which have been modified drastically by
Arts. 1016 and 1017 of the New Civil Code, will help. Thus:
“Art. 982. In order that in testamentary succession
the right of accretion may take place, the following are
required:

462

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1017

“(1) That two or more persons are called to the
same inheritance or to the same portion thereof without
special designation of shares.
“(2) That one. of the heirs designated dies before
the testator, renounces the inheritance, or is incapable to
receive it.
“Art. 983. It shall be understood that a designation
of shares has been made only in cases in which the testator has expressly determined a quota for each heir.
“The phrase “in halves or in equal parts” or other
which, though designating an aliquot part, do not fix such
part numerically or in such manner as may make each
of them the owner of a separate unit of property, do not
exclude the right of accretion.”
Comparing the above provisions with those of Arts. 1016 and
1017 of the New Civil Code, it is obvious that the opinions of
Spanish commentators with regard to their proper interpretation are no longer very relevant, considering the clear and explicit provisions of the New Civil Code, especially of Art. 1017.
It must, however, be noted that just because two or more
persons are called to inherit aliquot parts, (such as “in the proportion of 2:2:1”), or fractional shares, (such as “1/4 for A, 1/4 for
B, and 1/2 for C”), for the inheritance does not necessary mean
that if there is a vacancy in the inheritance as a result of predecease, incapacity or repudiation, the vacant portion accrues to
all of the instituted heirs. This may be illustrated by the following example: X instituted as his heirs A and B, with respect to
one-third (1/3) of his estate, C and D, with respect to one-third
(1/3), and E and F, with respect to the balance. A predeceased X.
How shall the estate be divided? It is clear that B alone will be
able to inherit by right of accretion. The others cannot because
they are not jointly (pro indiviso) instituted as co-heirs with respect to the one-third (1/3) portion allotted for A and B. But suppose that both A and B predeceased X, shall C, D, E, and F now
inherit by right of accretion? Since they are not instituted jointly
as co-heirs with respect to the one-third (1/3) portion which has
been rendered vacant, they cannot inherit by right of accretion.
Consequently, such vacant portion shall now be merged in the
mass of the hereditary estate, and shall be given to the legal
heirs of the testator in accordance with the rules of legal or intestate succession (Art. 1022, Civil Code).
In reality, it becomes a matter of construction. Thus if
X instituted as his universal heirs, A, B, C, D, E, and F, then

463

ART. 1018

SUCCESSION

stated that one-half (1/2) of his estate shall be given to A and
B, one-fourth (1/4), to C and D, and the balance, to E and F, the
situation is already different. If A predeceased the testator, undoubtedly, only B shall be benefited. He alone shall inherit the
portion rendered vacant by right of accretion. The reason is that
he and A are the only ones who are called jointly to inherit the
one-half (1/2) portion which is affected. But suppose that both A
and. B predeceased the testator, who shall inherit the one-half
(1/2) portion which has been rendered vacant? It is submitted
that C, D, E, and F shall be entitled to this vacant portion by
right of accretion. Both of the requisites prescribed by law in
order that there will be accretion are obviously present.

Idem; Vacancy in inheritance. — In addition to plurality of
subjects and unity of object, it is also essential in order that accretion
shall take place in testamentary succession that there is a vacancy
in the inheritance, legacy or devise. This vacancy may be caused by
any of the following: first, predecease of one of the instituted heirs,
legatees or devisees; second, incapacity of one of the instituted heirs,
legatees or devisees; third, repudiation by one of the instituted
heirs, legatees or devisees; fourth, nonfulfillment of the suspensive
condition attached to the institution of an heir or the designation
of a legatee or devisee; and fifth, void or ineffective testamentary
dispositions.9
Art. 1018. In legal succession the share of the person who
repudiates the inheritance shall always accrue to his co-heirs.10
Accretion in Intestate Succession. — In legal or intestate
succession, since by the very nature of the succession the legal heirs
are called by the law to the same inheritance, pro indiviso, only one
requisite is essential in order that the right of accretion shall take
place. There must be a vacancy in the inheritance. This vacancy may
be cause by either predecease, incapacity or repudiation. It must
be observed, however, that Art. 1018 speaks only of repudiation
and not of predecease and incapacity. The reason for this is that,
strictly speaking, in legal or intestate succession, a vacancy in the

9
See Art. 1016, par. 2, Civil Code; Torres and Lopez vs. Lopez, 49 Phil. 504; 16
Scaevola, 302-305.
10
Art. 981, Spanish Civil Code.

464

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1018

inheritance exists only in case of repudiation. It cannot exist in case
of predecease or incapacity.
(Note: We might as well spell it. In the field of civil law,
somehow we have fallen into the habit of echoing opinions of
Spanish commentators even in those cases where the provisions
of the New Civil Code are new or have drastically modified or
even changed the equivalent provisions of the Spanish Civil
Code. A very good example of this is the problem of accretion in
testamentary succession under Arts. 1016, 1017 and 1019 of the
Civil Code. We have already discussed this problem in our comments on Arts. 1016 and 1017. Another equally good example is
the problem of accretion in legal or intestate succession. In this
problem, two provisions of the Civil Code are directly involved.
They are Arts. 1018 and 1019. The first is an exact copy of Art.
981 of the Spanish Civil Code, while the second is a new provision. The questions which are usually asked are as follows: In legal or intestate succession, when does the right of accretion take
place? In case accretion takes place, is it not true that whether
the other heirs inherit by right of accretion or in their own right,
the result will still be the same? Practically all commentators
in this country answer the first question by saying that in legal or intestate succession, accretion may take place in case of
predecease, incapacity or repudiation. In the process they also
answer the second question by adding: “At any rate, whether
we say that the other heirs shall inherit by right of accretion or
in their own right will not make any difference. The result will
still be the same”.
Actually, in legal or intestate succession, accretion can
only take place in case of repudiation; it cannot take place, as
a rule, in case of either predecease or incapacity. The reason is
that, strictly speaking, in legal or intestate succession, a vacancy in the inheritance exists only in case of repudiation; it cannot exist in case of predecease or incapacity. That explains why
under the Civil Code of the Philippines (Art. 1018) and under
the Spanish Civil Code (Art. 781), the law speaks only of repudiation as the basis for accretion in legal or intestate succession,
but not of predecease or incapacity. And it is not correct to say
that whether or not there is accretion in case of predecease or
incapacity, the result will still be the same. We submit that the
result will not be the same. Otherwise, there would be no sense
in speaking of accretion in legal or intestate succession; in other
words, the subject of accretion would become material or important only in testamentary succession.

465

ART. 1018

SUCCESSION

Probably, the following example will serve to clarify the
problem:
Problem — X died intestate survived by: (1) his legitimate parents, F and M; (2) his widow, W; and (3) his acknowledged natural children, A and B. The net value of his estate is
P480,000.
(a) Suppose that F predeceased X or is incapacitated to
inherit from X, how shall the estate be divided?
(b) Suppose that F repudiated his inheritance, how
shall the estate be divided?
Answer — (a) The estate of P480,000 shall be divided as
follows: M shall be entitled to one-half (1/2), or P240,000; W
shall be entitled to one-fourth (1/4), or P120,000; and A and B
shall also be entitled to one-fourth (1/4), or P120,000, which they
shall divide in equal shares. (See Art. 1000, Civil Code.)
(b) If F had not repudiated his inheritance, the division
of the estate, applying Art. 1000 of the Civil Code would have
been as follows:
F ........................... P120,000
M ..........................

120,000

W ..........................

120,000

A ..........................

60,000

B ..........................

60,000

However, since F had repudiated his inheritance of P120,000, a
vacancy is created in the estate. What will happen now to this
vacant portion? According to Art. 1018 of the Civil Code, this
vacant portion shall accrue to F’s co-heirs. Therefore, applying
Art. 1019 of the Civil Code, the P120,000, which would have
passed to F, shall now pass to M, W, A, and B in the proportion of 2:2:1:1. In other words, M shall be entitled to two-sixth
(2/6) or one-third (1/3) of P120,000 by right of accretion; W, twosixths (2/6) or one-third (1/3) of P120,000 by right of accretion;
A, to one-sixth (1/6) of P120,000 by right of accretion; and B, to
one-sixth (1/6) of P120,000 by right of accretion. The distribution shall, therefore, be as follows:
M

...................... P120,000, as legal heir
40,000, by right of accretion

W

...................... 120,000, as legal heir
40,000, by right of accretion

466

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

A

......................

60,000, as legal heir
20,000, by right of accretion

B

.......................

60,000, as legal heir
20,000, by right of accretion

ART. 1018

P480,000
There are some, however, who are more inclined to accept
the view that when Art. 1019 says that “the heirs x x x take it
in the same proportion that they inherit,” the phrase “same proportion” refers to the proportional shares stated in the law itself,
which, in the above problem, would be one-half (1/2) for M, onefourth (1/4) for W and one-half (1/4) for A and B. Thus, M shall
be entitled to one-half (1/2) of the portion rendered vacant by
the act of repudiation of F; W, to one-fourth (1/4); and A and B,
also to one-fourth (1/4), which they shall divide in equal shares.
Therefore, according to them, the estate of P480,000 shall be
divided as follows:
M

...................... P120,000, as legal heir
60,000, by right of accretion

W

...................... 120,000, as legal heir
30,000, by right of accretion

A

.......................

60,000, as legal heir
15,000, by right of accretion

B

.......................

60,000, as legal heir
15,000, by right of accretion
P480,000

It is submitted that the first solution is more logical. If we
adopt the second solution, in effect, we shall be saying that the
P120,000 rendered vacant by the repudiation by F shall first be
merged in the mass of the hereditary estate and then given to
the legal heirs of X in their own right. Such a process would not
jibe or tally with the concept of accretion. As a matter of fact,
under this solution, there would be no accretion after all.
There are, however, two instances under our Code which
would justify accretion in intestate succession not only in case
of repudiation but even in case of predecease or incapacity. The
first is when the right of representation takes place and the
share of one of the representatives is rendered vacant. In such
case, the vacant share passes to the co-representatives by right
of accretion and not to all of the co-heirs in their own right. This

467

ARTS. 1019-1020

SUCCESSION

is logical, because, otherwise, the rule enunciated in Art. 974
of the Code to the effect that the division of the estate in such
case shall be made in such a manner that the representatives
shall not inherit more than what the person represented would
have inherited would be nullified. The second is when the decedent is survived only by grandparents in both paternal and
maternal lines and the share of one of them is rendered vacant.
In such case, the vacant share passes to the other grandparent
belonging to the same line by right of accretion and not to all
of the grandparents in their own right. This is likewise logical,
because, otherwise, the rule enunciated in the second paragraph
of Art. 987 of the Code to the effect that the estate in such case
shall be divided equally between paternal and maternal lines
would also be nullified.11

Art. 1019. The heirs to whom the portion goes by the right of
accretion take it in the same proportion that they inherit.12
Art. 1020. The heirs to whom the inheritance accrues shall
succeed to all the rights and obligations which the heir who
renounced or could not receive it would have had.13
Effect of Accretion. — The most important effect of accretion
is that the share or portion which is rendered vacant by predecease,
incapacity or repudiation is added or incorporated to the share of
the co-heirs, co-legatees or co-devisees.14 However, in testamentary
succession, a certain qualification must be made. Where the share
which is rendered vacant happens to be the share of a compulsory
heir, only that part of the share which is taken from the disposable
free portion shall pass to the co-heirs by right of accretion. The
legitime is not included. This is clear from the provision of Art.
1021. In case of predecease or incapacity, the legitime shall pass
to the children or descendants of the compulsory heir by right of
representation. If there are no children or descendants, the other
co-heirs shall succeed to it in their own right. In case of repudiation,
even if there are children or descendants of the compulsory heir who
had repudiated his inheritance, the right of representation cannot

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 317-318.
New provision.
13
Art. 984, Spanish Civil Code.
14
Art. 1015, Civil Code.
11
12

468

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1020

take place because of the principle that an heir who repudiates his
inheritance cannot be represented.15 Consequently, whether there
are children or descendants or not, the other co-heirs shall succeed
to it in their own right and not be right of accretion.16 In legal or
intestate succession, on the other hand, the rule is different. The
entire share which is rendered vacant shall pass to the co-heirs by
right of accretion.
Idem; Division in Case of Accretion. — Whether the succession is testamentary or intestate; if the right of accretion takes
place, the heirs to whom the vacant share or portion is assigned shall
divide it in the same proportion that they inherit.17 This method of
distribution may be illustrated by the following example:
Problem — In his will, the testator instituted his three
nephews, A, B, and C, as his universal heirs – A, to inherit 2/3
of the entire estate, B, 1/6, and C, also 1/6. After the death of
the testator, C repudiated his share. Assuming that the net remainder of the estate is P30,000, how shall the distribution be
made?
Answer — Had C not repudiated his share, the distribution of the estate would have been as follows:
A

.......................

P20,000

B

.......................

5,000

C

.......................

5,000

Since both of the requisites for accretion to take place in
testamentary succession are present, the P5,000 which would
have gone to C and which is now vacant because of C’s repudiation, shall be divided between A and B in the proportion of 4:1. In
other words, A shall be entitled to 4/5 of P5,000, or P4,000, while
B shall be entitled to 1/5 of P5,000, or P1,000. Consequently, the
distribution shall be as follows:
A

....................... P20,000, in his own right
4,000, by right of accretion

B

.......................

5,000, in his own right
1,000, by right of accretion
P30,000

Art. 977, Civil Code.
Art. 1021, Civil Code.
17
Art. 1019, Civil Code.
15
16

469

ART. 1020

SUCCESSION

Ideal; Division in Case of Conflict of Rights. — Probably,
the most complicated aspect of the law on succession is when there
is a conflict in the succession among three rights – first, the right of
representation, second, the right of accretion, and third, the right
of legal or intestate succession. This conflict exists when there is a
vacancy in the inheritance as a result of either predecease, incapacity,
or disinheritance of, or repudiation by, a co-heir, co-legatee or codevisee. The law, however, becomes simple if we are going to look
at it from the point of view of the effects of predecease, incapacity,
disinheritance, or repudiation in both testamentary and intestate
succession. The following chart will help:

Testamentary Succession
Legitime

Free Portion

Intestate
Succession

1. R

1. A

1. A

2. IS

2. IS

2. IS

Incapacity

Same

Same

Disinheritance

Same

—

—

Repudiation

IS

A

A

Predecease

Summary
A.

In testamentary succession:
1.

Legitime:
(a)

In case of predecease of an heir, there is representation
if there are children or descendants; if none, the
others inherit in their own right.

(b)

In case of incapacity of an heir, the results are the
same as in predecease.

(c)

In case of disinheritance of an heir, the results are
the same as in predecease.

(d)

In case of repudiation by an heir, the other heirs
inherit in their own right.
470

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

2.

ART. 1020

Disposable free portion:
Accretion takes place when requisites stated in Art.
1016, Civil Code, are present; but if such requisites are
not present, the other heirs inherit in their own right.

B.

In intestate succession:
1.

In case of predecease, there is representation if there are
children or descendants; if none, the other heirs inherit in
their own right.

2.

In case of incapacity, the results are the same as in predecease.

3.

In case of repudiation, there is always accretion.

The above principles may be illustrated by the following problems:
Problem No. 1 — X died intestate survived by: (1) A, B, D
and E, his legitimate children; (2) F and G, legitimate children
of C, a legitimate son of X who predeceased him; (3) H and I,
legitimate children of D; and (4) J and K, legitimate children of
E, D, however, is incapacitated to inherit from X because of an
act of unworthiness, while E repudiated his inheritance. If the
net value of the hereditary estate is P120,000, how shall it be
divided?
Answer — In the instant problem, actually, there are
three shares which are rendered vacant. They are: first, the
share which C would have inherited if he had not predeceased
the decedent; second, the share which D would have inherited
if he had the necessary capacity to inherit from the decedent;
and third, the share which E would have inherited if he had not
repudiated it. Since C is survived by two legitimate children, F
and G, such children shall now represent him in the inheritance
(Arts. 970, et seq., Civil Code). The same is true in the case of
H and I. They shall also represent their father, D, in the inheritance (Arts. 970, et seq., 1035, Civil Code. It is different in the
case of J and K. Since an heir who repudiates his inheritance
cannot be represented (Art. 977, Civil Code), there will be accretion in favor of the co-heirs, A and B (Arts. 1015, 1018, 1019,
Civil Code). Therefore, the hereditary estate of P120,000 shall
be divided as follows:
A

....................... P 24,000, in his own right
12,000, by right of accretion

471

ART. 1020

SUCCESSION

B

.......................

24,000, in his own right
12,000, by right of accretion

F

.......................

12,000, by right of representation

G

.......................

12,000, by right of representation

H

.......................

12,000, by right of representation

I

.......................

12,000, by right of representation
P120,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem, X
died testate. In his will, he instituted his five children, A, B, C,
D and E, as heirs to inherit to inherit in equal shares. However,
C died before him; D is incapacitated to inherit from him by reason of an act of unworthiness; and E repudiated his inheritance.
How shall the P120,000 estate be divided?
Answer — Had it not been for the predecease of C, the
incapacity of D and the repudiation by E, the hereditary estate
of P120,000 would have been divided as follows:
A

....................... P 12,000, as a compulsory heir
12,000, as a voluntary heir

B

.......................

12,000, as a compulsory heir
12,000, as a voluntary heir

C

......................

12,000, as a compulsory heir
12,000, as a voluntary heir

D

.......................

12,000, as a compulsory heir
12,000, as a voluntary heir

E

.......................

12,000, as a compulsory heir
12,000, as a voluntary heir
P120,000

Since C predeceased the testator, the legitime of P12,000
to which he would have been entitled as a compulsory heir shall
pass to his legitimate children, F and G, by right of representation, while the free portion of P12,000 to which he would have
been entitled as a voluntary heir shall pass to his co-heirs, A
and B, by right of accretion. The same is true in the case of D.
Since he is incapacitated to inherit from the testator because
of an act of unworthiness, the legitime of P12,000 to which he
would have been entitled as a compulsory heir shall pass to his
legitimate children, H and I, by right of representation, while

472

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1020

the free portion of P12,000 to which he would have been entitled
as a voluntary heir shall pass to his co-heirs, A and B, by right
of accretion. It is different in the case of E. Since he repudiated
his inheritance, he cannot be represented by his children, J and
K. Therefore, the legitime of P12,000 to which he would have
been entitled as a compulsory heir shall pass to the legal heirs
of the testator by intestate succession, while the free portion of
P12,000 to which he would have been entitled as a voluntary
heir shall pass to his co-heirs, A and B, by right of accretion.
Who are the legal heirs of the testator? A is a legal heir; B is a
legal heir; F, G, H and I are also legal heirs by right of representation. Hence, the P12,000 legitime repudiated by E shall be
divided among them as follows: 1/4 for A; 1/4 for B; 1/4 for F and
G; and 1/4 for H and I. Consequently, the division of the entire
hereditary estate is as follows:
A .................... P 12,000, as compulsory heir
12,000, as voluntary heir
18,000, by right of accretion
3,000, as legal heir
B ....................

12,000, as compulsory heir
12,000, as voluntary heir
18,000, by right of accretion
3,000, as legal heir

F ....................

6,000, by right of representation
1,500, as legal heir by representation

G ....................

6,000, by right of representation
1,500, as legal heir by representation

H ....................

6,000, by right of representation
1,500, as legal heir by representation

I

6,000, by right of representation
1,500, as legal heir by representation

....................

P120,000
Problem No. 3 — Suppose that in the above problem, the
testator instituted his five children as heirs to the entire disposable portion of his hereditary estate in the proportion of 1/5 for
A, 1/10 for B, 1/10 for C, 1/10 for D, and 1/2 for E, what is the
effect of the predecease of C, the incapacity of D by reason of an
act of unworthiness and the repudiation by E upon the division
of the P120,000 estate?

473

ART. 1020

SUCCESSION

Answer — Had it not been for the predecease of C, the
incapacity of D and the repudiation by E, the estate would have
been divided as follows:
A

....................... P 12,000, as compulsory heir
12,000, as voluntary heir

B

.......................

12,000, as compulsory heir
6,000, as voluntary heir

C

.......................

12,000, as compulsory heir
6,000, as voluntary heir

D

.......................

12,000, as compulsory heir
6,000, as voluntary heir

E

.......................

12,000, as compulsory heir
P30,000, as voluntary heir

Using the same analysis and the same line of reasoning
which we applied in the preceding problem, the estate shall be
divided as follows:
A ............. P 12,000,

as compulsory heir

12,000,

as a voluntary heir

4,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the predecease of C

4,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the incapacity of D

20,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the repudiation by E

3,000,

as legal heir because of repudiation by E

12,000,

as a compulsory heir 6,000, as a
voluntary heir

2,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the predecease of C

2,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the incapacity of D

B .............

474

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

F .............

G .............

H .............

I .............

ART. 1020

10,000,

as his proportionate share by right
of accretion because of the repudiation by E

3,000,

as legal heir because of repudiation by E

6,000,

by right of representation

1,500,

as legal heir by representation because of repudiation by E

6,000,

by right of representation

1,500,

as legal heir by representation because of repudiation by E

6,000,

by right of representation

1,500,

as legal heir by representation because of repudiation by E

6,000,

by right of representation

1,500,

as legal heir by representation because of repudiation by E

We are, of course, aware of some who hold the view that in
order that there will be accretion in the above hypothetical case,
it is necessary that the legitimate children should have been
instituted as heirs without designation of shares, or if there is a
designation, they should have been instituted “in equal shares”
or “one-fifth for each.” Therefore, according to them, since accretion cannot take place in the above case, the shares from the free
portion given to the child who predeceased the testator or who is
incapacitated to inherit from the testator or who repudiated his
inheritance shall be merged in the hereditary estate and given
to those who are legally entitled thereto in accordance with the
rules of intestate succession. It is submitted, however, that by
virtue of the provision of Art. 1017 of the New Civil Code which
entirely changed the provision of Art. 983 of the Spanish Civil
Code, this view which was adhered to by some commentators
under the old law, is no longer sound. Furthermore, under Art.
1019, a new provision, there is a clear inference that the co-heirs
may be instituted to unequal shares. Finally, the solution that
we have given is more in accordance with the presumed will of
the testator, which after all is the basis of accretion.
Problem No. 4 — X died intestate survived by: (1) B and
C, his legitimate children; (2) D, E, F and G, legitimate children

475

ART. 1020

SUCCESSION

of A, a legitimate child of X who predeceased him; (3) H and I,
legitimate children of B; and (4) J and K, legitimate children
of C. B, however, had been previously convicted of an attempt
upon the life of his father more than ten years ago. C, on the
other hand, repudiated his inheritance. If the hereditary estate
is worth P120,000, how shall it be divided?
Answer — Since A predeceased his father X, his legitimate
children D, E, F and G shall now represent him in the succession. The same is true in the case of B. Since he is incapacitated
to inherit from his father because of an act of unworthiness,
his legitimate children H and I shall represent him in the succession. It is different in the case of C. An heir who repudiates
his inheritance cannot be represented (Art. 977, Civil Code).
Therefore, the portion which C repudiated shall now accrue to
his co-heirs (Arts. 1018, 1019, Civil Code). But his co-heir A is
dead; his other co-heir B is incapacitated. There can, therefore,
be no accretion. Hence, the vacant portion shall pass to the legal
heirs of the decedent. The legal heirs are, of course, the grandchildren, D, E, F, G, H and I, who will divide such portion per
stirpes, since they inherit by representation. Thus, the division
shall be as follows:
D

.......................

P15,000

E

.......................

15,000

F

.......................

15,000

G

.......................

15,000

H

.......................

30,000

I

.......................

30,000
P120,000

Idem; Transmission of Rights and Obligations. — Another
effect of accretion is that the heirs to whom the vacant inheritance or
portion accrues shall succeed to all the rights and obligations which
would have pertained to the heir who died before the decedent,
or who is incapacitated to succeed, or who has repudiated his
inheritance.18
There is, however, one question that is ordinarily taken up in
connection with this effect. Can the co-heirs to whom the vacant share
will accrue repudiate their shares in the accretion? In other words,
18

Art. 893, Civil Code.

476

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1021

is the right of accretion voluntary or compulsory? Commentators are
divided with regard to the answer to this question. According to one
view, since each heir has a potential right not only to be the sole
owner of that share to which he is called to inherit, but also of the
entire inheritance, it is but logical that when the share of an heir
becomes vacant, the co-heirs, in order to comply with the expressed
or presumed will of the decedent, must necessarily accept their share
in the portion which is vacant. According to a second view, since
the acts of acceptance and repudiation are free and voluntary, and
since the right of accretion is a right and not an obligation, it is but
just that the co-heirs should be granted the option of accepting or
repudiating their shares in the accretion. According to a third view,
a distinction must be made between testamentary and intestate
succession. In the former, since the share which passes to a co-heir
by right of accretion is separate and distinct from the share which
passes to him by force of the testator’s will, it is but proper that
when he accepts his inheritance as an instituted heir, he is free to
accept or repudiate his share in the accretion. In the latter, however,
because of the principle that there can be no partial acceptance or
repudiation, once a co-heir accepts his share in the inheritance,
he must also accept his share in the accretion. We believe that the
second view is the most logical.19
Art. 1021. Among the compulsory heirs the right of accretion
shall take place only when the free portion is left to two or more of
them, or to any one of them and to a stranger.
Should the part repudiated be the legitime, the other coheirs
shall succeed to it in their own right, and not by the right of accretion.20
Effect of Compulsory Succession. — In testamentary
succession, when the heir who dies before the testator, or who is
incapable of succeeding, or who repudiates his inheritance, is a
compulsory heir, the right of accretion shall pertain only to the
free portion given to such heir but not to the legitime.21 What will,

See 7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 330-332; 17 Scaevola 329.
Art. 985, Spanish Civil Code.
21
Art. 977, Civil Code.
19
20

477

ARTS. 1021

SUCCESSION

therefore, happen to such legitime? The answer depends upon the
cause for the vacancy.
If the vacancy was due to predecease or incapacity, and the
heir who died before the testator or who cannot receive his share has
children or descendants of his own, such children or descendants
shall be entitled to the legitime by right of representation. If there
are no children or descendants, it shall be given to the legal heirs of
the testator in accordance with the rules of intestate succession.
On the other hand, if the vacancy was due to repudiation, the
legitime shall be given to the legal heirs of the testator in accordance
with the rules of intestate succession regardless of whether the
compulsory heir who had repudiated his share in the inheritance
has children or descendants of his own or not. This rule, which is
enunciated in the second paragraph of Art. 1021, is in conformity
with the principle that an heir who repudiates his inheritance
cannot be represented.
These principles may be illustrated by the following:
Problem No. 1— The testator executed a will instituting
his three legitimate children, A, B, and C, as his universal heirs.
According to the will, A shall be entitled to 1/2 of the entire
free portion, B, 1/4, and C, the remainder. C, however, cannot
inherit from the testator, because he had committed an act of
unworthiness. He has two legitimate children of his own, D
and E. Assuming that the net remainder of the estate after the
testator’s death is P120,000, how shall it be distributed?
Answer — Had it not been for the incapacity of C, the
estate would have been distributed as follows:
A

..................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
30,000, as voluntary heirs

B

..................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir

C

..................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir

As a result of C’s incapacity, there is now a vacancy in the
inheritance covering his legitime, to which he would have been
entitled by operation of law, amounting to P20,000, and his share
of the free portion, to which he would have been entitled by will,

478

COMMON PROVISIONS
Right of Accretion

ART. 1021

amounting to P15,000. As far as the legitime is concerned, the
amount shall pass to D and E by right of representation. As far
as the free portion of P15,000 is concerned, the amount shall pass
to A and B by right of accretion. D and E shall divide the P20,000
equally. A and B, on the other hand, shall divide the P15,000 in
the proportion of 2:1. In other words, A shall be entitled to 2/3 of
P15,000, or P10.000, while B shall be entitled to 1/3 of P15,000,
or P5,000. Consequently, the distribution will be as follows:
A

....................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
30,000, as voluntary heir
10,000, by right of accretion

B

.......................

20,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir
5,000, by right of accretion

D

.......................

10,000, by right of representation

E

.......................

10,000, by right of representation
P120,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the above problem,
instead of being incapacitated to succeed, C had repudiated his
inheritance, how shall the distribution be made?
Answer — As far as the legitime of P20,000 is concerned,
since D and E cannot represent their father, C, the amount shall
be given to A and B in accordance with the rules of intestate
succession. As far as the share of C in the free portion amounting
to P15,000 is concerned, the amount shall be given to A and B
by right of accretion. The distribution shall, therefore, be as
follows:
A

....................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
30,000, as voluntary heir
10,000, as legal heir
10,000, by right of accretion

B

....................... P 20,000, as compulsory heir
15,000, as voluntary heir
10,000, as legal heir
5,000, by right of accretion
120,000

479

ARTS. 1022-1025

SUCCESSION

Art. 1022. In testamentary succession, when the right of
accretion does not take place, the vacant portion of the instituted
heirs, if no substitute has been designated, shall pass to the legal
heirs of the testator, who shall receive it with the same charges
and obligations.22
Effect If Accretion Does Not Take Place. — In testamentary
succession, when there is a vacancy in the inheritance, but the right
of accretion does not take place because the first requisite stated in
Art. 1016 for accretion is not present, the share or portion which
is rendered vacant shall pass to the legal heirs of the testator in
accordance with the rules of intestate succession, who shall receive it
with the same charges and obligations. However, if a substitute has
been designated in the testator’s will, it shall pass to such substitute,
who shall receive it with the same charges and obligations.
Art. 1023. Accretion shall also take place among devisees,
legatees and usufructuaries under the same conditions established
for heirs.23

Section 2. Capacity to Succeed by Will
or by Intestacy
Art. 1024. Persons not incapacity by law may succeed by will
or ab intestato.
The provisions relating to incapacity by will are equally
applicable to intestate succession.1
Art. 1025. In order to be capacitated to inherit, the heir, devisee
or legatee must be living at the moment the succession opens,
except in case of representation, when it is proper.
A child already conceived at the time of the death of the
decedent is capable of succeeding provided it be born later under
the conditions prescribed in Article 41.2
22
23

1
2

Art. 986, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 987, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.

Art. 744, 914, Spanish Civil Code.
New provision.

480

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1025

Capacity to Succeed. — Under our Code, there is a disputable
presumption that every person, whether natural or juridical, can
succeed either ex testamento or ab intestato. This is evident from
the provision of Art. 1024. Consequently, in order to show that a
person does not have the necessary capacity to succeed, it must be
proved that he falls under an incapacity expressly provided for in
the Code.3 Capacity is, therefore, the general rule, while incapacity
is the exception.4
Idem; Requisites. — Reading the provision of Art. 1025 in
relation to the provision of Art. 1024, it is clear that in order that
a person can inherit either by will or by intestacy, the following
requisites must concur: first, that the heir, legatee or devisee must
be living or in existence at the moment the succession opens; and
second, that such heir, legatee or devisee must not be incapacitated
by law to succeed.
It must be noted that the first requisite is not absolute
in character. There are certain well-known exceptions. These
exceptions are regulated by the provisions of Arts. 1026, 1029,
and 1030 of the Code. On the other hand, the right given to the
representative to inherit by right of representation does not really
constitute an exception because, even in such case, it is essential
that the representative must be living at the moment the succession
opens.5 The same is true with regard to the right of a child already
conceived at the time of the death of the decedent. Under our law,
a conceived child shall be considered born for all purposes that are
favorable to it, provided that it be born later with the conditions
specified in Art. 41 of the Codes.6
Incapacity to Succeed. — Incapacity to succeed may be
either absolute or relative. Absolute incapacity is the incapacity of
a person, whether natural or juridical, to succeed any person in any
form with regard to any property. Relative incapacity, on the other
hand, is the incapacity of a person, whether natural or juridical, to
succeed by reason of a special relation which he has to the decedent,
or to other persons, or to the property disposed of.7
6 Sanchez Roman 225-226.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 13.
5
Art. 973, Civil Code.
6
Art. 40, Civil Code.
7
13 Scaevola 136; 6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 8.
3
4

481

ART. 1026

SUCCESSION

The following are absolutely incapacitated to succeed: first,
those who are not living or in existence at the time of the death of
the decedent, subject to the exceptions provided for in Arts. 1026,
1029 and 1030 of the Code; second, those who cannot be identified,
such as uncertain persons under Art. 845;8 and third, individuals,
associations and corporations not permitted by law to inherit.9
Relative incapacity, on the other hand, may be classified as
follows: first, incapacity based on the possibility of undue influence or
on interest, such as those specified in Nos. 1 to 5 of Art. 1027; second,
incapacity based on morality or public policy, such as those referred
to in Art. 1028; third, incapacity based on acts of unworthiness, such
as those specified in Art. 1032; and fourth, incapacity by operation
of law, such as the incapacity of the guilty spouse to inherit from
the innocent spouse if there is a decree of legal separation,10 or the
incapacity of the adopter to inherit from his adopted child,11 or the
incapacity of illegitimate children and legitimate relatives of the
decedent to inherit from each other.12
Art. 1026. A testamentary disposition may be made to the
State, provinces, municipal corporations, private corporations,
organizations, or associations for religious, scientific, cultural,
educational, or charitable purposes.
All other corporations or entities may succeed under a will,
unless there is a provision to the contrary in their charter or the
laws of their creation, and always subject to the same.13
Capacity of Entities or Associations. — The above article
expressly recognizes the capacity to succeed not only of juridical persons but also of associations for religious, scientific, cultural, educational, or charitable purposes. It is evident that such associations
are not juridical persons; hence, they do not have any juridical existence. It is, therefore, apparent that the right of such associations to

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 8; Resurreccion vs. Javier, 63 Phil. 599.
Art. 1027, No. 6, Civil Code.
10
Art. 106, No. 4, Civil Code.
11
Arts. 342, 984, Civil Code; Art. 39, No. 4, P.D. No. 603.
12
Art. 992, Civil Code.
13
Art. 746, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
8
9

482

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1027

succeed ex testamento constitutes an exception to the rule stated in
the first paragraph of Art. 1025.
Art. 1027. The following are incapable of succeeding:
(1) The priest who heard the confession of the testator
during his last illness, or the minister of the gospel who extended
spiritual aid to him during the same period;
(2) The relatives of such priest or minister of the gospel
within the fourth degree, the church, order, chapter, community,
organization, or institution to which such priest or minister may
belong;
(3) A guardian with respect to testamentary dispositions
given by a ward in his favor before the final accounts of the
guardianship have been approved, even if the testator should die
after the approval thereof; nevertheless, any provision made by
the ward in favor of the guardian when the latter is his ascendant,
descendant, brother, sister, or spouse, shall be valid;
(4) Any attesting witness to the execution of a will, the
spouse, parents, or children, or any one claiming under such witness, spouse, parents, or children;
(5) Any physician, surgeon, nurse, health officer or druggist
who took care of the testator during his last illness;
(6) Individuals, associations and corporations not permitted
by law to inherit.14
Incapacity Based on Undue Influence or Interest. —
There are three fundamental characteristics which can be applied
to the different incapacities or disqualifications enumerated from
No. 1 to No. 5 of the above article. No. 6 is excluded because the
individuals, associations and corporations referred to are absolutely
and not relatively incapacitated to succeed. In the first place, these
incapacities or disqualifications are based either on the possibility of
undue influence or on interest. In the second place, they are possible
only in testamentary succession. This is clear from the article itself.
In the third place, they are not only relative in character, but they
14

Arts. 745, 752, 753, 754, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

483

ART. 1027

SUCCESSION

are also partial in the sense that if the heir who is incapacitated or
disqualified is a compulsory heir, only the free portion given to him
is affected, but not his legitime.
Idem; Disqualification of priest or minister. — In order
that a priest or minister of the gospel shall be disqualified to succeed,
it is essential: first, that the priest must have heard the confession
of the testator during the latter’s last illness, or that the minister
must have extended spiritual aid to him during the same period;
and second, that the testator must have executed the will during
such last illness and not before. The second requisite is, of course,
essential because if the will had been executed before the testator’s
last illness, the reason behind the disqualification would no longer
exist.
What is meant by “last illness”? It is clear that the qualification
of the word “illness” by the word “last” conveys the idea that it must
be the illness of which the testator died. However, the fact that the
latter died from some other cause does not necessarily exclude the
application of the disqualification. Thus, let us take up the case of
a testator who has already been pronounced by his physicians as
dying from cancer. He dies not from the cancer, but from some other
cause, such as an accident. The disqualification in such a case shall
still apply. Hence, what is really essential is that there must be an
imminent or impending danger of the illness being the last as far as
the testator is concerned at the time he executed the will.15
There is another problem which arises as a result of this
disqualification. Suppose that the testator, after he has been
pronounced hopeless by his physicians, executes a will disposing
of all of his disposable properties in favor of the minister who is
extending spiritual aid to him. After a few months, he is still very
much alive and feeling much stronger. He makes no effort to change
the testamentary disposition. Can the disqualification be applied
if he dies ten months afterwards as a result of a sudden relapse
from the same illness? Authorities are evenly divided with regard
to the answer to this question. According to one view, there is a
presumption juris et de jure that the testamentary disposition is
void; consequently, there can be no ratification or confirmation of
the same.16 According to a second view, the failure of the testator to
15
16

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 48-49.
6 Sanchez Roman 264.

484

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1027

rectify the testamentary disposition is deemed to be a ratification
or confirmation of the same.17 We believe that the second view is
more logical. So long as there is a sufficient time for the testator
to meditate on the consequences of his act, his failure to rectify
the disposition which he had made clearly indicates that there is
a tacit confirmation. After all, the basis of disqualification is the
presumption that at the threshold of death the testator becomes
an easy prey to the scheming priest or minister. Once such basis is
removed he becomes again a free agent. Consequently, his failure
to revoke or rectify the disposition is deemed to be a confirmation of
the same.18
Under paragraph (2), the disqualification of priests and ministers
of the gospel is extended to their relatives within the fourth degree
as well as to the church, order, chapter, community, organization,
or institution to which they may belong. The reason for extending
the disqualification is of course the possibility of undue influence. It
must be observed, however, that the law does not include among the
persons disqualified the spouse of the priest or minister. Hence, if
the beneficiary is the wife of the minister of the gospel who extended
spiritual aid to the testator during the latter’s last illness, she would
not be disqualified. Otherwise, we would be reading into the law
what is not found there. Besides, capacity to succeed is the general
rule, while incapacity to succeed is the exception. Consequently, the
rules on incapacity must be strictly construed.
Idem; Disqualification of Guardians. — In order that a
guardian shall be disqualified to succeed from his ward, it is essential
that the will of the ward must have been executed before the approval
of the final accounts of guardianship. The disqualification applies
even if the ward should die after the approval thereof. However, it
does not apply if the guardian is an ascendant, descendant, brother,
sister, or spouse of the testator.
Idem; Disqualification of Witnesses. — Unlike the others,
it must be observed that the basis of the disqualification of an
instrumental witness, or of his spouse, parents, or children, or of
anyone claiming under such witness, spouse, parents or children is
not the possibility of undue influence but interest. In other words,

17
18

13 Scaevola 244-247.
Ibid.

485

ART. 1028

SUCCESSION

the fact that the beneficiary is an attesting witness or that he is
the spouse, parent, or child of one of the attesting witnesses or that
he is claiming under such witness, spouse, parent, or child will be
sufficient to disqualify him. The disqualification, however, is not
absolute. Under Art. 823 of the Code, such disqualification does not
apply “if there are three other competent witness” to the execution
of the will.
Idem; Disqualification of Physicians or Nurses. —Any
physician, surgeon, nurse, health officer or druggist who took care
of the testator during his last illness is also disqualified to succeed
by will. The position of the physician or nurse who took care of the
testator during his last illness is very similar to that of the priest or
minister of the gospel in paragraph (1) of the article under discussion.
Consequently, what had been previously stated with regard to the
meaning of “last illness” can also be applied here. The disqualification,
however, is not extended to the relatives of the physician or nurse,
or to the organization or institution to which such physician or nurse
may belong. Furthermore, unlike the disqualification of guardians
in paragraph (3), here there are no exceptions. Does this mean that
if the physician or nurse who took care of the testator during the
latter’s last illness happens to be his spouse, ascendants, descendant,
brother, or sister, the disqualification shall be applied? We believe
that in this case it would be difficult to invoke the technicalities of
statutory construction by saying that we cannot read into the law
what is not found there. Human nature dictates that such relatives
should take care of the testator during his illness. To disqualify
them because of the possibility of undue influence would be unjust
and illogical. Besides, when a husband, wife, parents or child rushes
to the bedside of the testator who is about to die, he or she does so
because he or she is the spouse, parent, or child and not because
he or she is a physician or nurse. It is therefore, submitted that if
the physician or nurse who took care of the testator during his last
illness is his spouse, ascendant, or descendant, the disqualification
specified in paragraph (5) cannot be applied.
Art. 1028. The prohibitions mentioned in Article 739, concerning donations inter vivos shall apply to testamentary provisions.19

19

New provision.

486

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1029

Incapacity Based on Morality or Public Policy. — By
virtue of the provision of the above article, which incorporates by
reference the prohibitions mentioned in Art. 739 of the Code, the
following are also disqualified to succeed:
(1) Any person with whom the testator was guilty of adultery
or concubinage at the time of the making of the will;
(2) Any person found guilty of the same criminal offense as
the testator, where the disposition is the consideration thereof; and
(3) Any public officer or his spouse, descendant, or ascendant,
where the disposition is given by reason of the office of such public
officer.20
In the first, previous criminal conviction is not necessary, while
in the second, it is indispensable.21
These disqualifications are based on good morals and public policy. Like the disqualifications provided for in the preceding
article, they are applicable only in testamentary succession. Furthermore, they are not only relative in character, but they are also
partial in the sense that if the heir who is disqualified is a compulsory heir, the incapacity shall apply only to the free portion given to
him, but not to his legitime.
Art. 1029. Should the testator dispose of the whole or part
of his property for prayers and pious works for the benefit of his
soul, in general terms and without specifying its application, the
executor, with the court’s approval shall deliver one-half thereof or
its proceeds to the church or denomination to which the testator
may belong, to be used for such prayers and pious works, and
the other half to the State, for the purposes mentioned in Article
1013.22
Dispositions for Benefit of Testator’s Soul. — In order that
the rule stated in the above article can be applied, it is necessary
that the following requisites must concur: first, that the testator
must have disposed of the whole or part of his estate for prayers and

Art. 739, Civil Code.
Ibid.
22
Art. 747, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
20
21

487

ART. 1029

SUCCESSION

pious works for the benefit of his soul; second, that the disposition
must be in general terms without specifying its application. Once
both of these requisites will concur, the executor or administrator of
the estate, with the court’s approval, shall deliver one-half thereof
to the church or denomination to which the testator may belong, to
be used for prayers and pious works, and the other half to the State,
for the purposes mentioned in Art. 1013 of the Code. Thus, if the
testator states in his will that he is disposing of his entire estate
to be used for the benefit of his soul, or that he is leaving one-half
of his estate to be used for prayers and pious works for the benefit
of his soul, Art. 1029 is applicable. But if he imposes a charge upon
one of the heirs, or legatees, or devisees to use a certain property or
a certain amount for prayers and pious works for the benefit of his
soul, or if he specifies the application of the property, such as when
he state that one-half or one-fourth of his estate shall be used for
prayers and masses dedicated to our Lady of Perpetual Help every
Wednesday for a period of ten years from the time of his death, Art.
1029 is no longer applicable. Consequently, the will of the testator
must be complied with literally.
Spanish commentators maintain that what is actually
contemplated in Art. 1029 is the institution of the testator’s soul
as heir.23 This is in deference to the religious and moral ideas of
the decedent. Whatever it is, there is no question that it constitutes
an exception to the rules of identity and existence with respect to
the capacity to succeed. This is so because once the testator has
appointed an heir, devisee or legatee charged with the obligation or
burden of applying even the whole estate for prayers for the testator’s
soul, Art. 1029 can no longer be applied.24 This is so because the
law requires that the disposition must be made in general terms
without specifying the application of the property disposed of.
Hence, it differs from the institution of a persona incieta under Art.
845 where the only uncertainty is with regard to the identity of the
person instituted but not with regard to his existence; it differs from
dispositions made in favor of a specified class or cause (Arts. 786 and
1030) where, although the instituted heir is a universal or abstract
concept (unum in multis), yet there are persons, natural or artificial,
comprised within such concept.

23
24

6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 30-31; 6 Sanchez Roman 243-244.
13 Scaevola 188-193.

488

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1030

Villavicencio vs. Quinio
67 Phil. 367
The third clause of the last will and testament of Eugenia
Zuniga del Rosario, which was duly probated, is as follows:
“Tercero: Declaro que tengo bienes inmuebles, muebles,
semimovientes, vasa y camarin que he heredado de mis padres
y hermanos y, no, teniendo yo heredero forzoso como ya ha dicho
mas arriba, he dispuesto que mis citados bienes sean destinados
solamente para la paz y felicidad de mi alma y de las mis padres y hermanos, y tambien para el beneficio de la iglesia, en la
manera siguiente: x x x”
Relatives of the testatrix within the fifth degree filed a
motion, approved by the Bishop of Lipa, praying that they be
declared the intestate heirs of the said testatrix on the ground
that, after the deduction of the amounts for the alms and masses
provided for by the testatrix in her will, there will still be a sizable balance left out of her properties, which, in the absence of
any disposition made by the said testatrix, must pass by operation of law to her legal or intestate heirs. The Supreme Court,
however, ruled:
“Such contention on the part of the movant is based on
something entirely inconsistent with what the testatrix has ordered in the third clause of her will. The testatrix in said clause
had disposed of her proportions in accordance with the provision
of Article 747 (now Art. 1029) of the Civil Code, a disposition
absolutely within her right, having no forced heirs.
“The collateral relatives of the deceased, E. Z. del Rosario,
not being forced heirs, are not entitled to succeed her as to the
remainder of her properties, which does not exist, or as to the
naked ownership of the same. The provisions of the will disposing her properties for masses and pious works, the validity of
which is not questioned herein, should be complied with because
the testatrix, not having forced heirs, may dispose of her properties as she did in her will, for masses and pious works for the
benefit of her soul and those of her relatives.”

Art. 1030. Testamentary provisions in favor of the poor
in general, without designation of particular persons or of any
community, shall be deemed limited to the poor living in the
domicile of the testator at the time of his death, unless it should
clearly appear that his intention was otherwise.
489

ARTS. 1031-1032

SUCCESSION

The designation of the persons who are to be considered
as poor and the distribution of the property shall be made by the
person appointed by the testator for the purpose; in default of such
person, by the executor; and should there be no executor, by the
justice of the peace, the mayor, and the municipal treasurer, who
shall decide by a majority of votes all questions that may arise. In
all these cases, the approval of the Court of First Instance shall be
necessary.
The preceding paragraph shall apply when the testator
has disposed of his property in favor of the poor of a definite
locality.25
Art. 1031. A testamentary provision in favor of a disqualified
person, even though made under the guise of an onerous contract,
or made through an intermediary, shall be void.26
Art. 1032. The following are incapable of succeeding by
reason of unworthiness:
(1) Parents who have abandoned their children or induced
their daughters to lead a corrupt or immoral life, or attempted
against their virtue.
(2) Any person who has been convicted of an attempt
against the life of the testator, his or her spouse, descendants, or
ascendants;
(3) Any person who has accused the testator of a crime for
which the law prescribes imprisonment for six years or more, if
the accusation has been found groundless;
(4) Any heir of full age who, having knowledge of the violent
death of the testator, should fail to report it to an officer of the law
within a month, unless the authorities have already taken action;
this prohibition shall not apply to cases wherein, according to law,
there is no obligation to make an accusation;
(5) Any person convicted of adultery or concubinage with
the spouse of the testator;

25
26

Art. 749, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 755, Spanish Civil Code.

490

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1032

(6) Any person who by fraud, violence, intimidation, or
undue influence should cause the testator to make a will or to
change one already made;
(7) Any person who by the same means prevents another
from making a will, or from revoking one already made, or who
supplants conceals, or alters the latter’s will;
(8) Any person who falsifies or forges a supposed will of
the decedent.27
Incapacity Due to Unworthiness. — There are three fundamental characteristics which can be applied to the different incapacities which are enumerated in the above article. In the first
place, they are based on offenses committed by the disqualified person against the decedent which render him unworthy to succeed. In
the second place, they are applicable not only in testamentary succession, but also in legal or intestate succession. In the third place,
although they are relative in character, they are also total in the
sense that if the heir who is disqualified is a compulsory heir, the
incapacity shall apply not only to the free portion given to him but
even to his legitime.
Unlike the incapacities referred to in Arts. 1027 and 1028,
incapacity by reason of unworthiness is applicable not only in
testamentary succession, but also in legal or intestate succession.
This is so in spite of the fact that Art. 1032 uses the word “testator.”
Whereas under Art. 1027 and 1028, the reason for disqualification
can exist only in testamentary succession, under Art. 1032, the
reason can exist in either testamentary or intestate succession.
Most of the acts of unworthiness enumerated in Art. 1032, such
as those stated in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (5), and (6), are also grounds
for disinheritance.28 Consequently, what had been stated under
Arts. 919, 920, and 921 with regard to these offenses as grounds for
disinheritance are also applicable here. Hence, only those which are
not grounds of disinheritance will be discussed.
According to paragraph (4), any heir of full age who, having
knowledge of the violent death of the decedent, should fail to report

27
28

Arts. 756, 673, 674, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Arts. 919, 920, 921, Civil Code.

491

ART. 1032

SUCCESSION

it to an officer of the law within a month shall be incapable of
succeeding by reason of unworthiness, unless the authorities have
already taken action. However, this incapacity shall not apply to
cases wherein, according to law, there is no obligation to make an
accusation. The following requisites must, therefore, concur: first,
that the heir must be of full age; second, that he must have knowledge
of the violent death of the decedent; third, that he must have failed
to report the matter to the proper authorities; and fourth, that there
must be a legal obligation to make an accusation. It is clear that the
last requisite has rendered the incapacity useless for all practical
purposes. In this jurisdiction there is no obligation imposed by the
law to make an accusation in such cases.
In paragraph (5), it must be noted that the heir who is incapable
of succeeding by reason of unworthiness is the person who is
convicted of adultery or concubinage with the spouse of the decedent.
The spouse is not included. Hence, as far as the law is concerned, the
husband or wife who is convicted of either adultery or concubinage
is not unworthy to inherit from the decedent. The only time when
such husband or wife cannot inherit is when the offended spouse
will act positively either by securing a decree of legal separation29 or
by disinheriting him or her.30 So strong is the presumption in favor
of the solidarity of marriage that even where one of the spouses has
been convicted of the most grievious offense against the sanctity
of the marriage vows, the law refuses to pronounce judgment.
Consequently, whether such spouse can inherit or not is a question
which only the offended spouse can decide.
Problem — H caught his wife, W, committing adultery
with his own brother, B. The two were subsequently convicted
as a result of a criminal action brought by H against them. A few
days ago, H died intestate leaving considerable properties. His
only surviving relatives are: (a) W; (b) B; and (c) C and D, first
cousins. Who shall inherit from him?
Answer — W, alone, shall inherit from H. Legally, the
criminal conviction of W for adultery is not an act of unworthiness within the meaning of Art. 1032 of the Civil Code. The only
time when a guilty spouse is considered unworthy to inherit
from the other is when there is a decree of legal separation. (See
29
30

Art. 106, No. 4, Civil Code.
Art. 921, No. 4, Civil Code.

492

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1033

Art. 106, No. 4, Civil Code). Here, there is no legal separation.
It is different in the case of B. He is unworthy to inherit from
H because he has been convicted of adultery with the spouse of
the decedent (Art. 1032, No. 5, Civil Code). In the case of C and
D, although there is no question about their capacity to inherit
from H, nevertheless, they are excluded from the succession by
the presence of W.

In paragraphs (6), (7), and (8), it must also be noted that
actually there are six kinds of offenses connected with the execution
or revocation of wills which the law considers as acts of unworthiness.
These offenses are: (1) causing the testator to make a will; (2) causing
the testator to change one already made; (3) preventing the testator
to make a will; (4) preventing the testator from revoking one already
made; (5) supplanting, concealing, or altering the testator’s will; and
(6) falsifying a supposed will of the decedent. It is evident that it is
only the first, second, third, and fourth where it is necessary that
fraud, violence, intimidation, or undue influence must be proved in
order that the heir responsible is incapacitated to succeed by reason
of unworthiness. In the others, such proof is no longer necessary
because the very act itself signifies fraud on the part of the heir
responsible.31
Art. 1033. The causes of unworthiness shall be without effect
if the testator had knowledge thereof at the time he made the will,
or if, having known of them subsequently, he should condone
them in writing.32
Pardon of Acts of Unworthiness. — Since acts of unworthiness within the meaning of Act. 1032 are offenses directed against
the decedent, only the decedent himself and no other can erase the
effects of such acts of unworthiness. He can do this by pardoning
the offense either expressly or impliedly. There is an express pardon when the decedent condones the act of unworthiness in writing.
There is an implied or tacit pardon when the testator, with knowledge of the act of unworthiness, executes a will instituting the person who has committed the offense as an heir.

31
32

6 Sanchez Roman 282.
Art. 757, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

493

ART. 1033

SUCCESSION

Although the law does not expressly say so, it is clear that
express pardon can take place in either testamentary or intestate
succession, while implied or tacit pardon can only take place in
testamentary succession.
The act of the decedent in pardoning an act of unworthiness
must not be confused with reconciliation. The first is a unilateral
act, while the second is a bilateral act requiring the concurrence
of the offender. The fact that there is a reconciliation between the
decedent and the unworthy heir does not necessarily mean that
the effects of the act of unworthiness are erased. Under our Code,
a subsequent reconciliation between the offender and the offended
person deprives the latter of the right to disinherit, and renders
ineffectual any disinheritance that may have been made.33 It cannot,
however, erase the effects of an act of unworthiness. In order to do
so there must be a pardon, which may be either express or tacit, in
conformity with the form prescribe by Art. 1033. Thus, if a son of the
decedent has committed an act of unworthiness, the mere fact that
before the death of the decedent there was a reconciliation between
him and his son does not mean that the effects of the latter’s act of
unworthiness are erased. But if the decedent, before his death, had
condoned the offense of his son in writing, or if he had executed a
will instituting his son as an heir, with knowledge of the offense
committed against him, the result would be different. There would
then be a pardon within the meaning of Art. 1033. The effects of the
act of unworthiness are erased altogether.
There is, however, a problem arising from the distinction
between pardon and reconciliation which is rather controversial in
character. The problem may be illustrated by the following example:
The testator’s wife is convicted of an attempt against his life.
Subsequently, he executes a will expressly disinheriting his wife.
Later, there is a reconciliation between the two, but the testator dies
without changing or revoking the will. Can the wife inherit from her
husband? According to one view, the wife cannot inherit from her
husband because, although the subsequent reconciliation between
her and the decedent has the effect of rendering the disinheritance
ineffectual in accordance with Art. 922 of the Code, it cannot have
the effect of erasing the act of unworthiness. Under Art. 1033 of

33

Art. 922, Civil Code.

494

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1034

the Code, the effects of acts of unworthiness can be erased only by
either express or implied pardon, and certainly, under the facts
stated in the problem, there is no pardon, whether express or
implied.34 According to a second view, the wife can inherit from her
husband because from the moment that the testator executed a will
disinheriting his wife, the law on disinheritance governs and not
the law on incapacity. Consequently, the provision of Art. 922 of the
Code regarding the effect of reconciliation is applicable and not the
provision of Art. 1033 regarding the effect of pardon.35 We believe
that the first view is more logical.
Art. 1034. In order to judge the capacity of the heir, devisee or
legatee, his qualification at the time of the death of the decedent
shall be the criterion.
In cases falling under Nos. 2, 3, or 5 of Article 1032, it shall
be necessary to wait until final judgment is rendered, and in the
case falling under No. 4, the expiration of the month allowed for
the report.
If the institution, devise, or legacy should be conditional
the time of the compliance with the condition shall also be
considered.36
Time to Determine Capacity. — In general, capacity is
determined at the moment of the death of the decedent. The reason
for the rule is that it is only then that the property and transmissible
rights and obligations of the decedent are actually transmitted to
those who are called to succeed either by will or by operation of law.
It is, therefore, logical that such persons must have the necessary
capacity to succeed at such time. There are, however, three exceptions
to this rule. In the first place, in the case of those who may be
disqualified under Nos. (2), (3), and (5) of Art. 1032, or No. 2 of Art.
739, it will be necessary to wait until final judgment is rendered; in
the second place, in the case of those who may be disqualified under
No. (4) of Art. 1032, it will be necessary to wait for the expiration
of the month allowed for the report; and in the third place, if the

Manresa, 7th Ed., p. 694; 14 Scaevola 920.
6 Sanchez Roman 1130.
36
Art. 758, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
34
35

495

ART. 1035

SUCCESSION

institution of heirs, or the legacy or devise is conditional, the time of
the compliance with the condition shall also be considered.37
The third exception refers to an institution of heir, or a legacy
or devise which is subject to a suspensive condition. In such case,
the law requires that the heir, legatee or devisee must have the
necessary capacity to succeed not only at the time of the death of
the decedent, but also at the time of the fulfillment of the condition.
This rule is logical because when the institution, legacy or devise
is subject to a suspensive condition, the heir, legatee or devisee
actually acquires a hope or expectancy which is protected by the
law from the very moment of the death of the decedent — a hope or
expectancy which is finally converted into a perfected right from the
moment the condition is fulfilled.
Art. 1035. If the person excluded from the inheritance by reason of incapacity should be a child or descendant of the decedent
and should have children or descendants, the latter shall acquire
his right to the legitime.
The person so excluded shall not enjoy usufruct and administration of the property thus inherited by his children.38
Effect of Incapacity Upon Compulsory Heirs. — If the
heir who is incapable of succeeding is a compulsory heir, whether or
not his right to his legitime is affected shall depend upon the cause
of his incapacity.
If the incapacity is due to any of the causes specified in either
Art. 1027 or Art. 739, only the free portion given to the heir is
affected, but not his legitime. In other words, he is incapacitated to
succeed only as a voluntary heir or as a legatee or devisee, but not
as a compulsory heir. This is clear not only from the phraseology of
the law, but also from the very nature and basis of the incapacity
itself. Thus, if the testator had executed a will during his last illness,
and in the will, he bequeaths P10,000 to the priest who heard
his confession, and it so happens that such priest is his own son,
certainly, the right of such son to the legitime which the law has
reserved for him is not affected. While it is true that under No. 1 of

37
38

Art. 1034, Civil Code.
Art. 761, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

496

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ART. 1035

Art. 1027, he is incapacitated to succeed because there is always the
possibility of undue influence, yet such reason cannot possibly be
applied to the legitime which is reserved for him, not by force of the
testator’s will, but by operation of law.
Problem — When the attending physician of X finally informed the latter that he is suffering from the last stages of
cancer and that he cannot live longer than one month, he called
up his son A, a priest. It was the latter who heard his last confession. After the confession, he executed a will wherein he gave
the disposable free portion of his estate in the proportion of “onethird for each” to his two sons, A and B, who are his only compulsory heirs, and to a friend, F. He died ten days afterwards.
The net value of his estate is P120,000. During the administration proceedings, B, who was not in good terms with his brother
A, contended that the latter is incapacitated to inherit from the
testator pursuant to the provisions of No. 1 of Art. 1027 of the
Civil Code. Is he correct? Reasons.
Answer — B is correct. A is certainly incapacitated under
No. 1 of Art. 1027 of the Civil Code. There can be no question
about that. But B is also incapacitated to inherit from the testator under No. 2 of the same article being a brother of A, and
therefore, a collateral relative of the latter within the fourth degree. There can also be no question about that.
It must be noted, however, that their legitime will not be
affected by their disqualification. What is affected is their share
in the disposable free portion. Such shares shall pass to their coheir, F, by right of accretion pursuant to Arts. 1016 and 1017 of
the Civil Code. Therefore, A shall still be entitled to his legitime
of P30,000; B, to his legitime of P30,000; and F, to the entire free
portion of P60.000.

If the incapacity, however, is due to any of the causes specified
in Art. 1032, it is clear that even the legitime of the compulsory
heir who has committed the act of unworthiness is affected. It is
well-settled not only because of the phraseology of the law, but also
because of the very nature of the incapacity itself, that incapacity
due to unworthiness has the effect of depriving the heir of any
share or participation in the inheritance. This applies not only to
the share to which he is entitled by force of the testator’s will, but
also to the share to which he is entitled by law. It must be noted,
however, that the incapacity is personal; it cannot, therefore attach
to his own children or descendants. Consequently, in testamentary
497

ART. 1036

SUCCESSION

succession, if the heir who has committed the act of unworthiness
is a compulsory heir in the direct descending line and he should
have children or descendants of his own, the latter shall acquire his
right to the legitime. If there are no children or descendants who
can represent him, then the legitime shall be given to those who are
entitled thereto in accordance with the rules of intestate succession.
The same principle is also applied in legal or intestate succession.
If the legal heir who has committed the act of unworthiness should
have children or descendants of his own, the latter shall be entitled
to the entire share which is rendered vacant, provided, of course,
that the right of representation can properly take place. If there are
no children or descendants who can represent him, then the vacant
share shall be given to those who are entitled thereto by right of
accretion.
Art. 1036. Alienations of hereditary property, and sets of administration performed by the excluded heir, before the judicial
order of exclusion, are valid as to third persons who acted in good
faith; but the co-heirs shall have a right to recover damages from
the disqualified heirs.39
Effect of Acts of Disqualified Heir. — Alienations of
hereditary property by the disqualified heir before he is excluded
from the succession by a judicial order of exlcusion are valid as to
third persons who acted in good faith. In other words, a purchaser
in good faith and for value is protected, but the co-heirs who are
ultimately adjudged the real heirs of the decedent shall have to
recover the damages from the disqualified heir. Hence, after the
decedent’s death, if one of the alleged heirs and known to be such,
sells his undivided share in the inheritance to a third person who is
unaware of any defect or flaw in the vendor’s title, such sale shall be
valid, if, subsequently, the vendor shall be judicially excluded from
the inheritance by reason of any incapacity. Although the alienation
is valid, the co-heirs who are prejudiced shall have a right to recover
damages from the disqualified heir.
The same rules are applicable with respect to acts of administration performed by the disqualified heir before the judicial order of
exclusion. This is especially apparent when the heir is in possession
39

New provision.

498

COMMON PROVISIONS
Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy

ARTS. 1037-1039

of the property or estate. Third persons who are affected by such
acts, relying upon the apparent authority of the possessor, not only
as possessor of the property, but also as alleged heir of the decedent,
shall be protected. But, again, in such case, the co-heirs shall have a
right to recover damages from the disqualified heir.
Art. 1037. The unworthy heir who is excluded from the succession has a right to demand indemnity for any expenses incurred
In the preservation of the hereditary property, and to enforce such
credits as he may have against the estate.40
Art. 1038. Any person incapable of succession, who, disregarding the prohibition stated in the preceding articles, entered
into the possession of the hereditary property, shall be obliged to
return it together with its accessions.
He shall be liable for all the fruits and rents he may have received, or could have received through the exercise of due diligence.41
Art. 1039. Capacity to succeed is governed by the law of the
nation of the decedent.42
Governing Law If Decedent is a Foreigner. — Under
the Civil Code, in case of conflict of laws, generally, we adhere to
the nationality principle. Thus, according to Art. 15 of the Code,
“family rights and duties or the status, condition and legal capacity
of Filipino citizens who are living abroad are governed by Philippine
law.” This general provision has always been understood, even
before the effectivity of the New Civil Code, as implying that in the
case of foreigners, it is their national law that shall govern their
family rights and duties or their status, condition and legal capacity
if they are living in the Philippines, and not Philippine law. Be that
as it may, the law of succession is much more explicit. There are four
aspects of succession which are governed by the national law of the
decedent if he is a foreigner. They are: first, the order of succession;
second; the amount of successional rights; third, the intrinsic validity
of testamentary provisions; and fourth, the capacity to succeed. The

New provision.
Art. 760, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
42
New provision.
40
41

499

ART. 1040

SUCCESSION

first three are enumerated in the second paragraph of Art. 16, while
the last is stated in Art. 1039.
Problem — Gold was a citizen of State X under whose
law an illegitimate child is not an intestate heir. He died in the
Philippines without a will leaving considerable properties in
Manila. Can Octavio, an acknowledged illegitimate son of Gold
by a Filipina woman, legally claim inheritance by invoking the
succession rights of acknowledged illegitimate children under
Philippine law. (1974 Bar Problem)
Answer — Octavio cannot legally claim inheritance from
his father Gold by invoking the successional rights of acknowledged illegitimate children under Philippine law. In this country, where the question before the court involves the legal capacity of the claimant to succeed the decedent who is a foreigner,
we adhere to the nationality principle. According to the Civil
Code, “capacity to succeed is governed by the law of the nation
of the decedent.” (Art. 1039). So what is applicable is the law of
X State which declares that illegitimate children cannot inherit
by intestate succession.

Art. 1040. The action for a declaration of incapacity and for
the recovery of the inheritance, devise or legacy shall be brought
within five years from the time the disqualified person took possession thereof. It may be brought by any one who may have an
interest in the succession.43
Remedy Against Disqualified Heir. — The action defined
in the above article has a two-fold purpose — first, a declaration of
incapacity, and second, recovery of the inheritance, devise or legacy.
Hence, what is contemplated is a case in which the disqualified heir,
devisee or legatee has already taken possession of the property.
Therefore, the primary purpose of the action is the restoration of
the property.44
It is evident that this action for declaration of incapacity
and for recovery of the property may or may not be a part of the
administration proceedings. If it is not a part of the administration
proceedings, it becomes an ordinary action by anyone who may have
an interest in the succession.
43
44

Art. 762, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
6 Manresa, 7th Ed., pp. 103-104.

500

COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTS. 1041-1042
Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance

Idem; Period of prescription. — The Code gives the executor or administrator or any one who may have an interest in the
succession five years from the time the disqualified person took possession of the inheritance, devise or legacy within which to file the
action. Beyond that, the action shall prescribed.

Section 3. — Acceptance and Repudiation
of the Inheritance
Art. 1041. The acceptance or repudiation of the inheritance is
an act which is purely voluntary and free.1
Art. 1042. The effects of the acceptance or repudiation shall
always retroact to the moment of the death of the decedent.2
Concept of Acceptance and Repudiation. — Acceptance
refers to the act by virtue of which an heir, legatee or devisee
manifests his desire in accordance with the formalities prescribed by
law to succeed to the inheritance, legacy or devise. Repudiation, on
the other hand, refers to the act by virtue of which an heir, legatee
or devisee manifests his desire in accordance with the formalities
prescribed by law not to succeed to the inheritance, legacy or
devise.
Characteristics. — The three principal characteristics of
acceptance or repudiation are the following: first, it is voluntary
and free,3 second, it is retroactive,4 and third, once made, it is
irrevocable.5
While it is true that successional rights are transmitted at the
very moment of the death of the decedent, it must be observed that
before such transmission can take place, it is absolutely necessary
that those who are called to the succession either by will or by
operation of law must accept their inheritance, legacy or devise. So
long as there is no manifestation of such acceptance, there can be no

Art. 988, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 989, Spanish Civil Code.
3
Art. 1041, Civil Code.
4
Art. 1042, Civil Code.
5
Art. 1056, Civil Code.
1
2

501

ART. 1043

SUCCESSION

transmission of successional rights. The heirs, legatees or devisees,
however, cannot be compelled to accept their inheritance, legacy or
devise. This is so because acceptance and repudiation are by their
very nature voluntary and free. Hence, during that interval between
the death of the decedent and the acceptance or repudiation, the
inheritance, legacy or devise remains in a state of suspension.6
But once the heir, legatee or devise manifests his acceptance or
repudiation in accordance with the formalities prescribed by law,
the effect thereof shall retroact to the very moment of the death of
the decedent. It has become irrevocable.
Effects in General. — If the heir, legatee or devisee accepts
the inheritance, legacy or devise, his right thereto is perfected or
confirmed. On the other hand, if he repudiates such inheritance,
legacy, or devise, he throws away a right which the law has conferred
upon him.7 As a result, the inheritance, legacy or devise which is
rendered vacant shall pass to those who are entitled thereto either
by right of accretion or in their own right.
Art. 1043. No person may accept or repudiate an inheritance
unless he is certain of the death of the person from whom he is to
inherit, and of his right to the inheritance.8
Requisites for Acceptance or Repudiation. — Before a
person may accept or repudiate an inheritance, the following requisites must concur: first, he is certain of the death of the person from
whom he is to inherit; and second, he is certain of his right to the inheritance. The second requisite is, of course, necessary because there
is always the possibility that he might not be allowed to inherit. In
testamentary succession, for instance, the will by virtue of which he
is called to inherit may not be admitted to probate by reason of some
fatal defect or the institution of heirs may be invalid for some reason
or other. The same is true in intestacy. There might be some heirs
who are preferred in the order of intestate succession. In all of these
cases, any acceptance or repudiation becomes superfluous.9

17 Scaevola 864.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 344.
8
Art. 991, Spanish Civil Code.
9
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 359.
6
7

502

COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTS. 1044-1048
Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance

Art. 1044. Any person having the free disposal of his property
may accept or repudiate an inheritance.
Any inheritance left to minors or incapacitated persons may
be accepted by their parents or guardians. Parents or guardians
may repudiate the inheritance left to their wards only by judicial
authorization.
The right to accept an inheritance left to the poor shall belong
to the person designated by the testator to determine the beneficiaries and distribute the property, or in their default, to those
mentioned in Article 1030.10
Art. 1045. The lawful representatives of corporations, associations, institutions and entities qualified to acquire property may
accept any inheritance left to the latter, but in order to repudiate it,
the approval of the court shall be necessary.11
Art. 1046. Public official establishments can neither accept
nor repudiate an inheritance without the approval of the government.12
Art. 1047. A married woman of age may repudiate an inheritance without the consent of her husband.13
Art. 1048. Deaf-mutes who can read and write may accept or
repudiate the inheritance personally or through an agent. Should
they not be able to read and write, the inheritance shall be accepted by the guardians. These guardians may repudiate the same
with judicial approval.14
Who May Accept or Repudiate. — In order that the heir,
legatee or devisee may accept or repudiate, the law requires that
he must have the free disposal of his property. Otherwise, if he
cannot freely dispose of his property, because he is incapacitated
to do so, such as when he is a minor, or a deaf-mute who cannot
read and write, or an insolvent judicially declared, or is under civil
interdiction, his guardian or legal representative shall be the one

Art. 992, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 993, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
12
Art. 994, Spanish Civil Code.
13
Art. 995, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
14
Art. 996, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
10
11

503

ART. 1048

SUCCESSION

who will accept or repudiate. It must be noted, however, that if
such guardian or legal representative declares to repudiate, judicial
authorization is necessary.
If the beneficiary happens to be the poor, the right to accept
shall belong to the person designated by the testator to determine
the beneficiaries and distribute the property. In default of such
person, it shall belong to the executor. As far as the right to repudiate
is concerned, however, such right may be exercised only by the
beneficiaries themselves once they are finally determined.
If the beneficiary happens to be a corporation, association, institution or entity, the right to accept or repudiate belongs to the
legal representative, but in case of repudiation, judicial authorization is necessary.
If the beneficiary happens to be a married woman of age, her
right to accept is subject to the limitation prescribed by Art. 114
of the Code which declares that she cannot, without her husband’s
consent, acquire any property by gratuitous title, except from her
ascendants, descendants, parents-in-law, and collateral relatives
within the fourth degree. However, her right to repudiate is absolute, unless the marriage is governed by the system of absolute community, in which case, according to Art. 200 of the Code, neither
spouse may renounce or repudiate any inheritance without the consent of the other.
Problem — Can the successional rights of minors or incapacitated persons be waived?
Answer — Art. 1044 of the NCC provides that any person
having free disposal of his property may accept or repudiate an
inheritance. Any inheritance left to minors or incapacitated persons may be accepted by their parents or guardians. Parents
or guardians may repudiate the inheritance left to their wards
only by judicial authorization. Parents and guardians may not
therefore waive or repudiate the inheritance of their wards
without judicial approval. This is because repudiation amounts
to an alienation of property which must pass the court’s scrutiny
in order to protect the interest of the ward.
The Release and Waiver of Claim in the case of Michael C.
Guy vs. CA, G.R. No.163707, Sept. 15, 2006, is void and will not
bar private respondents-minors Karen Oanes Wei and Kamille
Oanes Wei, represented by their mother, Remedios Oanes from

504

COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTS. 1049-1050
Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance

asserting their successional rights as heirs of the deceased since
the Release and Waiver of Claim has not been judicially authorized. Moreover, the said Release and Waiver of Claims does not
state with clarity the purpose of its execution. Considering that
the document did not specifically mention private respondents’
hereditary share in the estate of Sima Wei, it cannot be construed as a waiver of successional rights. To be valid and effective, a waiver must be couched in clear and unequivocal terms
which leave no doubt as to the intention of a party to give up a
right or benefit which legally pertains to him. A waiver may
not be attributed to a person when its terms do not explicitly
and clearly evince an intent to abandon a right. Furthermore, it
must be emphasized that waiver is the intentional relinquishment of a known right. Where one lacks knowledge of a right,
there is no basis upon which waiver of it can rest. Ignorance of a
material fact negates waiver, and waiver cannot be established
by a consent given under a mistake or misapprehension of fact.

Art. 1049. Acceptance may be express or tacit.
An express acceptance must be made in a public or private
document.
A tacit acceptance is one resulting from acts by which the
intention to accept is necessarily implied, or which one would
have no right to do except in the capacity of an heir.
Acts of mere preservation or provisional administration do
not imply an acceptance of the inheritance if, through such acts,
the title or capacity of an heir has not been assumed.15
Art. 1050. An inheritance is deemed accepted:
(1) If the heir sells, donates or assigns his right to a stranger,
or to his co-heirs, or to any of them;
(2) If the heir renounces the same, even though gratuitously,
for the benefit of one or more of his co-heirs;
(3) If he renounces it for a price in favor of all his co-heirs
indiscriminately; but if his renunciation should be gratuitous and
the co-heirs in whose favor it is made are those upon whom the

15

Art. 999, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.

505

ART. 1051

SUCCESSION

portion renounced should devolve by virtue of accretion, the
inheritance shall not be deemed as accepted.16
Art. 1051. The repudiation of an inheritance shall be made
in a public or authentic instrument, or by petition presented to
the court having jurisdiction over the testamentary or intestate
proceedings.17
Manner of Acceptance. — The acceptance may be either
express or tacit. It is express when it is made in a public or private
document; it is tacit when it results from acts by which the intention
to accept is necessarily implied, or which one would have no right to
do except in the capacity of an heir.
Three examples of implied or tacit acceptance are given in Art.
1050. It must be observed that all of these acts are acts which only
one who had already accepted the inheritance may perform. In other
words, they are acts of disposition; consequently, they are acts which
only the owner is empowered to perform. The enumeration, however,
is not complete. There are other instances of tacit acceptance, such
as the failure to accept or repudiate within the prescribed period
of thirty days after the issuance of the order of distribution of the
estate,18 or acts of preservation or administration if, through such
acts, the title or capacity of heir has been assumed, or the filing of
a complaint for the partition of the inheritance, or alienations of
determinate objects of the inheritance, or compromises regarding
objects and rights included in the inheritance, or the exercise of any
action which pertained to the decedent during his lifetime and which
survives, or the enjoyment of the inheritance itself.19
Manner of Repudiation. — The act of repudiation is more
solemn and formal than the act of acceptance. Hence, the manner
by which it is made must be clear, expressed, and formal. This
difference between acceptance and repudiation is based on the
following considerations:
(1) Acceptance involves merely the confirmation of the
transmission of successional rights, while repudiation renders such
Art. 1000, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 1008, Spanish Civil Code.
18
Art. 1057, Civil Code.
19
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 398-400.
16
17

506

COMMON PROVISIONS
Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance

ART. 1052

transmission ineffective. Hence, the consequences of the latter are
more violent and disturbing, and therefore, cannot be governed by
mere presumptions.
(2) Repudiation is, by its very nature, equivalent to an act of
disposition and alienation.
(3) The publicity required for repudiation is necessary for the
protection of other heirs and also of creditors.20
Consequently, under Art. 1051, there are three ways by which
the repudiation of the inheritance, legacy or devise may be made.
They are: first, by means of a public instrument; second, by means of
an authentic instrument; and third, by means of a petition presented
to the court having jurisdiction over the testamentary or intestate
proceedings. A public instrument is, of course, an instrument, which
is acknowledged before a notary public, which an authentic instrument would be the equivalent of an indubitable writing or a writing
whose authenticity or genuine character is admitted or proved.
Art. 1052. If the heir repudiates the inheritance to the prejudice
of his own creditors, the latter may petition the court to authorize
them to accept it in the name of the heir.
The acceptance shall benefit the creditors only to an extent
sufficient to cover the amount of their credits. The excess, should
there be any, shall in no case pertain to the renouncer, but shall be
adjudicated to the persons to whom, in accordance with the rules
established in this Code, it may belong.21
Effect of Repudiation upon Creditors. — In order that the
right granted by the above article to creditors may be availed of, it
is necessary that the following requisites must concur: first, that the
heir who repudiated his inheritance must have been indebted at the
time when the repudiation is made; second, that the heir-debtor must
have repudiated his inheritance in accordance with the formalities
prescribed by law; third, that such act of repudiation must be
prejudicial to the creditor or creditors; and fourth, that there must

20
21

Ibid., p. 439.
Art. 1001, Spanish Civil Code.

507

ARTS. 1053-1055

SUCCESSION

be judicial authorization. Once all of these requisites are present,
the creditor or creditors can then accept the inheritance in the name
of the renouncer. It must be noted, however, that such acceptance
shall benefit the former only to the extent sufficient to cover the
amount of their credits. The excess, should there be any, shall not
pertain to the renouncing heir, but shall be adjudicated to those to
whom, in accordance with the rules established by the Civil Code, it
may belong. Consequently, it may pass to the co-heirs in their own
right or by right of accretion depending upon the circumstances and
conditions of each particular case.
Art. 1053. If the heir should die without having accepted or
repudiated the inheritance his right shall be transmitted to his
heirs.22
Art. 1054. Should there be several heirs called to the inheritance, some of them may accept and the others may repudiate
it.23
Art. 1055. If a person, who is called to the same inheritance
as an heir by will and ab intestato, repudiates the inheritance
in his capacity as a testamentary heir, he is understood to have
repudiated it in both capacities.
Should he repudiate it as an intestate heir, without knowledge
of his being a testamentary heir, he may still accept it in the latter
capacity.24
Repudiation as Testamentary or as Legal Heir. — The
first paragraph of the above article states the rule that if the person
called to succeed is a testamentary heir and a legal heir at the
same time and he repudiates his inheritance in his capacity as a
testamentary heir, he is considered to have repudiated the inheritance
in both capacities. There is, therefore, a presumption that his act of
repudiation when called by the testator himself is tantamount to
an act of repudiation when called by the law in accordance with the
presumed will of the decedent. Or to state the basis of the rule in

Art. 1006, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 1007, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
24
Art. 1009, Spanish Civil Code.
22
23

508

COMMON PROVISIONS
Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance

ART. 1056

another way, if such heir refuses to heed the expressed will of such
testator, how can he heed the presumed will of the decedent? Hence,
once such heir has repudiated his share in the inheritance in his
capacity as testamentary heir, the act becomes final or irrevocable.
He can no longer accept as a legal heir.
The rule is different if such heir repudiates his share in the
inheritance as a legal or intestate heir without knowledge of his
being a testamentary heir. In such case, out of respect for the wishes
of the decedent, he may still accept his share in his capacity as a
testamentary heir.25
Art. 1056. The acceptance or repudiation of an inheritance,
once made, is irrevocable, and cannot be impugned, except when
it was made through any of the causes that vitiate consent, or
when an unknown will appears.26
Irrevocability of Acceptance or Repudiation. — One of
the principal characteristics of the right to accept or repudiate an
inheritance is its irrevocability. Once made, it becomes irrevocable
and cannot be impugned. There are, however, two exceptions to this
rule. They are: first, when the acceptance or repudiation was made
through any of the causes that vitiate consent; and second, when an
unknown will appears. The first, of course, can only refer to those
different vices which vitiate consent, such as mistake, violence,
intimidation, undue influence, or fraud.27
The rule of irrevocability is logical. To permit the heir who
renounced to change his mind with respect to the acceptance or
repudiation of his inheritance would result in violent disturbance of
rights which are already vested or perfected. This is so because the
moment the decedent dies, the rights to the succession are opened.
Acceptance of the inheritance results in the transmission of rights
and obligations to the accepting heir. To allow him to change his
mind would destroy the stability of property rights. The same thing
can be said with respect to repudiation. If the heir repudiates his
inheritance, the vacant portion passes to other heirs either by right

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 445-446.
Art. 997, Spanish Civil Code.
27
Arts. 1330, et seq., Civil Code.
25
26

509

ARTS. 1057-1060

SUCCESSION

of accretion or in their own right. To allow such heir to change his
mind would result in chaos and confusion.28
Art. 1057. Within thirty days after the court has issued an
order for the distribution of the estate in accordance with the
Rules of Court, the heirs, devisees and legatees shall signify to
the court having jurisdiction whether they accept or repudiate the
inheritance.
If they do not do so within that time, they are deemed to have
accepted the inheritance.29

Section 4. — Executors or Administrators
Art. 1058. All matters relating to the appointment, powers
and duties of executors and administrators and concerning the
administration of estates of deceased persons shall be governed
by the Rules of Court.1
Art. 1059. If the assets of the estate of a decedent which
can be applied to the payment of debts are not sufficient for that
purpose, the provisions of Articles 2239 and 2251 on Preference of
Credits shall be observed, provided that the expenses referred to
in Article 2244, No. 8, shall be those involved in the administration
of the decedent’s estate.2
Art. 1060. A corporation or association authorized to conduct
the business of a trust company in the Philippines may be appointed
as an executor, administrator, guardian of an estate, or trustee, in
like manner as an individual; but it shall not be appointed guardian
of the person of a ward.3

28
29

287 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 383.
New provision.

New provision.
New provision.
3
New provision.
1
2

510

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1061

Section 5. — Collation
Art. 1061. Every compulsory heir, who succeeds with other
compulsory heirs must bring into the mass of the estate any property or right which he may have received from the decedent, during the lifetime of the latter, by way of donation, or any other gratuitous title, in order that it may be computed in the determination of
the legitime of each heir, and in the account of the partition.1
Concept of Collation. — In general, collation may be defined
as the act of returning or restoring to the common mass of the
hereditary estate, either actually or fictitiously, any property which
a person may have received from the decedent during the latter’s
lifetime, but which is understood for legal purposes as an advance
from the inheritance.2
As noted down in the discussion under Arts. 908 to 910,
actually, collation, as it is understood in the Civil Code, has three
different but interrelated acceptations. In one sense, it is understood
as a fictitious mathematical process of adding the value of the thing
donated to the net value of the hereditary estate. This is the sense
in which it is used in Art. 908 of the Code. It is a process which is
applicable to all donations inter vivos, whether to compulsory heirs
or to strangers. The immediate purpose is to compute the legitime
of compulsory heirs. In another sense, it includes not only the
process of adding the value of the thing donated to the net value
of the hereditary estate but also the subsequent act of imputing
(imputar) such value against the legitime of the compulsory heir to
whom the thing was donated. This is the sense in which it is used
in this section of the Code. The immediate purpose is “to compute it
in the determination of the legitime of each compulsory heir, and in
the account of the partition.” The ultimate purpose, however, is to
equalize the position of each compulsory heir. In still another sense,
it refers to the actual act of restoring to the hereditary estate that
part of the donation which is inofficious. The immediate purpose is
to prevent the impairment of the legitime of compulsory heirs.

1
2

Art. 1035, Spanish Code, in modified form.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 541.

511

ART. 1061

SUCCESSION

The basis of collation is the consideration that what a compulsory heir receives from the decedent by gratuitous title during the
lifetime of the latter is in the nature of an advance on his inheritance.
Hence, in order to equalize the legal portion to which compulsory
heirs are entitled and which such heirs shall ultimately or eventually receive, it is necessary that such advance must be returned or
brought back, fictitiously, to the hereditary estate.
However, such advance must have been made during the
lifetime of the decedent by way of donation or any other gratuitous
title. Hence, it may be in the nature of a donation inter vivos, or a
donation propter nuptias, or a remission of a debt, or any other title,
lucrative or gratuitous in character.
The same can be said of donations inter vivos to strangers.
What the decedent during his lifetime had donated to any person
who is not a compulsory heir must also be returned or restored
to the mass of the hereditary estate fictitiously, so that a proper
division can be made of the estate. A person cannot give by way of
donation more than what he can give by will. Consequently, if he
gives more than what he can dispose of by will, the donation is said
to be inofficious with regard to the excess. However, at the time the
donation is made, there is no way by which one can tell whether the
donation is inofficious or not. It is only when the decedent donor dies
that it will be possible to determine what portion of his property is
at this free disposal. In order to do this, there must be a collation,
fictitious in character, of the value of all donations inter vivos to the
net value of the estate, and from the aggregate sum thus found, the
legitime of compulsory heirs and the portion at the decedent’s free
disposal can be determined.
From what has been stated, it is clear that all donations,
whether to compulsory heirs or to strangers, must be collated.
However, at this stage, the collation is merely fictitious in character;
it is simply a mathemathical process of adding to the net value of
the estate the value of the things donated. After the legitime and the
disposable portion have been determined, the value of the donations
which had been added to the net value of the estate are charged or
imputed against either the legitime or the disposable portion. As
a rule, donations to compulsory heirs are imputable against their
legitime. Donations to strangers are, of course, imputable against
the disposable portion. Again, it must be noted that at this stage,
the process is still fictitious in character; it is still a mathematical
512

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1062

process the purpose of which is to determine what has already
been advanced by the decedent donor either from the legitime of
the donee if he is a compulsory heir from the disposable portion if
he is a stranger. If the donations are inofficious in the sense that
they cannot be contained within the portion at the decedent’s free
disposal, there must be a proper reduction of such donations in order
not to impair the legitime of compulsory heirs. This reduction will
have the effect of an actual restoration. It is at this stage that the
process becomes actual in character but only when the donation is
inofficious.
Thus, in reality, there are three acts which must always be
considered before there can be a partition of the estate. They are
collation, imputation and reduction. Aptly stated, they are the three
links in a chain, with one single objective and guided by the same
principle.3
Art. 1062. Collation shall not take place among compulsory
heirs if the donor should have so expressly provided, or if the
donee should repudiate the inheritance, unless the donation
should be reduced as inofficious.4
When Collation Shall Not Take Place. — According to the
above article, collation shall not take place: first, when the donor
should have so expressly provided; and second, when the donee
should have repudiated his inheritance.
What is meant by the law when it says “collation shall not take
place?’’ Does it mean that when the donor expressly provides either
in the deed of donation or in his will that collation shall not take
place, or when the donee repudiates his inheritance, the obligation
to collate ceases altogether so that it will no longer be taken into
account in the partition? It is rather unfortunate that the vague
provisions of the old Code have been preserved without any change
whatsoever. There is no doubt, however, that when the donor
expressly provides that the donee who is a compulsory heir shall
not collate the donation, the latter in relation to the donation ceases
to be a compulsory heir. In other words, the donation is no longer

3
4

Ibid.
Art. 1036, Spanish Civil Code.

513

ART. 1062

SUCCESSION

considered an advance from his legitime. Hence, the value thereof
shall not be imputable against such legitime. Since he is considered
a stranger, at least with respect to the donation, the value thereof
shall not be imputable against the disposable portion in accordance
with Art. 909 of the code. Similarly, when the donee repudiates
his inheritance, he ceases to be a compulsory heir. He becomes a
stranger. Consequently, the value of the donation given to him is
also imputable against the disposable portion and not against the
legitime. Therefore, when the law says that “collation shall not take
place,” what is actually meant is that the value of the thing donated
shall not be imputed against the legitime of the beneficiary; instead,
it shall be imputed against the disposable portion. Hence, there will
still be a collation in the sense in which the term is used in Art. 908
of the Code. The value of the thing donated shall still be added to
the net value of the estate. The only difference is that it is imputable
against the disposable portion and not against the legitime of the
beneficiary.
Problem No. 1 — In 1960, X donated a piece of land to his
eldest son, A. The value of the land then was P40,000; the value
now is P200,000. The deed of donation is silent with respect to
whether or not the donation shall be brought to collation. In
1980, X died intestate survived by his four sons, A, B, C and D.
The net value of his estate is P280,000. Distribute the estate.
Answer — We must collate or add the value of the land donated at the time when the donation was made to the net value
of the estate. The result is P320,000. Although X died intestate,
we must now determine the legitime of the four children using
this amount as basis. The reason is obvious. The donation given
by X to his son, A, in 1960 is considered an advance of the latter’s
legitime. Additionally, there is always the possibility that the
donation is inofficious. In order to be able to determine whether
the donation is inofficious or not, we must first determine the
disposable free portion of the estate, and this can be done only
when we have already determined the legitime of the compulsory heirs. At any rate, using the amount of P320,000 as basis,
the legitime of A, B, C and D is 1/2, or P160,000, or P40,000
each. The disposable free portion is P160,000. It is evident that
the donation is not inofficious. Against what portion shall the
value of the land donated be charged of imputed? The answer is:
against the legitime of A. In other words, when X donated to A
land valued at P40,000, what he merely did was to advance to
the latter his legitime. Pursuant to the mandate of Art. 1061 of

514

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1063

the Civil Code, this must be taken into account in the partition.
Since the legitime of A is P40,000, therefore, in the partition,
he shall not be entitled to any legitime anymore because he had
already received it in advance. Consequently, the distribution of
the estate shall be as follows:
A

...................... P 40,000

B

.......................

80,000

D

.......................

80,000

C

.......................

80,000
P280,000

Problem No. 2 — Suppose that in the deed of donation, X,
in the above problem, expressly stated that the donation shall
not be brought to collation, how shall the distribution be made?
Answer — Since the donor had expressly stated that the
donation shall not be brought to collation, the value thereof
shall, therefore, not be considered an advance of the legitime of
the donee. Instead, it will be considered as an ordinary donation
inter vivos to a stranger. Consequently, since it is not inofficious,
the net value of the estate shall be divided equally among the
four children.

Art. 1063. Property left by will is not deemed subject to collation, if the testator has not otherwise provided, but the legitime
shall in any remain unimpaired.5
Property Left by Will. — The above article provides that
“property left by will is not deemed subject to collation.” What is
meant by the phrase “not deemed subject to collation”? If such phrase
is construed in the light of Art. 1061 to mean the act of bringing into
the mass of the estate any property which a compulsory heir may
have received from the decedent during the lifetime of the latter,
how can the Code say that the “property is left by will”? In such
case, how can the beneficiary restore or return that which he never
had during the lifetime of the decedent? It is clear, therefore, that
what is meant is not the restoration alluded to in Art. 1061, but the
imputation alluded to in the comments under the preceding article.
In other words, such property left by will is not subject to collation

5

Art. 1037, Spanish Civil Code.

515

ART. 1064

SUCCESSION

in the sense that it cannot be imputed against the legitime of the
compulsory heirs; it can only be imputed against the disposable
portion. What is, therefore, contemplated in Art. 1063 are devises
or legacies. Such dispositions are, as a general rule, imputable only
against the disposable portion, not against the legal portion.
It must be remembered that a compulsory heir may also be a
voluntary heir or a legatee or devisee. In such case, there is no longer
any equality of the compulsory heirs in the succession. Nevertheless,
the will of the testator must be respected. The devisees or legacies
shall not, however, impair the legitime of a compulsory heir. If they
do, then they shall be reduced in accordance with Art. 911.
The exception provided for in the article under discussion
must, therefore, be construed in the light of the foregoing discussion.
The general rule is that devises or legacies are imputable against
the disposable portion and not against the legitime of compulsory
heirs. However, if the devise or legacy is in favor of a compulsory
heir, and the testator has provided that the devise or legacy shall
be imputed against the legitime of such heir, the general rule, shall
no longer apply. Nevertheless, whether it is the general rule or the
exception that is followed, the legitime of compulsory heirs must
never be impaired.
Art. 1064. When grandchildren, who survive with their uncles,
aunts, or cousins, inherit from their grandparents in representation
of their father or mother, they shall bring to collation all that their
parents, if alive, would have been obliged to bring, even though
such grandchildren have not inherited the property.
They shall also bring to collation all that they may have received from the decedent during his lifetime, unless the testator
has provided otherwise, in which case his wishes must be respected, if the legitime of the co-heirs is not prejudiced.6
Collation of Representation. — When a grandchild, who
survives with uncles, aunts, or first cousins, inherits by right of
representation, he is obliged to bring to collation not only what
may have been directly donated to him by the decedent, but also
what may have been donated to his father or mother. The reason
6

Art. 1038, Spanish Civil Code.

516

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1064

for this precept is obvious. If the rule were otherwise there would be
no equalization of the heirs. However, it must again be noted that
what the law means when it says that the grandchild shall bring
to collation all that his father or mother, if alive, would have been
obliged to bring, is that the value of the donation shall be imputed
against his lifetime as a representative and not against the disposable
portion. This may be illustrated by the following problem:
Problem — A died in 1970 without a will survived by his
son, B, and his grandson, D, child of a deceased son, C. During
his lifetime, he had executed three donations. The first, worth
P40,000, was executed in 1950 in favor of a stranger, X; the second, worth P10,000, was executed in 1955 in favor of his son,
C, now deceased; and the third, worth P10,000, was executed
in 1960 in favor of his grandson, D. The net remainder of the
estate after liquidation is P20,000. How shall the distribution
be made?
Answer — In the first place, we must collate or add the
value of all the donations inter vivos to the net remainder of the
estate. The result is P80,000. Although A died without a will,
yet we must still determine the respective legitimes of B, who
is inheriting in his own right, and D, who is inheriting by right
of representation, for the purpose of determining whether the
donations are inofficious or not. It is evident that the legitime of
B is P20,000, while the legitime of D is also P20,000. The disposable free portion, on the other hand, is P40,000. Under Art. 1064
of the Civil Code, D must bring to collation, not only the P10,000
donated to him by the decedent, but also the P10,000 donated to
C, the person represented. This means that both donations shall
be charged against the legitime because, under the law such
legitime has already been advanced to him. How about the donation given to X? According to Art. 909 of the Civil Code, such
donation shall be charged against the disposable free portion.
Since the free portion is P40,000 and the value of the donation
imputable against the free portion is also P40,000, it is clear
that nothing remains out of such free portion. It is also equally
clear that the donation is not inofficious; consequently, it must
be respected.
How then shall the distribution be made? Since the legitime of D had already been advanced to him, and since the legitime of B of P20,000 has not yet been satisfied and the only
amount now available for distribution is P20,000, such amount
shall, therefore, be given to B.

517

ARTS. 1065-1067

SUCCESSION

Art. 1065. Parents are not obliged to bring to collation in the
inheritance of their ascendants any property which may have been
donated by the latter to their children.7
Donations to Children of Compulsory Heirs. — Parents
are not obliged to collate any property which their ascendants may
have donated to their children. In such case, the beneficiaries are not
the parents, but the children. Hence, with respect to the inheritance
coming from an ascendant, the parents are compulsory heirs, while
the children of such parents are mere strangers. Therefore, such
donation shall be imputed against the disposable portion as in the
case of donations inter vivos to strangers.
Art. 1066. Neither shall donations to the spouse of the child be
brought to collation; but if they have been given by the parents to
the spouses jointly, the child shall be obliged to bring to collation
one-half of the thing donated.8
Donations to Spouse of Child. — The spouse of the child or
compulsory heir is a mere stranger to the succession. Consequently,
if the donation is given by the parents to such spouse, it shall not
be collated; but if it is given to the spouse jointly, the presumption
is that one-half of the donation belongs to the child or compulsory
heir, while the other half belongs to the spouse or stranger. Hence,
the former shall be obliged to collate his one-half undivided share.
It shall, therefore, be imputed against his legitime. On the other
hand, the other undivided half which belongs to the spouse shall be
imputed against the disposable portion.
Art. 1067. Expenses for support, education, medical attendance, even in extraordinary illness, apprenticeship, ordinary
equipment, or customary gifts are not subject to collation.9
Expenses for Support. — The expenses referred to in this
article are not donations. The person giving them does so because
it is his moral obligation to give them. Consequently, they do not
constitute an advance which must be imputed or charged later on
Art. 1038, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 1040, Spanish Civil Code.
9
Art. 1041, Spanish Civil Code.
7
8

518

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1068

against the legitime of the beneficiary. They are not, therefore,
subject to collation.
Hence, Art. 1067 means exactly what it says: there is no
collation, even in the sense of charging what had been given to the
free portion. As a matter of fact, the parents or ascendant cannot
even provide that such expenses shall be collated. It is, therefore,
clear that the precept contained in the article is in the nature of a
prohibition.10
Art. 1068. Expenses incurred by the parents in giving their
children a professional, vocational or other career shall not be
brought to collation unless the parents so provide, or unless they
impair the legitime; but when their collation is required, the sum
which the child would have spent if he had lived in the house and
company of his parents shall be deducted therefrom.11
Expenses for a Career. — According to the above article,
expenses incurred by parents in giving their children a professional,
vocational or other career are, in general, not to be collated. This
rule, however, is subject to the following exceptions: first, if the
parents so provided; and second, if the expenses impair the legitime
of compulsory heirs. In both cases the sum which the child would
have spent if he had lived in the house and company of his parents
shall be deducted from that which shall be collated.
Evidently, the expenses referred to in this article are different
from those referred to in Art. 1067. The expenses incurred by parents
in giving their children a professional or artistic education are not
as necessary as those used for books, tuition and matriculation fees,
examination fees, traveling expenses, pensions, diplomas, school
equipment, tools, etc. As a result of the difference between the two
articles, different rules are applied.12 It must, however, be noted
that whether the expenses fall under Art. 1067 or under Art. 1068,
all of them are classified as support.
As in the case of the other properties not subject to collation,
expenses for the professional or vocational studies of a compulsory
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 573-574.
Art. 1042, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
12
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 578.
10
11

519

ART. 1068

SUCCESSION

heir are not to be collated in the sense that they cannot be imputed
against the legitime of such heir. They can be imputed only against
the disposable portion. This rule, however, cannot apply to the
expenses for support, education, medical attendance, apprenticeship
or customary gifts referred to in Art. 1067. Such expenses and gifts
are so necessary and yet so trivial in character that it would be
absurd to collate them to the mass of the hereditary estate and,
afterwards, impute them either against the legitime or against
the disposable portion. Hence, the rule that such expenses or gifts
shall not be collated must be applied in its literal sense. Under Art.
1068 and other articles, however, the phrase “shall not be brought
to collation” must be interpreted to mean that such expenses or
donations shall be considered as advances of the heir’s legitime,
and, therefore, shall not be imputable against such legitime but only
against the disposable portion. These rules may be illustrated by the
following examples: If the child is sick and the parents are obliged to
call a physician, the expenses in such case shall not be placed in the
same category as donations inter vivos either to a compulsory heir
or to a stranger. It would indeed be absurd to charge such expenses
either against the legitime or against the disposable portion. Or,
take the case of a birthday present or any customary gift. It would
also be absurd to impute such gifts later on, even if such imputation
is directed against the disposable portion. In the case of expenses for
a professional or vocational career, the rule is different and rightly
so. The amount involved is not so insignificant or trivial. Hence,
generally, such expenses should be imputed or charged against the
disposable free portion.
It must also be noted that Art. 1068 refers only to expenses
incurred by the parents in giving their children a professional,
vocational or other career. It does not refer to expenses incurred
after the completion of such professional, vocational or other
career. Hence, expenses for a law library, medical instruments, a
drug store, a vessel for a mariner, or a commercial establishment
for a businessman are not within the purview of the article. Such
expenses shall be collated and, therefore, are imputable against the
legitime of the recipient or beneficiary.13

13

Ibid., pp. 578-579.

520

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ARTs. 1069-1070

Art. 1069. Any sums paid by a parent in satisfaction of
the debts of his children, election expenses, fines, and similar
expenses shall be brought to collation.14
Payments for Debts of Children. — This article enumerates
several cases in which the parents spend for their children with the
obligation on the part of the latter to bring such expenses to collation
after the death of the parents in order to equalize the portion which
shall pass to each of the compulsory heirs. Actually, such expenses
are not different from other kinds of donations inter vivos. As a
matter of fact, such expenses may even be more detrimental to
the successional rights of the children not benefited because they
sometimes involve large amounts.
A certain qualification, however, must be made with respect to
such expenses. The act of the parents in paying a debt of a child, or
in spending for the election of a favorite child to a public office, or
in saving a child from disgrace by paying a fine imposed by a court
of law, or any similar act involving similar expenses must be an act
of liberality, not an act resulting in the creation of a relationship or
creditor and debtor. Otherwise, the obligation of the child shall no
longer be to collate the amount paid or spent, but to pay the estate
such amount. The child becomes a debtor and if the amount is not
paid before the death of the decedent, he can always be held liable
for the payment of the debt. As a matter of fact, even if he repudiates
his inheritance, he shall still be held liable for the full amount of his
debt. On the other hand, if the payment is gratuitous in character,
the obligation of the beneficiary or donee would only be to collate the
amount. And if he chooses to repudiate his inheritance, his position,
will be similar to that of a stranger. The amount expended would
then be imputable against the disposable portion. As a consequence,
the provision of Art. 1062 would be applicable.15
Art. 1070. Wedding gifts by parents and ascendants consisting
of jewelry, clothing, and outfit, shall not be reduced as inofficious
except insofar as they may exceed one-tenth of the sum which is
disposable by will.16

Art. 1043, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 582-583.
16
Art. 1044, Spanish Civil Code.
14
15

521

ART. 1070

SUCCESSION

Wedding Gifts. — Generally, wedding gifts coming from parents and ascendants consisting of jewelry, clothing, and outfit are
not subject to collation. Hence, they shall not be reduced as inofficious unless they exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the sum which is disposable by will. The excess, therefore, shall be collated in the sense that
it shall be imputed against the legitime of the beneficiary.
The reason behind the provision is, of course, to prevent any
abuse that may result because of vanity or love, thus prejudicing
other compulsory heirs.17
Idem; Article applied. — The above article should always
be interpreted in the light of the meaning of collation in this
section of the Civil Code. In other words, what is meant is that the
wedding gift shall not be considered as an advance of the legitime
of the recipient so long as it does not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the
disposable free portion. As such, it will be considered as a donation
inter vivos chargeable against the disposable free portion. However,
once it exceeds one-tenth (1/10) of the disposable free portion, the
excess will then be considered as an advance of the legitime of the
recipient. This is illustrated by the following:
Problem — When his youngest daughter C got married
in 1975, X gave to her as a wedding gift jewelries valued at
P40,000. He died intestate in 1980, survived by his three daughters, A, B and C. The net value of his estate is P200,000. Divide
the estate.
Answer — We must first add the value of the gift to the net
value of the estate. The result is P240,000. Using this amount
as basis, the legitime of the three children is one-half (1/2), or
P120,000, or P40,000 for each of them, while the disposable free
portion is also one-half (1/2), or P120,000. Now, one-tenth (1/10)
of P120,000 is P12,000. The value of the gift (P40,000) is charged
against this amount. There is an excess of P28,000. This excess
is considered as an advance of the legitime of C. Hence, in the
partition, she will be entitled to a legitime of only P12,000. As
far as the balance of P108,000 of the disposable free portion is
concerned, since X died intestate, said amount will be divided
equally among the three daughters. Consequently, the estate
shall be divided as follows:

17

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 586-587.

522

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1071

A ...............

P40,000

+

P36,000, or

P76,000

B ...............

P40,000

+

P36,000, or

P76,000

C ...............

P12,000

+

P36,000, or

P48,000
P200,000

Art. 1071. The same things donated are not to be brought
to collation and partition, but only their value at the time of the
donation, even though their just value may not then have been
assessed.
Their subsequent increase or deterioration and even their
total loss or destruction, be it accidental or culpable, shall be for the
benefit or account and risk of the donee.18
What Must be Collated. — To bring back to the mass of the
hereditary estate the same thing donated by the decedent during his
lifetime would be impracticable or even impossible at times. Hence,
the rule is that only the value of the thing donated shall be brought
to collation. This value must be the value of the thing at the time
of the donation, even though its just value may not then have been
assessed.
The determination of this value is, of course, difficult especially if many years shall have elapsed since the time when the donation was effected and the property is movable property. In the case
of real property, the value may be stated in the public instrument
itself which conveys the property. If the value is not stated therein
or if is not agreed upon by the interested parties, recourse may be
made to those appearing in tax assessments or cadastral surveys.
In the case of personal property, in the absence of assessments or
agreements between the parties, recourse may be made to expert
appraisal. However, whether the property is real or personal, there
is no question that even if the value has been expressed or agreed
upon, the same is not absolutely binding or obligatory upon the parties.19
-

The rule stated in the second paragraph, on the other hand,
is in conformity with the rule that once the donation is made or
perfected, there is a transfer of ownership. The donee becomes the
18
19

Art. 1045, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 590-591.

523

ARTS. 1072-1074

SUCCESSION

owner of the thing donated. Risks of loss or deterioration, must,
therefore, fall upon him (res perit domino). The same is true with
respect to any subsequent increase. By the principle of accession,
any increase in value would be for the benefit of the donee.
Art. 1072. In the collation of a donation made by both parents,
one-half shall be brought to the inheritance of the father, and the
other half, to that of the mother. That given by one alone shall be
brought to collation in his or her inheritance.20
Rule for Donations Made by Both Parents. — The rule
stated in the above article is logical. Since, ordinarily, the parents
act in concert whenever an advance is given to a favorite child or to
a child in need, the donation generally forms a part of the conjugal
property. Hence, when the value of the thing donated is brought to
collation, one-half of the amount is brought to the inheritance of the
father, and the other half to that of the mother. However, that given
by one alone shall be brought to collation in his or her inheritance
only.
Art. 1073. The donee’s share of the estate shall be reduced by
an amount equal to that already received by him; and his co-heirs
shall receive an equivalent, as much as possible, in property of the
same nature, class and quality.21
Art. 1074. Should the provisions of the preceding article be
impracticable, if the property donated was immovable, the co-heirs
shall be entitled to receive its equivalent in cash or securities, at the
rate of quotation; and should there be neither cash nor marketable
securities in the estate, so much of the other property as may be
necessary shall be sold at public auction.
If the property donated was movable, the co-heirs shall only
have a right to select an equivalent of other personal property of
the inheritance at its just price.22
Rules for Equalization of Shares of Heirs. — The rule
stated in Art. 1073 is directed or aimed at equalizing the shares of
Art. 1046, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 1047, Spanish Civil Code.
22
Art. 1048, Spanish Civil Code.
20
21

524

COMMON PROVISIONS
Collation

ART. 1075

all the heirs. Hence, after the determination of the legitime and the
free portion, or, in case of intestate succession after determining the
shares of each of the legal heirs, the donee’s legitime or legal share as
the case maybe, shall be reduced by an amount equal to that already
received by him. His co-heirs shall, in turn, receive an equivalent, as
much as possible, in property of the same nature, class and quality.
This equivalent is, of course, taken from the estate.
The situation contemplated in the first paragraph of Art. 1074,
on the other hand, refers to a case in which the property donated
is an immovable and it is impracticable to give the co-heirs an
equivalent in property of the same nature, class and quality. In
such case, the rule is to give the co-heirs its equivalent in cash or
securities at the rate of quotation. If this is also impracticable or
impossible by reason of lack of cash or marketable securities in the
estate the only recourse would be to sell at public auction as much of
the other property as may be necessary. The rule is different if the
property donated was movable. In such case, the co-heirs shall only
have a right to select an equivalent of other personal property of the
inheritance at its just price. Absolute equalization of all the heirs is
impossible.23
Art. 1075. The fruits and interest of the property subject to
collation shall not pertain to the estate except from the day on
which the succession is opened.
For the purpose of ascertaining their amount, the fruits and
interest of the property of the estate of the same kind and quality
as that subject to collation shall be made the standard of assessment.24
Rules Regarding Fruits and Interest. — The rules stated
in the above article are in conformity with some fundamental rules
of succession. As a matter of fact, they necessary follow from such
rules. When the property donated to one of the compulsory heirs,
title is vested in such donee once the donation is perfected. It is but
natural that the fruits and interest of the property donated shall
also vest in the donee from that time. However, once the rights to
the succession are opened by the death of the decedent-donor, the

23
24

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 599.
Art. 1049, Spanish Civil Code.

525

ARTS. 1076-1077

SUCCESSION

obligation to collate the value of the thing or property donated also
arises. All of the heirs called to the succession acquire some right
with respect to what is collated. In other words, what is supposed
to be collated, by legal fiction, becomes a part of the mass of the
hereditary estate. The heirs all become co-owners of such estate
from the very moment of the death of the decedent. Hence, it follows
that the fruits and interest from that moment shall pertain to the
hereditary estate.25
Art. 1076. The co-heirs are bound to reimburse to the donee the
necessary expenses which he has incurred for the preservation of
the property donated to him, though they may not have augmented
its value.
The donee who collates in kind an immovable, which has
been given to him, must be reimbursed by his co-heirs for the improvements which have increased the value of the property, and
which exist at the time of the partition is effected.
As to works made on the estate for the mere pleasure of the
donee, no reimbursement is due him for them; he has, however, the
right to remove them, if he can do so without injuring the estate.26
Collation in Kind. — Justice J.B.L. Reyes, commenting on
this article, states:
“The provisions of Article 1076 could be applied only to the
case of a donation that becomes revoked as inofficious in its totality under the rules of Article 912; it is only then that the very
same thing donated must be returned. But that is not collation.
Art. 1076 in its present form should be placed with the other
articles treating of the reduction of donations in the chapter on
legitime.”27

Art. 1077. Should any question arise among co-heirs upon
the obligation to bring to collation or as to the things which are
subject to collation, the distribution of the estate shall not be
interrupted for this reason provided adequate security is given.28

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 599-600.
New provision.
27
Observation on the New Civil Code, Lawyer’s Journal, Dec. 31, 1950.
28
Art. 1050, Spanish Civil Code.
25
26

526

COMMON PROVISIONS
Partition

ARTS. 1078-1079

Section 6. — Partition and Distribution
of the Estate
Subsection 1. — Partition
Art. 1078. Where there are two or more heirs, the whole estate
of the decedent is, before its partition, owned in common by such
heirs, subject to the payment of debts of the deceased.1
Art. 1079. Partition, in general, is the separation, division and
assignment of a thing held in common among those to whom it
may belong. The thing itself may be divided, or its value.2
Concept and Classification of Partition. — Art. 1079 gives
the definition of partition. This definition is supplemented by the
provision of Art. 1082.
There are several classes of partition. As regards its extent, it
may be total or partial; as regards its duration, it may be provisional
or definite; as regards the manner or method by which it is done, it
may be extrajudicial or judicial. According to Manresa:
“It is total, when all of the things comprised in the whole
estate are divided among all of the participants or co-owners.
“It is partial, when some of the things are divided among
all or some of the participants or co-owners, the rest remaining
in a state of indivision or community ownership.
“It is provisional, when the division is merely temporary
or transitory until a final or definite division is made.
“It is definite, when it is stable, final and absolute.
“It is extrajudicial, when it is effected by the testator himself, or by some person named by such testator, or by the participants or co-owners themselves amicably or by common accord.
“It is judicial, when the court intervenes in the division.”3

New provision.
New provision.
3
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 607.
1
2

527

ART. 1079

SUCCESSION

Under the New Rules of Court, there are four ways by which
the estate may be partitioned. They are: first, by extrajudicial settlement;4 second, by an ordinary action for partition;5 third, by judicial
summary settlement;6 and fourth, by administration proceedings.7
The last three are judicial in character.
Who May Effect Partition. — The partition may be effected
either by the decedent himself during his lifetime by an act inter
vivos or by will,8 or by a third person designated by the decedent,9
or by the heirs themselves,10 or by a competent court in accordance
with the New Rules of Court.11
Under Section 1, Rule 74 of the Rules of Court, an extrajudicial
settlement of the estate applies only to the estate left by the deceased
who died without a will and with no creditors, and the heirs are
all of age or the minors are represented by their judicial or legal
representatives. If the property does not belong to the estate of the
decedent, the same being an exclusive property of the husband, it
cannot be the subject matter of an extrajudicial partition.
Since the property in the case of Emiliana Bautista as heir
of the late Manuel Bautista and Evangeline Bautista vs. Special
First Division of the Court of Appeals, et al., G.R. No. 79958, October
28, 1988, does not belong to the estate of the first wife, the Deed of
Extrajudicial Partition is void ab initio, being contrary to law, for
in effect, it deprives the lawful owner of his property without due
process of law. Only the property of the estate of the decedent which
is transmitted by succession can be the lawful subject matter of an
extrajudicial partition.
Extrajudicial partition cannot constitute a partition of the
property during the lifetime of its owner. Partition of future
inheritance is prohibited by law.

Sec. 1, Rule 74, New Rules of Court.
Ibid.
6
Sec. 2, Rule 74, New Rules of Court.
7
Rules 79-91, New Rules of Court.
8
Art. 1080, Civil Code.
9
Art. 1081, Civil Code.
10
Arts. 1083, 1084, Civil Code.
11
Rules 78-90, New Rules of Court.
4
5

528

COMMON PROVISIONS
Partition

ART. 1080

Art. 1080. Should a person make a partition of his estate by an
act inter vivos, or by will, such partition shall be respected, insofar
as it does not prejudice the legitime of the compulsory heirs.
A parent who, in the interest of his or her family, desires to
keep any agricultural, industrial, or manufacturing enterprise intact, may avail himself of the right granted him in this article, by
ordering that the legitime of the other children to whom the property is not assigned, be paid in cash.12
Partition by Decedent. — Under this article, there are two
ways by which a person may effect the partition of his own property
or estate — by an act inter vivos or by will. The only limitation
imposed upon the power of such person to effect the partition is that
it must not prejudice the legitime of compulsory heirs. The partition
of the estate by an act inter vivos may take place in an ordinary
public instrument when such is required. In other words, the rules
regarding ordinary conveyance of personal and real properties must
be followed. The partition by will, must, of course, be effected by a
valid will duly executed in accordance with the formalities prescribed
by law.
Art. 1056 of the Spanish Civil Code, the source of Art. 1080 of
our present law, provides:
“If the testator makes the partition of his property by an
act inter vivos or by a last will, it shall be respected in so far as
it does not prejudice the legitime of the forced heirs.
“The father who, for the interest of his family, desires to
keep undivided an agricultural, industrial or manufacturing enterprises, may make use of his authority, by providing that the
legitime of the other children be paid in cash.

Comparing this provision of the Spanish Civil Code with the
present law, it will be observed that whereas, the former speaks
only of the “testator,” the latter speaks of “person.” The change is
significant. It renders a part of the ruling of the Supreme Court
in Legasto vs. Verzosa13 obsolete. The present law means precisely
what it says — that any person may make a partition of his estate
12
13

Art. 1056, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
54 Phil. 776.

529

ARTS. 1081-1082

SUCCESSION

by an act inter vivos. The Supreme Court, in the Legasto case, on the
other hand, interpreted the word “testator” to imply that even when
the testator partitions his estate by an act inter vivos, he must first
make a will complying with all of the formalities prescribed by law.
It must be noted that a partition effected by a person by an
act inter vivos constitutes an exception to the rule declared in the
second paragraph of Art. 1347 of the Code that no person can enter
into a contract with respect to future inheritance.
Art. 1081. A person may, by an act inter vivos or mortis causa,
intrust the mere power to make the partition after his death to any
person who is not one of the co-heirs.
The provisions of this and of the preceding article shall be
observed even should there be among the co-heirs a minor or a
person subject to guardianship; but the mandatory, in such case,
shall make an inventory of the property of the estate, after notifying
the co-heirs, the creditors, and the legatees or devisees.14
Partition by Third Person. — What is intrusted or delegated
in the above article is the mere power of partition not the power
to distribute the hereditary estate. Hence, the act of the person
delegated with such power is that of a mere agent or mandatory.
The mere physical act of partition, which must not be confused with
the act of distribution, must be done pursuant to the latter.
It must be noted that the law states that the mere power of
partition may be delegated either by an act inter vivos or by an act
mortis causa. Hence, following the interpretation used in Art. 1080,
the delegation may be made either by an act inter vivos such as in
a public instrument or any other writing or by a will executed in
accordance with all of the formalities prescribed by law.
Art. 1082. Every act which is intended to put an end to
indivision among co-heirs and legatees or devisees is deemed to
be a partition, although it should purport to be a sale, an exchange,
a compromise, or any other transaction.15

14
15

Art. 1057, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
New provision.

530

COMMON PROVISIONS
Partition

ARTS. 1083-1084

Art. 1083. Every co-heir has a right to demand the division of
the estate unless the testator should have expressly forbidden its
partition, in which case the period of indivision shall not exceed
twenty years as provided in Article 494. This power of the testator
to prohibit division applies to the legitime.
Even though forbidden by the testator, the co-ownership
terminates when any of the causes for which partnership is
dissolved takes place, or when the court finds for compelling
reasons that division should be ordered, upon petition of one of
the co-heirs.16
Art. 1084. Voluntary heirs upon whom some condition has
been imposed cannot demand a partition until the condition has
been fulfilled; but the other co-heirs may demand it by giving
sufficient security for the rights which the former may have in
case the condition should be complied with; and until it is known
that the condition has not been fulfilled or can never be complied
with, the partition shall be understood to be provisional.17
Who can Demand Partition. — The partition of the estate
may be demanded by any of the following: (1) any compulsory heir;
(2) any voluntary heir; (3) any legatee or devisee; and (4) any person
who has acquired an interest in the estate.
Idem; When partition cannot be demanded. — The partition, however, cannot be demanded in the following cases: (1) when
such partition has been expressly prohibited by the testator himself
for a period which shall not exceed twenty years;18 (2) when the coheirs have agreed that the estate shall not be divided for a period
which shall not exceed ten years, renewable for another ten years;19
(3) when such partition is prohibited by law;20 and (4) when to partition the estate would render it unserviceable for the use for which
it is intended.21 As far as the first is concerned, even though the
partition is prohibited by the testator, the co-ownership may still be
terminated provided that any of the causes for which a partnership

Art. 1051, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
Art. 1054, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
18
Arts. 1083, 494, Civil Code.
19
Art. 494, Civil Code.
20
Ibid.
21
Ibid.
16
17

531

ARTS. 1085-1088

SUCCESSION

may be dissolved exists, or that the court finds for compelling reasons that a division should be ordered. Consequently, the existence
of any of the causes for the dissolution of a partnership enumerated in Arts. 1830 and 1831 would be sufficient in order to justify a
person entitled to do so to demand for partition. As far as the third
is concerned, the best examples would be family homes22 and party
walls.23 As far as the fourth is concerned, it must be noted that what
is prohibited is merely the physical division of the estate. The partition may still be demanded if made in accordance with Art. 1086 of
the Code.
Art. 1085. In the partition of the estate, equality shall be
observed as far as possible, dividing the property into lots, or
assigning to each of the co-heirs things of the same nature, quality
and kind.24
Art. 1086. Should a thing be indivisible, or would be much
impaired by its being divided, it may be adjudicated to one of the
heirs, provided he shall pay the others the excess in cash.
Nevertheless, if any of the heirs should demand that the thing
be sold at public auction and that strangers be allowed to bid, this
must be done.25
Art. 1087. In the partition the co-heirs shall reimburse one
another for the income and fruits which each one of them may
have received from any property of the estate, for any useful
and necessary expenses made upon such property, and for any
damage thereto through malice or neglect.26
Art. 1088. Should any of the heirs sell his hereditary rights
to a stranger before the partition, any or all of the co-heirs may be
subrogated to the right of the purchaser by reimbursing him for
the price of the sale, provided they do so within the period of one
month from the time they were notified In writing of the sale by the
vendor.27

Art. 238, Civil Code.
Art. 658, Civil Code.
24
Art. 1061, Spanish Civil Code.
25
Art. 1062, Spanish Civil Code.
26
Art. 1063, Spanish Civil Code.
27
Arts. 1330, et seq., Civil Code.
22
23

532

COMMON PROVISIONS
Partition

ARTS. 1089-1090

Legal Redemption in Favor of Co-Heirs. — It will be noted
that the right of legal redemption recognized by the above article is
predicated upon the fact that the sale made by the co-heir is effected
before the partition of the estate but after the death of the decedent.
Since the rights to the succession are transmitted at the very moment
of the death of the decedent, there is no question about the right of
an heir to alienate his undivided share in the inheritance. However,
he has an obligation to notify the other co-heirs of the alienation.
Such notification must be made in writing. In such case, the co-heirs
are given one month from the time of such notification within which
to exercise their right of redemption by reimbursing the vendee for
the price of the sale.
It is, therefore, clear that in order that the right of redemption
may be exercised, the following requisites must concur: first, that
there must be several co-heirs; second, that one of them sells his
rights to a stranger; third, that the sale is made before the partition
is effected, fourth, that the right of redemption must be exercised
by one or more of the co-heirs within a period of one month to be
counted from the time that they were notified in writing by the coheir vendor; and fifth, that the vendee is reimbursed for the price of
the sale.28
Art. 1089. The titles of acquisition of ownership of each property shall be delivered to the co-heir to whom said property has
been adjudicated.29
Art. 1090. When the title comprises two or more pieces of
land which have been assigned to two or more co-heirs, or when
it covers one piece of land which has been divided between two
or more co-heirs, the title shall be delivered to the one having the
largest interest, and authentic copies of the title shall be furnished
to the other co-heirs at the expense of the estate. If the interest of
each co-heir should be the same, the oldest shall have the title.30

7 Manresa, 6th Ed., p. 717.
Art. 1065, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
30
Art. 1066, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
28
29

533

ARTS. 1091-1096

SUCCESSION

Subsection 2. — Effects of Partition
Art. 1091. A partition legally made confers upon each heir the
exclusive ownership of the property adjudicated to him.1
Art. 1092. After the partition has been made, the co-heirs
shall be reciprocally bound to warrant the title to, and the quality
of each property adjudicated.2
Art. 1093. The reciprocal obligation of warranty referred to
in the preceding article shall be proportionate to the respective
hereditary shares of the co-heirs; but if any one of them should
be insolvent, the other co-heirs shall be liable for his part in the
same proportion, deducting the part corresponding to the one
who should be indemnified.
Those who pay for the insolvent heir shall have a right of
action against him for reimbursement, should his financial
condition improve.3
Art. 1094. An act to enforce the warranty among co-heirs
must be brought within ten years from the date the right of action
accrues.4
Art. 1095. If a credit should be assigned as collectible, the
co-heirs shall not be liable for the subsequent insolvency of the
debtor of the estate, but only for his insolvency at the time the
partition Is made.
The warranty of the solvency of the debtor can only be
enforced during the five years following the partition.
Co-heirs do not warrant bad debts, if so known to, and
accepted by, the distributee. But if such debts are not assigned to
a co-heir, and should be collected, in whole or in part, the amount
collected shall be distributed proportionately among the heirs.5
Art. 1096. The obligation of warranty among co-heirs shall
cease in the following cases:
Art. 1068, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 1069, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.
3
Art. 1071, Spanish Civil Code.
4
New provision.
5
Art. 1072, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.
1
2

534

COMMON PROVISIONS
Rescission and Nullity of Partition

ARTS. 1097-1100

(1) When the testator himself has made the partition, unless
it appears, or it may be reasonably presumed, that his Intention
was otherwise, but the legitime shall always remain unimpaired;
(2) When it has been so expressly stipulated in the
agreement of partition, unless there has been bad faith;
(3) When the eviction is due to a cause subsequent to the
partition, or has been caused by the fault of the distributee of the
property.6

Subsection 3. — Rescission and Nullity of Partition
Art. 1097. A partition may be rescinded or annulled for the
same causes as contracts.1
Art. 1098. A partition, judicial or extrajudicial, may also be
rescinded on account of lesion, when any one of the co-heirs
received things whose value is less, by at least one-fourth, then
the share to which he is entitled, considering the value of the things
at the time they were adjudicated.2
Art. 1099. The partition made by the testator cannot be
impugned on the ground of lesion, except when the legitime of the
compulsory heirs is thereby prejudiced, or when it appears or may
reasonably be presumed, that the intention of the testator was
otherwise.3
Art. 1100. The action for rescission on account of lesion
prescribe after four years from the time the partition was made.4
Rescission of Partition Due to Lesion. — If in the partition
anyone of the co-heirs should receive a share whose value is less,
by at least one-fourth (1/4), than the share to which he is entitled,
considering the value of the things at the time they were adjudicated,
the partition, whether judicial or extrajudicial, may be rescinded
6

Art. 1072, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.

Art. 1073, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.
Art. 1074, Spanish Civil Code, in a modified form.
3
Art. 1075, Spanish Civil Code.
4
Art. 1076, Spanish Civil Code.
1
2

535

ARTS. 1101-1104

SUCCESSION

on account of the lesion.5 Under Art. 1381, there are also two cases
where contracts may be rescinded on account of lesion; first, those which
are entered into by guardians whenever the wards whom they represent
suffer lesion by more than one-fourth of the value of the things, which are
the object thereof; and second, those agreed upon in representation
of absentees, if the latter suffer the lesion stated in the preceding
number.
If the partition, however, was effected by the decedent himself
either by an act inter vivos or by will, it cannot be impugned on the
ground of lesion.6 This rule is subject to two exceptions: first, when the
legitime of compulsory heir is thereby prejudiced; and second, when it
appears or may reasonably be presumed, that the intention of the
testator was otherwise.
Art. 1101. The heir who is sued shall have the option of indemnifying the plaintiff for the loss, or consenting to a new partition.
Indemnity may be made by payment in cash or by the delivery of
a thing of the same kind and quality as that awarded to the plantiff.
If a new partition is made, it shall affect neither those who have
not been prejudiced nor those who have not received more than their
just share.7
Art. 1102. An heir who has alienated the whole or a considerable
part of the real property adjudicated to him cannot maintain an action
for rescission on the ground of lesion, but he shall have a right to be
indemnified in cash.8
Art. 1103. The omission of one or more objects or securities
of the inheritance shall not cause the rescission of the partition on
the ground of lesion, but the partition shall be completed by the
distribution of the objects or securities which have been omitted.9
Art. 1104. A partition made with preterition of any of the compulsory heirs shall not be rescinded, unless it be proved that there was
bad faith or fraud on the part of the other persons interested; but the

Art. 1098, Civil Code.
Art. 1058, Civil Code.
7
Art. 1077, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
8
Art. 1078, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
9
Art. 1079, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
5
6

536

COMMON PROVISIONS
Rescission and Nullity of Partition

ART. 1105

latter shall be proportionately obliged to pay to the person omitted
the share which belongs to him.10
Art. 1105. A partition which includes a person believed to be
an heir, but who is not, shall be void only with respect to such
person.11
Effect of Inclusion of Intruder in Partition. — We may
consider the problem presented by the above article under any one of
three aspects:
First: One heir shares the inheritance with other heirs who
were mistakenly believed to be so during the partition. In this case,
Art. 1105 applies. The partition is totally void. Hence, the declaration
of nullity shall only result in the delivery of everything that had been
adjudicated to the real heir since a new partition is impossible
considering that there is only one heir.
Second: There are several heirs, but a third person, without any
right, had participated in the partition in the belief that he was one of
the heirs of the deceased. It is clear that, although there was consent
in the transmission of the share to the intruder, said transmission is void.
Hence, Art. 1105 is also applicable.
Third: Through error or mistake, a third person without any
right is allotted the share that would have been given to a real heir. In
this case, both Arts. 1104 and 1105 shall apply. Under Art. 1104, the
partition shall not be rescinded, unless it be proved that there was bad
faith or fraud on the part of the other persons interested; but the latter
shall be proportionately obliged to pay to the person omitted the share
which belongs to him. Under Art. 1105, the partition shall be void, but
only with respect to the intruder. Hence, there must be a declaration of
nullity of the partition, but only with respect to the share adjudicated
to the intruder. This share, including fruits, shall, in turn, be delivered
to the omitted heir as payment of his share, without prejudice to any
additional obligation incurred under Art. 1104.12

Art. 1080, Spanish Civil Code.
Art. 1081, Spanish Civil Code, in modified form.
12
7 Manresa, 6th Ed., pp. 777-779. For illustrative case (under the old law, Art.
1081 Spanish Civil Code) — see Reyes vs. Barretto-Datu, G.R. No. L-17818, Jan. 25,
1967, 9 SCRA 85.
10
11

537

SUCCESSION

APPENDIX

PROVISIONS OF THE FAMILY CODE
THAT AFFECT LAWS ON SUCCESSION
Art. 176. Illegitimate children shall use the surname and
shall be under the parental authority of their mother, and shall be
entitled to support in conformity with this Code. The legitime of
each illegitimate child shall consist of one-half of the legitime of a
legitimate child. Except for this modification, all other provisions in
the Civil Code governing successional rights shall remain in force.
(287a)
Art. 189. Adoption shall have the following effects:
(1) For civil purposes, the adopted shall be deemed to be a
legitimate child of the adopters and both shall acquire the reciprocal
rights and obligations arising from the relationship of parent and
child, including the right of the adopted to use the surname of the
adopters;
(2) The parental authority of the parents by nature over the
adopted shall terminate and be vested in the adopters, except that
if the adopter is the spouse of the parent by nature of the adopted,
parental authority over the adopted shall be exercised jointly by
both spouses; and
(3) The adopted shall remain an intestate heir of his parents
and other blood relatives. (39(1)a, (2)a, (3)a, PD 603).
Art. 190. Legal or intestate succession to the estate of the
adopted shall be governed by the following rules:
(1) Legitimate and illegitimate children and descendants and
the surviving spouse of the adopted shall inherit from the adopted, in
accordance with the ordinary rules of legal or intestate succession;
(2) When the parents, legitimate or illegitimate, or the
legitimate ascendants of the adopted concur with the adopters, they
538

APPENDIX
Provisions of the Family Code that Affect Laws on Succession

shall divide the entire estate, one-half to be inherited by the parents
or ascendants and the other half, by the adopters;
(3) When the surviving spouse or the illegitimate children of
the adopted concur with the adopters, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-half to be inherited by the spouse or
the illegitimate children of the adopted and the other half, by the
adopters.
(4) When the adopters concur with the illegitimate children
and the surviving spouse of the adopted, they shall divide the entire
estate in equal shares, one-third to be inherited by the illegitimate
children, one-third by the surviving spouse, and one-third by the
adopters;
(5) When only the adopters survive, they shall inherit the
entire estate; and
(6) When only collateral blood relatives of the adopted
survive, then the ordinary rules of legal or intestate succession shall
apply. (39(4)a, PD 603).

539

COMMENTS AND JURISPRUDENCE
ON
SUCCESSION

By
DESIDERIO P. JURADO
Associate Justice, Court of Appeals;
Pre-Bar Reviewer-Civil Law

2009
Ninth Edition

Published & Distributed by

856 Nicanor Reyes, Sr. St.
Tel. Nos. 736-05-67 • 735-13-64
1977 C.M. Recto Avenue
Tel. Nos. 735-55-27 • 735-55-34
Manila, Philippines
www.rexpublishing.com.ph
i

Philippine Copyright, 1959, 1980, 1984, 1988, 1991, 2009
by

DESIDERIO P. JURADO

ISBN 978-971-23-5279-9
No portion of this book may be copied or
reproduced in books, pamphlets, outlines or notes,
whether printed, mimeographed, typewritten, copied
in different electronic devices or in any other form, for
distribution or sale, without the written permission
of the author except brief passages in books, articles,
reviews, legal papers, and judicial or other official
proceedings with proper citation.
Any copy of this book without the corresponding
number and the signature of the author on this page
either proceeds from an illegitimate source or is in
possession of one who has no authority to dispose of
the same.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
BY THE AUTHOR

No. ____________
ISBN 978-971-23-5279-9

9

789712 352799

Printed by

rex printing company, inc.
typography & creative lithography
84 P. Florentino St., Quezon City
Tel. Nos. 712-41-01
• 712-41-08
ii

PREFACE TO THE 2009 EDITION
Dr. Jovito Salonga once wrote that we have books that contain
not only simple matters of definitions, distinctions and enumerations but even more, reminding us that life is complex and real, that
the law which essays to support and maintain a regime of ordered
liberty, upholding basic social values and reconciling demands and
interests that overlap and conflict, should cope with its increasing
complexities, that it cannot be inert but that it must thrive and
flourish, since history has shown that law assumes stability only
when it has not lost its capacity for growth.
We hope that Justice Jurado, in this book, just like in his other
books, continuously “supplies an acute need for a manual that is
well-grounded, comprehensive, balanced in treatment” and able
to cope with life’s increasing complexities. We also pray that his
“wealth of experience which he has gained as a respected scholar
and teacher of law” shall continue to satisfy the needs of judges,
lawyers, bar candidates and students of law.
We wish to extend our gratitude to Dr. Jovito Salonga who
wrote the beautiful Foreword in one of Justice Jurado’s books; to the
judges, lawyers, bar candidates and students of law who continue
to have faith in using not only this book, but also his other Civil
Law books. We likewise give our thanks to Mama Nena for the
love and inspiration, and to the REX BOOK STORE for the unending
support given to us.
Quezon City, Philippines, August 23, 2008.

JUSTICE ROLAND B. JURADO
Associate Justice, Sandiganbayan; Former RTC Judge Branch 76,
Malolos, Bulacan; Former MTC Judge, Branch 2, Malolos,
Bulacan; Former Fourth Assistant City Prosecutor, Caloocan
City; Professor of Law – FEU, UE, MLQU and SSC;
BSC; Ll.B. (FEU)

iii

ATTY. ROSARIO JURADO-BENEDICTO
Vice-President and Head, Bank of the Philippine Islands,
Legal Services Division; Partner, Benedicto, Verzosa, Burkley
& Associates; Former Corporate Secretary/Assistant Corporate
Secretary and Legal Officer of the Filinvest Group of Companies,
and the Francisco V. del Rosario Group of Companies; Private
Practitioner, Dizon, Paculdo, Jurado, Jurado, Vitug and
Associates; Former Professor,
F.E.U. School of Business; Former Professor of San Sebastian
College of Law; A.B. and Ll.B. (U.P. Diliman)

ATTY. RUDOLF PHILIP B. JURADO
Private Practitioner, The Law Firm of R.P.B. Jurado; Former
Partner, Culvera, Waytan & Jurado Law Offices; Former Trial
Lawyer, Coronel Law Office; Professor, MLQU School of Law;
Former Professor U.E. College of Law and Lyceum College of
Law; B.S.C., Ll.B. (U.E.)
and
ATTY. ROBERT B. JURADO
Consultant, Housing and Urban Development and Coordinating
Council (HUDCC); Private Practitioner; Former Director,
Legislative Bills and Index Services, Senate of the Republic of the
Philippines and HUDCC; Former Consultant to the
Office of the Vice President
of the Philippines; Former Trial Lawyer, Marbibi Law Office,
Electrical Engineering (N.U.); Ll.B. (F.E.U.)

iv

PREFACE TO THE 1991 EDITION
In the long span of time since its last edition, new precedents,
new developments and new trends in the law of succession have
emerged. These appear throughout this edition. Painstaking effort
had been given to the preparation of this new edition in the true
tradition of the author to make it such an indispensable help to
law students, bar candidates and law practitioners as it had been
from the time of publication in 1980.
Thus, this book is again in circulation with a fervent hope and
prayer that it may continue to aid the “two thousand and thirteen
loves” of the author’s life so that they may further understand and
appreciate this “most complicated, yet most interesting, branch of
Civil Law”.
Quezon City, Philippines, June 1991
By
ATTY. ROSARIO JURADO-BENEDICTO
(Manager, Legal Services Division,
Bank of the Philippine Island;
Attorney-at-Law, Leonen, Ramirez and
Associates; Former Corporate Secretary and Legal
Officer of the Filinvest Group of Companies and the
Francisco V. del Rosario Group of Companies;
Former Professor, F.E.U. School of Business;
A.B.; Ll.B, U.P.);
- and JUDGE ROLAND B. JURADO
(Judge, Municipal Trial Court, Branch 2, Malolos, Bulacan;
Former Fourth Assistant City Prosecutor, Caloocan
City; Former Legal Consultant, Metro Manila Commission;
Professor, San Sebastian College of Law;
B.S.C.; Ll.B., F.E.U.)
v

PREFACE
It is with a sense of pride that we are bringing out once
again the revision of this text on Succession.
This work first appeared in mimeographed form in 1951 almost
immediately after the effectivity of the New Civil Code. After its appearance, it was adopted as the official text in most of the law
schools in Manila and in the provinces. It passed through
three revisions. In 1959, it came out in printed form. It ran out of print
in 1963, but the author, because of pressure of work in other fields,
was unable to revise it. He was, however, able to revise it in 1970.
Again, it ran out of print. Encouraged, however, by repeated requests of
some professors of Succession and of many fields in both bench and bar
to revive the text, the author took time out to revise it. The result is this
sixth edition. And it is the proper time too. During the past eight or nine
years, the Supreme Court had promulgated some significant decisions
which clarify or interpret some provisions of the law on Succession
which were considered either obscure or controversial. All of
these decisions are now embodied in this text.
So, once again, this book is in circulation. With a prayer, the
author hopes that it will still continue to help law students, bar candidates
and law practitioners to understand and appreciate what is probably the
most complicated, yet most interesting, branch of Civil Law.
D. P. JURADO
Manila
May 23, 1980

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Title IV — SUCCESSION
Page
Chapter 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS (Arts. 774-782) ...........

1

Concept of Succession ...................................................................
Basis of Succession.........................................................................
Subjective Elements of Succession .............................................
Objective Elements of Succession ..............................................
Inheritance distinguished from succession ..........................
Restricted concept of inheritance ...........................................
Causal Element of Succession .....................................................
Transmission of successional rights ......................................
Rule in case of presumptive death ....................................
Effect of judicial settlement.....................................................
Kinds of Succession .................................................................
Testamentary succession....................................................
Intestate succession .................................................................
Mixed succession.................................................................
Contractual succession .......................................................
Extent of Inheritance ..............................................................
Property in existence at decedent’s death .........................
Transmissible rights and obligations.................................
Monetary obligations .....................................................
Accretions....................................................................................
Heirs, Devisees and Legatees in General ..............................
Concept of heirs ..................................................................
Kinds of heirs..................................................................
Concept of devisees and legatees .......................................
Distinguished from heirs ...............................................
Importance of distinction ...................................................

1
2
4
4
5
5
7
7
11
12
14
15
15
15
16
17
17
18
20
23
23
24
25
26
27
28

Chapter 2. TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION
(Arts. 783-959) ...........................................................................

29

Section 1. Wills ....................................................................................

29

vii

Subsection 1. Wills in General ...................................................
Concept of Wills ..................................................................
Characteristics of Wills ............................................................
Personal Character of Wills ...............................................
Delegation of Testamentary Act ........................................
Delegation of Non-Testamentary Acts ....................................
Construction of Wills...............................................................
Dispositions susceptible of different
interpretations ..................................................................
Mistakes and omissions ..........................................................
After-acquired property ............................................................
Law Governing Form of Wills ...............................................
Effect of changes after testator’s death ............................
Effect of changes before testator’s death .........................
Subsection 2. Testamentary Capacity and Intent ............
Nature of Testamentary Capacity .......................................
Persons with Testamentary Capacity ...............................
When capacity must exist ..........................................
Age Requirement .......................................................
Mental Requirement ..................................................
Test of a sound mind ..................................................
Presumption of a sound mind ....................................
Inversion of presumption ...........................................
Sufficiency of evidence of mental capacity ................
Effect of old age..........................................................
Effect of infirmity or disease......................................
Effect of insanity ........................................................
Effect of mental delusion ...........................................
Effect of belief in supernatural ..................................
Effect of drunkenness ................................................
Capacity of spouse .....................................................
Subsection 3. Forms of Wills .........................................
Classification of Wills ........................................................
Object of Formalities .................................................
Common formalities ...................................................
Written form of wills ..............................................
Language of wills ...................................................
Special Formalities of Ordinary Wills ...........................
Subscription by testator ............................................
Manner of signing ......................................................
Signature by mark .....................................................
Signature by another .................................................
Place of signature ......................................................
viii

29
29
30
30
31
31
34
34
35
36
36
37
38
39
39
39
40
40
41
42
43
43
45
45
47
48
49
49
50
51
51
51
52
52
52
53
54
55
55
56
57
59

Presence of witnesses ................................................
Attestation and subscription by witnesses ..................
Order of signing .........................................................
Meaning of presence ..................................................
Test of presence .........................................................
Marginal signatures .............................................................
Location of signatures ..........................................................
Numbering of pages ..............................................................
Attestation clause .................................................................
Contents .................................................................................
Effect of defects or imperfections.........................................
Language of attestation........................................................
Notarial acknowledgment ....................................................
Doctrine of Liberal Interpretation.......................................
Limitation ..............................................................................
Illustrative cases ...................................................................
Special Formalities of Holographic Wills ................................
Probate of Holographic Wills ...............................................
Law Which Governs Formal Validity of Wills ...................
Where testator is a Filipino .................................................
Where testator is an alien ....................................................
Joint wills...............................................................................
Law Which Governs Intrinsic Validity of Wills .................
Subsection 4. Witnesses to Wills ..............................................
Qualifications of Witnesses ..................................................
Competency and credibility of witnesses explained ..........
Disqualifications of Witnesses .............................................
Effect of Subsequent Incompetency ....................................
Competency of Interested Witness......................................
Competency of Creditor ........................................................
Subsection 5. Codicils and Incorporation by Reference .........
Codicils ..................................................................................
Incorporation by Reference ..................................................
Subsection 6. Revocation of Wills.............................................
Revocation Defined ...............................................................
Nature and Effect of Revocation..........................................
Law Which Governs Revocation..........................................
Modes of Revocation .............................................................
Revocation by Implication of Law .......................................
Revocation by Will, Codicil or Writing................................
Express revocation ...........................................................
Effect if will is inoperative ...............................................
Effect if will is disallowed ...............................................
ix

59
59
60
62
65
67
72
73
74
75
76
78
79
82
86
87
93
97
104
104
105
106
108

109
109
110
112
113
114
114
114
115
115
116
116
116
117
118
119
120
120
121
121

Implied revocation ............................................................
Revocation by Physical Destruction ....................................
Intention of revocation..........................................................
Actual physical destruction .................................................
Revocation by burning ..........................................................
Revocation by tearing ...........................................................
Revocation by cancelling and obliterating..........................
Presumptions of Revocation.................................................
Conditional or Dependent Relative Revocation .................
Revocation by Mistake..........................................................
Effect of Revocation Upon Recognition of Child ................
Subsection 7. Republication and Revival of Wills ..................
Republication of Wills ...........................................................
Revival of Wills......................................................................
Subsection 8. Allowance and Disallowance of Wills ..............
Concept of Probate of Wills ..................................................
Nature of Probate..................................................................
Necessity of Probate..............................................................
Imprescriptibility of Probate................................................
Questions Determinable by Probate Court ........................
When Probate Commenced ..................................................
Procedure in Probate Proceedings.......................................
Effect of Allowance of Will ...................................................
When allowance may be set aside .......................................
Effect upon probate of Codicil ..............................................
Grounds for Disallowance of Wills ......................................
Violence or intimidation ..................................................
Undue influence................................................................
Fraud .................................................................................
Mistake ..............................................................................
Effect of Disallowance...........................................................
Ratification ............................................................................
Section 2. Institution of Heirs .......................................................
Concept of Institution of Heirs .................................................
Effect of Lack of Institution ......................................................
Freedom of Disposition .............................................................
Form of Institution ....................................................................
Validity of Institution ................................................................
Disposition in favor of unknown persons ................................
Dispositions in favor of definite class ......................................
Institution without Designation of Shares .............................
Individual and Collective Institutions.....................................
Institution of Brothers and Sisters ..........................................
x

122
122
123
123
126
126
127
128
129
131
131
132
132
133
134
134
134
135
137
138
141
142
142
144
150
152
152
153
157
157
158
158
159
159
160
160
163
163
164
165
165
167
168

Institution of a Person and His Children ................................
Institution Based on a False Cause .........................................
Institutions in Aliquot Parts ....................................................
Rule if entire inheritance not covered .....................................
Rule if more than inheritance covered ....................................
Preterition of Heirs ....................................................................
Requisites of Preterition ...........................................................
Character of omitted heir ................................................
Character of omission ......................................................
Survival of omitted heir ...................................................
Effects of Preterition..................................................................
Article Applied ...........................................................................
Effect of Predecease ...................................................................
Effect of Incapacity ....................................................................
Effect of Repudiation .................................................................
Section 3. Substitution of Heirs ....................................................
Concept of Substitution of Heirs ..............................................
General Limitation ....................................................................
Kinds of Substitution ................................................................
Simple or Common Substitution..............................................
When Substitution Takes Place ..........................................
Number of Substitutes .........................................................
Shares of Substitutes ............................................................
Effect of Substitution ............................................................
Fideicommissary Substitution .................................................
Requisites...............................................................................
Limitations ............................................................................
First limitation ......................................................................
Second limitation ..................................................................
Third limitation .....................................................................
Fourth limitation...................................................................
Rights of Fiduciary................................................................
Obligations of Fiduciary .......................................................
Preservation of inheritance ..................................................
Transmission of inheritance ................................................
Right to deductions ...............................................................
Rights of fideicommissary ....................................................
Void Substitutions...............................................................................
Effect of Void Fideicommissary Substitutions ...........................
Disposition of Usufruct to Various Persons ................................
Disposition Declaring Estate Inalienable ...................................
Section 4. Conditional Testamentary Dispositions ........................
Freedom of Disposition ...................................................................
xi

169
169
170
170
172
173
174
174
177
180
180
184
185
187
187
188
188
189
189
191
191
192
192
193
194
196
197
197
199
199
199
201
201
201
202
202
203
205
207
207
208
209
209

Conditional Testamentary Dispositions .................................... 209
Conditions Which Impair Legitime .......................................... 210
Impossible conditions ........................................................... 211
Absolute conditions not to Contract Marriage ................... 217
Condition not to contract first marriage ............................. 218
Condition not to contract subsequent marriage ................ 218
Nature of condition when validly imposed ......................... 219
Relative Conditions Regarding Marriage ........................... 220
Conditions Captatoria .......................................................... 221
Potestative, Casual and Mixed Conditions ........................ 222
Time of fulfilment.................................................................. 223
Rule in negative potestative conditions .............................. 224
Suspensive and Resolutory Conditions ................................... 226
Institution Modal ....................................................................... 228
Fulfillment or Compliance ................................................... 228
Manner of Fulfillment or Compliance ..................................... 229
Testamentary Dispositions With a Term ................................ 230
Rule if term is suspensive .................................................... 230
Transmissibility of rights .............................................................................. 231
Rule if term is resolutory...................................................... 232
Section 5. Legitime ......................................................................... 232
Concept of Legitime ................................................................... 232
Kinds of Legitime....................................................................... 234
Compulsory Heirs ..................................................................... 234
Kinds of Compulsory Heirs....................................................... 235
Legitimate children or descendants .................................... 236
Widow or widower................................................................. 236
Illegitimate children ............................................................. 237
Parents or ascendants .......................................................... 239
Legitime of Legitimate Descendants ....................................... 242
Rules of division ......................................................................... 243
Legitime of Legitimate Ascendants ......................................... 244
Rules of Division ........................................................................ 245
Reserva Troncal; Concept ......................................................... 246
Historical Background.......................................................... 247
Purpose................................................................................... 247
Requisites............................................................................... 248
Nature .................................................................................... 249
Personal Elements ................................................................ 252
Origin of property ............................................................. 255
Descendant-propositus .................................................... 256
Ascendant-reservista ....................................................... 260
Reservatarios .................................................................... 262
xii

Property Subject to Reservation ..........................................
Rights of Reservista ..............................................................
Obligations of Reservista .....................................................
Rights of Reservatarios ........................................................
When reservatario acquires right; effect ............................
Extinction of Reserva............................................................
Legitime of Surviving Spouse...................................................
Alone as a class ..........................................................................
With legitimate descendants ....................................................
With legitimate ascendants ......................................................
With illegitimate children.........................................................
Legitime of Illegitimate Descendants......................................
Alone as a class ..........................................................................
With legitimate descendants ....................................................
With ascendants ........................................................................
With spouse ................................................................................
With legitimate descendants and spouse ..................................
With legitimate ascendants and spouse ..................................
Transmissibility of rights..........................................................
Legitime of Illegitimate Parents ..............................................
Preservation of Legitime ...........................................................
Effect of impairment..................................................................
Effect of Renunciation or Compromise ....................................
Effect of Incomplete Legitime...................................................
Effect of Inofficious Testamentary Dispositions .....................
Steps in Distribution of Estate If There are Donations .........
Gross value of estate .............................................................
Debts and charges .................................................................
Collation of donations ...........................................................
Meaning of collation..............................................................
Donations to be collated .......................................................
Imputation .............................................................................
Illustrations ...........................................................................
Reduction of Testamentary Dispositions and Donations .....
Procedure for reduction ........................................................
Rules for reduction of devises ..............................................
Table of Legitime .......................................................................
Section 6. Disinheritance...............................................................
Concept of Disinheritance.........................................................
Requisites of Disinheritance.....................................................
Imperfect Disinheritance ..........................................................
Distinguished from preterition ............................................
Effect of imperfect disinheritance .......................................
xiii

272
273
274
274
276
277
284
285
286
287
287
290
290
293
296
296
296
300
301
304
304
305
306
308
309
310
314
314
314
315
315
316
317
320
321
323
324
326
327
327
329
329
331

Grounds for Disinheritance of Descendants ...............................
Grounds for Disinheritance of Ascendants..................................
Grounds for Disinheritance of Spouse .........................................
Effect of Subsequent Reconciliation .............................................
Effects of Disinheritance ................................................................
Section 7. Legacies and Devises .........................................................
Concept of Legacies and Devises...................................................
Persons Charged With Legacies and Devises .............................
Extent of Liability ......................................................................
Liability when no one is charged .............................................
Liability for Eviction .......................................................................
Legacy of Things Belonging Partly to Strangers ........................
Effect of Partition .......................................................................
Legacy of Things Belonging to Strangers ....................................
Legacy of Things Belonging to Legatee .......................................
Effect of acquisition by legatee .................................................
Legacy of a Credit.......................................................................
Legacy of Remission of Debts ...................................................
Revocation of Legacy..................................................................
Legacy to Creditors ....................................................................
Alternative Legacies and Devises ............................................
Generic Legacies.........................................................................
Generic Devises ..........................................................................
Legacy for Education or Support .............................................
When Right to Legacy or Devise Vests ...................................
Transmission of Right of Ownership.......................................
In determinate legacies or devises ......................................
In generic legacies and devises............................................
Order of Payment of Legacies and Devises ............................
Effect of Ineffective Legacies or Devises .................................
Revocation of Legacies and Devises....................................
Revocation by transformation .............................................
Revocation by alienation ......................................................
Revocation by loss or destruction ........................................
Dispositions in Favor of Relatives............................................

333
336
341
343
343
344
344
345
345
346
346
347
347
349
350
351
353
354
354
355
356
357
358
359
360
361
361
362
363
365
372
373
373
374
375

Chapter 3. LEGAL OR INTESTATE SUCCESSION
(Arts. 960-1014) .................................................................................. 377
Section 1. General Provisions .............................................................
Concept of Legal or Intestate Succession................................
Causes of Intestacy ....................................................................
Other causes of intestacy ..........................................................
Order of Intestate Succession ...................................................
xiv

377
377
378
379
380

Rule of preference of between lines ..............................
Rules of proximity ....................................................................
Exception ...............................................................................
Rule of equal division .............................................................
Exceptions .............................................................................
Subsection 1. Relationship ..........................................................
Computation of Degrees..........................................................
Effect of Incapacity or Repudiation ......................................
Subsection 2. Right of Representation .....................................
Concept of Representation .....................................................
Characteristics .........................................................................
When Representation Takes Place.......................................
Representation in Direct Descending Lines.......................
Representation in Collateral Line ........................................
Capacity of Representative ....................................................
Effect Upon Division of Estate ..............................................
Repudiation by Representative ............................................
Effect of Repudiation by Heir ................................................
Section 2. Order of Intestate Succession.......................................
Order of Intestate Succession in General ...........................
Nature and Basis ......................................................................
Subsection 1. Descending Direct Line ......................................
Legitimate Children or Descendants ...................................
Rules of Division .......................................................................
Legitimate and Illegitimate Children..................................
Subsection 2. Ascending Direct Line ........................................
Legitimate Parents or Ascendants .......................................
Rules of Division .......................................................................
Subsection 3. Illegitimate Children ..........................................
Illegitimate Children ...............................................................
Rules of Division .......................................................................
Right of representation ..........................................................
Illegitimate Children and Legitimate Ascendants ...........
Separation of Legitimate and Illegitimate Families ........
Order of Intestacy in Illegitimate Filiation ........................
Children or descendants ....................................................
Illegitimate parents.............................................................
Surviving spouse ..................................................................
Brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces.....................
Subsection 4. Surviving Spouse .................................................
Surviving Spouse ......................................................................
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate Descendants ................
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate Ascendants ..................
xv

380
381
381
381
382
383
384
385
389
389
389
390
391
392
394
395
399
400
401
401
403
404
404
405
407
414
414
415
415
416
416
417
417
419
421
422
422
422
424
425
425
426
431

Surviving Spouse and Illegitimate Children......................
Surviving Spouse and Legitimate and Illegitimate
Descendants ......................................................................
Surviving Spouse, Legitimate Ascendants
and Illegitimate Children ...............................................
Surviving Spouse, Brothers and Sisters, Nephews
and Nieces .........................................................................
Subsection 5. Collateral Relatives ...........................................
Collateral Relatives ..............................................................
Brothers and sisters .........................................................
Brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces .....................
Nephews and nieces .........................................................
Other colateral relatives ..................................................
Subsection 6. The State.............................................................
The State .....................................................................................
Procedure for escheat ..........................................................
Requisites for escheat ..........................................................
Table of Intestate Succession.......................................................

432
432
441
444
445
445
446
446
449
451
452
452
452
453
454

Chapter 4. PROVISIONS COMMON TO TESTATE
AND INTESTATE SUCCESSIONS (Arts. 1015-1105) ......... 458
Section 1. Right of Accretion ............................................................
Concept of Accretion ......................................................................
Conflict of rights ........................................................................
Accretion in Testamentary Succession ......................................
Plurality of subjects, unity of object.......................................
Vacancy in inheritance ............................................................
Accretion in Intestate Succession ...............................................
Effect of Accretion .........................................................................
Division in case of accretion ....................................................
Division in case of conflict of rights .......................................
Transmission of rights and obligations.................................
Effect of Compulsory Succession .................................................
Effect if Accretion Does Not Take Place ...................................
Section 2. Capacity to Succeed by Will or by Intestacy ...............
Capacity to Succeed ......................................................................
Requisites....................................................................................
Incapacity to Succeed ....................................................................
Capacity of Entities or Associations ...........................................
Incapacity Based on Undue Influence or Interest......................
Disqualification of priest or minister ....................................
Disqualification of guardians ..................................................
Disqualification of witnesses...................................................
xvi

458
458
458
460
460
464
464
468
469
470
476
477
480
480
481
481
481
482
483
484
485
485

Disqualification of physician or nurses .................................
Incapacity Based on Morality or Public Policy.........................
Dispositions for Benefit of Testator’s Soul ..........................
Incapacity Due to Unworthiness ................................................
Pardon of Acts of Unworthiness ..................................................
Time to Determine Capacity ........................................................
Effect of Incapacity Upon Compulsory Heirs ...........................
Effect of Acts of Disqualified Heir...............................................
Governing Law if Decedent is a Foreigner ...............................
Remedy Against Disqualified Heir .............................................
Period of prescription................................................................
Section 3. Acceptance and Repudiation of the Inheritance ........
Concept of Acceptance and Repudiation ...................................
Characteristics ...............................................................................
Effects in general............................................................................
Requisites for Acceptance or Repudiation ................................
Who May Accept or Repudiate ...................................................
Manner of Acceptance ...................................................................
Manner of Repudiation .................................................................
Effect of Repudiation Upon Creditors ........................................
Repudiation as Testamentary or as Legal Heir ......................
Irrevocability of Acceptance or Repudiation .............................
Section 4. Executors or Administrators ..........................................
Section 5. Collation .............................................................................
Concept of Collation .......................................................................
When Collation Shall Not Take Place........................................
Property Left by Will ....................................................................
Collation by Representation ........................................................
Donations to Children of Compulsory Heirs.............................
Donations to Spouse of Child .......................................................
Expenses for Support ....................................................................
Expenses for a Career ...................................................................
Payment for Debts of Children ....................................................
Wedding Gifts ................................................................................
Article applied ............................................................................
What Must be Collated .................................................................
Rule for Donations Made by Both Parents ...............................
Rules for Equalization of Shares of Heirs ...............................
Rules Regarding Fruits and Interests .....................................
Collation in Kind ...........................................................................
Section 6. Partition and Distribution of the Estate ...................
Subsection 1. Partition .................................................................
Concept and Classification of Partition ..............................
xvii

486
487
487
491
493
495
496
498
499
500
501
501
501
501
502
502
503
506
506
507
508
509
510
511
511
513
515
516
518
518
518
519
521
522
522
523
524
524
525
526
527
527
527

Who may Effect Partition .......................................................
Partition by Decedent ..............................................................
Partition by Third Person.......................................................
Who Can Demand Partition...................................................
When partition cannot be demanded...................................
Legal Redemption in Favor of Co-Heirs..............................
Subsection 2. Effects of Partition...............................................
Subsection 3. Rescission and Nullity of Partition ................
Rescission of Partition Due to Lesion ..................................
Effect of Inclusion of Intruder in Partition ......................

528
529
530
531
531
533
534
535
535
537

Appendix – Provisions of the Family Code that
Affect Laws on Succession .......................................................... 538

xviii

