PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
WITH CASE UPDATES

VOLUME 1

CIVIL PROCEDURE

SEVENTH 2022 EDITION

entralboo

MANUEL R. RIGUERA

PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON REMEDIAL LAW
(Vol. 1, Civil Procedure)
With case updates
Seventh (2022) edition
MANUEL R RIGUERA
Professorial Lecturer, Far Eastern University Institute
of Law and UniVersity of Asia
& the Pacific Institute of Law
Review Director, Bar Reviewer, and Senior Coach,
Jurists Bar Review Center; Partner, Riguera &
Riguera Law Office
Former Commissioner, Legal Education Board

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION
JURISDICTION
Rule 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Rule 2.
CAUSE OF ACTION
Rule 3.
PARTIES TO CIVIL ACTIONS
Rule 4.
VENUE
Rule 5.
UNIFORM PROCEDURE
IN TRIAL COURTS
Rule 6.
KINDS OF PLEADINGS
Rule 7. PARTS OF A PLEADING
Rule 8.
MANNER OF MAKING
ALLEGATIONS IN PLEADINGS
Rule 9.
EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PLEAD
Rule 10. AMENDED & SUPPLEMENTAL
PLEADINGS
Rule 11. WHEN TO FILE
RESPONSIVE PLEADING
Rule 12. BILL OF PARTICULARS
Rule 13. FILING & SERVICE OF PLEADINGS,
JUDGMENTS & OTHER PAPERS
Rule 14. SERVICE OF SUMMONS
Rule 15. MOTIONS
Rule 16. MOTION TO DISMISS
Rule 17. DISMISSAL OF ACTIONS
Rule 18. PRE-TRIAL
Rule 19. INTERVENTION
Rule 20. CALENDAR OF CASES
Rule 21. SUBPOENA
Rule 22. COMPUTATION OF TIME
Rules 23-29 DISCOVERY
Rule 23. DEPOSITIONS PENDING ACTIONS
vii

1
8
85
101
129
193
214
219
271
298
337
354
374
378
380
393
447
456
464
477
487
498
499
506
510
513

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Rule 24. DEPOSITIONS BEFORE ACTION
OR PENDING APPEAL
Rule 25. INTERROGATORIES TO PARTIES
Rule 26. ADMISSION BY ADVERSE PARTY
Rule 27. PRODUCTION OR INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS OR THINGS
Rule 28. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND
MENTAL EXAMINATION
OF PERSONS
Rule 30. TRIAL
Rule 31. CONSOLIDATION OR SEVERANCE
Rule 32. TRIAL BY COMMISSIONER
Rule 33. DEMURRER TO EVIDENCE
Rule 34. JUDGMENT ON THE PLEADINGS
Rule 35. SUMMARY JUDGMENTS
Rule 36. JUDGMENTS, FINAL ORDERS,
AND ENTRY THEREOF
Rule 37. NEW TRIAL OR RECONSIDERATION
Rule 38. PETITION FOR RELIEF
Rule 39. EXECUTION, SATISFACTION, &
EFFECT OF JUDGMENTS
Rule 40. APPEALS FROM THE MUNICIPAL
TRIAL COURTS TO THE
REGIONAL TRIAL COURTS
Rule 41. APPEAL FROM THE
REGIONAL TRIAL COURT
Rule 42. PETITION FOR REVIEW FROM
THE RTC TO THE CA
Rule 43. APPEALS FROM QUASI-JUDICIAL
BODIES TO THE COURT OF APPEALS
Rule 44. ORDINARY APPEALED CASES (CA)
Rule 45. APPEAL BY CERTIORARI TO
THE SUPREME COURT
Rule 46. ORIGINAL CASES

534
535
539
548

554
556
560
563
565
569
574
585
595
604
610

706
715
742
750
765
768
775

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Rule 47. ANNULMENT OF JUDGMENTS OR
FINAL ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS
Rule 51. JUDGMENT
Rule 56. PROCEDURE IN THE
SUPREME COURT

799

PROVISIONAL REMEDIES

800

Rule 57.
Rule 58.
Rule 59.
Rule 60.
Rule 61.

PRELIMINARY ATTACHMENT
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION
RECEIVERSHIP
REPLEVIN
SUPPORT PENDENTE LITE

776
796

802
831
856
865
873

PROVISIONAL REMEDIES AND
INTERIM RELIEFS UNDER
SPECIAL LAWS AND RULES

876

SPECIAL CIVIL ACTIONS

880

Rule 62. INTERPLEADER
Rule 63. DECLARATORY RELIEF &
SIMILAR REMEDIES
Rule 64. REVIEW OF JUDGMENTS AND
FINAL ORDERS OR RESOLUTIONS
OF THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS
AND THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT
Rule 65. CERTIORARI, PROHIBITION
AND MANDAMUS
Rule 66. QUO WARRANTO
Rule 67. EXPROPRIATION
Rule 68. FORECLOSURE OF
REAL ESTATE MORTGAGE
Rule 69. PARTITION
Rule 70. FORCIBLE ENTRY AND
UNLAWFUL DETAINER (EJECTMENT)
Rule 71. CONTEMPT

882

ix

888

899
903
946
955
975
993
1002
1050

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

APPENDICES
APPENDIX A
THE REVISED RULES OF PROCEDURE
FOR SMALL CLAIMS CASES
APPENDIX B
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11576
An Act Further Expanding the Jurisdiction of
The Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal
Trial Courts in Cities, Municipal Trial
Courts, and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts,
Amending for the Purpose Batas Pambansa
Blg. 129, Otherwise Known as
"The Judiciary Reorganization Act
Of 1980," as Amended
APPENDIX C
A.M. No. 08-8-7-SC
RULES ON EXPEDITED PROCEDURES
IN THE FIRST LEVEL COURTS

£001

x

1069

1080

1084

INTRODUCTION
Q.

What do you understand by remedial law?

A.

Remedial law is that branch of law which provides for
the jurisdiction of courts and the rules concerning
pleading, practice, and procedure before the courts.

Q.

What are the primary sources of remedial law?

A.

The primary sources of remedial law are the following:
1) B.P. Blg. 129 (Judiciary Reorganization Act of
1981) and other special laws which provide for
the jurisdiction of the courts.
2) The Rules of Court.
3) Decisions of the Supreme Court.
4) Circulars, Resolutions, and other administrative
issuances of the Supreme Court.
5) The Constitution, particularly Article VIII of the
Constitution on the judiciary.

Q.

May Congress repeal, alter, or supplement rules
concerning pleading, practice, and procedure?

A.

No. The power of Congress under the 1933 and 1973
Constitutions to repeal, alter, or supplement rules
concerning pleading, practice, and procedure was
taken away in the 1987 Constitution. (Echegaray v.
Secretary of Justice, G.R. No. 132601, 19 January
1999; !SAGAN! A. CRUZ, PHILIPPINE POLITICAL LAW
246 [1989 ed.]).

1

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The GSIS argued that it is exempt from the payment
of docket and legal fees by virtue of R.A. No. 8291
which exempts it from "all taxes, assessments,
fees, charges or duties of all kinds." Is the GSIS
correct?

A.

No. In In Re: Petition for Recognition of the Exemption
of the Government Service Insurance System from
Payment of Legal Fees (A.M. No. 08-2-01-0, February
11, 2010. AM. No. 08-2-01-0, February 11, 2010),
the Court ruled that the provision in the Charter of the
GSIS, i.e., Section 39 of Republic Act No. 8291,
which exempts it from "all taxes, assessments, fees,
charges or duties of all kinds," cannot operate to
exempt it from the payment of legal fees. This was
because, unlike the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, which
empowered Congress to repeal, alter or supplement
the rules of the Supreme Court concerning pleading,
practice and procedure, the 1987 Constitution removed
this power from Congress. Hence, the Supreme
Court now has the sole authority to promulgate rules
concerning pleading, practice and procedure in all
courts. (GSIS v. Caballero, G.R. No. 158090, 4 October
2010). Under 522 R141, while the Republic of the
Philippines and its agencies and instrumentalities are
exempt from paying legal fees, local governments and
GOCCs with or without independent charters are not
so exempt.

Q.

How are actions or proceedings classified?

A.

According to subject matter:
1) Real action.
2) Personal action.

2

INTRODUCTION

According to binding effect:
1) Action/proceeding in rem.
2) Action in personam.
3) Action quasi in rem.
Q.

Define a real action and a personal action.

A.

A real action is one which affects title to or possession
of real property or interest therein. (Si R4). A personal
action is one which does not affect title to or possession
of real property or interest therein. (52 R4).

Q.

Give examples of real actions.

A.

1) Action to recover ownership or possession of land.
2) Foreclosure of real estate mortgage.
3) Partition.
4) Ejectment.

Q.

Give examples of personal actions.

A.

1) Action to recover ownership or possession of
personal property.
2) Action for specific performance.
3) Action for collection of sum of money.

Q.

What is the importance or practical significance of
distinguishing between a real action and a
personal action?

A.

The distinction is important for purposes of determining
the venue of the action and the court having subject
matter jurisdiction thereof

3

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The venue of real actions is the proper court
which has jurisdiction over the area wherein the real
property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated. (Si
R4). On the other hand, venue of personal actions lies
in the place where the plaintiff or any of the principal
plaintiffs resides or where the defendant or any of the
principal defendant resides at the election of the
plaintiff. (S2 R4).
Jurisdiction over real actions depends upon the
assessed value of the real property involved. (See
519[2] BP Blg. 129). Jurisdiction over personal actions
depends upon the amount of the claim or demand
(See 519[3] BP Blg. 129) provided that if the subject
of the litigation is incapable of pecuniary estimation,
jurisdiction is vested in the RTC.
Q.

Define an action in rem.

A

An action or proceeding in rem is one which is not
directed against a particular person but on the thing or
res itself and which asks the court to make a
declaration of or to dispose of or deal with the res.
The thing or res may be personal or real property or it
may be a status, right, or particular fact.

Q.

Give examples of action or proceedings in rem.

A.
1) Application for original registration of a parcel
of land.
2) Special proceedings, the object of which is to
establish the res, i.e., status, right, or particular fact.
3) Petition for declaration of insolvency.

4

INTRODUCTION

4) Escheat proceedings.
5) Petition for change of name under R103.
Q.

What is an action in personam?

A.

An action in personam is one which is directed
against particular persons and seeks a relief which
would be binding only upon such particular persons.
Examples are action for a sum of money or for
specific performance.

Q.

What is an action quasi in rem?

A.

An action quasi in rem is one which is directed
against particular persons but seeks to reach and
dispose of or deal with their property located in the
Philippines. (Midgely v. Hon. Fernando, 13 May 1975).
It is similar to an action in rem in that the purpose is to
dispose of or deal with property (res) in the Philippines.
However like an action in personam, it is brought
against particular persons and the judgment therein is
binding only upon the parties thereto. (San Pedro v.
Ong, G.R. No. 177598, 17 October 2008).

Q.

Give examples of actions quasi in rem.

A.

1) Judicial foreclosure of mortgage.
2) Action in personam in which property of the
defendant has been attached. The attachment
converts the action to one quasi in rem.
(Citizen's Surety & Insurance Co. v. MelencioHerrera, 38 SCRA 369).
3) Action for partition and accounting. (Valmonte
v. CA, 252 SCRA 93, 102).

5

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
4) Action to quiet title and to remove cloud.
(San Pedro v. Ong, G.R. No. 177598, 17
October 2008).
5) Action for partition.

Q.

Is an action for ejectment an action quasi in rem
or in personam?

A.

It is an action in personam since the action is binding
only between the parties. (Domagas v. Jensen, G.R.
158407, 17 January 2005). It is submitted that the action
is one quasi in rem since the real object is to exclude
the defendant from possessory interest over the property
and hence extraterritorial service may be availed of.
Whether characterized as in personam or quasi in
rem, the judgment in an ejectment suit is binding only
between the parties.

Q.

Is an action to recover title to or possession of
real property an action in personam or an action
quasi in rem?

A.

It is a real action but an action in personam.
(Republic v. Court of Appeals, 315 SCRA 600). For
the same reasons as stated in the preceding answer,
it is submitted that the action is one quasi in rem.1
(See de Midgely v. Ferandos, 13 May 1975, where
the issue was the applicability of S17 R14 and where
the Court stated that the action for reconveyance of
land was an action quasi in rem).

i See de Midgely V. Ferandos, 13 May 1975, where the issue was the applicability
of S17 R14 and where the Court stated that the action for reconveyance of land
was an action quasi in rem.

6

INTRODUCTION

Q.

What is the importance of distinguishing an action
in personam from an action in rem or quasi in rem?

A.

Extraterritorial service under S17 R14 may be
effected in actions in rem or quasi in rem but not in an
action in personam. (Valmonte v. CA, 252 SCRA 93,
100). On the other hand, S16 and 318 of R14 apply
to any action, including actions in personam.
In preliminary attachment, the requirement of
prior or contemporaneous service of summons shall
not apply where the action is in rem or quasi in rem.
(S5 R57).

7

JURISDICTION
Q.

Define the term jurisdiction.

A.

Jurisdiction may be understood in three senses:
subject-matter jurisdiction, personal jurisdiction, and
jurisdiction over the res.
Subject-matter jurisdiction is the authority and
power of the court to hear and determine cases of the
general class to which the proceeding in question
belongs. (Diocese of Bacolod v. COMELEC, 21 January
2015). Simply put, it is a court's authority to try and
decide a particular type of dispute or case. For
instance, the jurisdiction of the regional trial court over
cases where the subject of the litigation is incapable
of pecuniary estimation.
Personal jurisdiction is the power of the court to
bind a party or person. Jurisdiction over the plaintiff
or petitioner is acquired by the filing of the complaint
or petition. Jurisdiction over the defendant is obtained
by service of summons or his voluntary appearance.
Jurisdiction over the res is the power of the court
to try a case which would bind real or personal
property or determine the status of a party.

Q.

What is meant by original and appellate jurisdiction
and exclusive and concurrent jurisdiction?

A.

Original jurisdiction is that exercised by a court or
body in the first instance, as for instance the
jurisdiction of the MTC over ejectment cases.
Appellate jurisdiction is that exercised by a court
or body over a case elevated to it by way of review.
An example is the jurisdiction by the Court of Appeals

8

JURISDICTION

over cases decided by the Regional Trial Court and
elevated to the Court of Appeals for review.
Exclusive jurisdiction is that jurisdiction exercised
by a court or body to the exclusion of all other courts.
An example is the jurisdiction of the Regional Trial
Court over cases incapable of pecuniary estimation.
Concurrent jurisdiction is that jurisdiction
exercised over a case or subject matter by two or
more courts or bodies. An example is a special civil
action for certiorari jurisdiction over which may be
exercised by the RTC, CA, and Supreme Court.
Q.

Outline the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
civil cases.

A.
A. Original
1) Exclusive
a) Petitions for certiorari, prohibition or mandamus
against:
1) Court of Appeals;
2) Commission on Elections;
3) Commission on Audit;
4) Court of Tax Appeals; and
5) Sandiganbayan.
2) Concurrent
a) With the Court of Appeals
1) Petitions for certiorari, prohibition or mandamus
against:
9

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) Regional Trial Courts; and
b) National Labor Relations Commission.
(Note: All such petitions over NLRC cases
should be filed with the CA unless there are
compelling and exceptional circumstances.)
b) With the Court of Appeals and Regional Trial
Courts
1) Petitions for certiorari, prohibition or mandamus
against courts of the first level and other
bodies; and
2) Petitions for habeas corpus and quo warranto.
c) With Regional Trial Courts
1) Actions against ambassadors, other public
ministers and consuls.
d) With the Sandiganbayan
1) Petitions for certiorari, prohibition, mandamus,
habeas corpus, injunctions and ancillary writs
in aid of its appellate jurisdiction and over
petitions of similar nature, including quo
warranto in PCGG cases.
e) With the Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan, and
Regional Trial Court.
1) Petition for a writ of amparo (S3 Rule on the
Writ of Amparo).
2) Petition for a writ of habeas data (S3 Rule
on the Writ of Habeas Data).

10

JURISDICTION

B) Appellate
1) Petitions for review on certiorari against:
a) Court of Appeals;
b) Sandiganbayan;
c) Regional Trial Courts in cases involving —
1) Constitutionality or validity of a treaty,
international or executive agreement, law,
presidential decree, proclamation, order,
instruction, ordinance, or regulation;
2) Legality of a tax, impost, assessment, toll or
a penalty in relation thereto;
3) Jurisdiction of a lower court; and
4) Pure error or question of law. (Cf. criminal
cases, Tan v. People, 381 SCRA 75. Note
that appeals from MTC decisions even if on
pure question of law is to the RTC and that
an appeal from the RTC's decision rendered
in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction is
to the CA even if on pure question/s of law
[52(c) R42]).
d) Court of Tax Appeals en banc. (Sec. 19,
R.A. 1125 as amended by R.A. 9282).
e) Final judgment or order in a writ of amparo
or habeas data case. (519, Rule on the
Writ of Amparo; S19 Rule on the Writ of
Habeas Data).

11

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Outline the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals in
civil cases.

A.
A) Original
1) Exclusive
a) Actions for annulment of judgments of
Regional Trial Courts.
b) Special civil action for certiorari against a
Regional Trial Court's order approving or
disapproving the rehabilitation plan or any
order issued after the approval of the
rehabilitation plan. (2013 Financial Rehabilitation
Rules of Procedure, Rule 6).
2) Concurrent
a) With the Supreme Court (see Par. 2, subpar. a. on the original jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court); and
b) With the Supreme Court and the Regional
Trial Courts (see Par.2, sub-par. b., loc.cit.).
c) With the Supreme Court, Sandiganbayan,
and Regional Trial Court. Petition for writ of
amparo and habeas data.
B) Appellate
1) Ordinary appeals from:
a) Regional Trial Courts, except in cases
exclusively appealable to the Supreme Court,
b) Family Courts.
12

JURISDICTION

c) Special Commercial Courts.
2) Appeal by petition for review (R43) from:
a) Civil Service Commission.
b) Securities and Exchange Commission;
c) Land Registration Authority;
d) Social Security Commission;
e) Office of the President;
f) Civil Aeronautics Board;
g) Bureau of Patents,
Technology Transfer;

Trademarks

and

h) National Electrification Administration;
i) Energy Regulatory Board;
j) National Telecommunications Commission;
k) Department of Agrarian Reform under R.A.
6657;
I) Government Service Insurance System;
m) Employees Compensation Commission;
n) Agricultural Inventions Board;
o) Insurance Commission;
p) Philippine Atomic Energy Commission;
q) Board of Investments;
r) Voluntary arbitrators authorized by law.

13

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3) Any other quasi-judicial agency, instrumentality,
board or commission in the exercise of its
quasi-judicial functions.
(Note: Per Sec. 19 of RA 1125 as amended by
RA 9282 decisions of the Court of Tax Appeals en
banc are appealable to SC via R45; decisions of the
CTA division denying a motion for reconsideration are
appealable to the CTA en banc by way of petition for
review. Judgments or final orders of Central Board of
Assessment Appeals are appealable to CTA w/in 30
days from by filing a petition for review analogous with
R42; with respect to judgments or final orders of the
CBAA in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction,
appeal shall be made by filing a petition for review
analogous to R43).
4) Petitions for review (R42) from the Regional
Trial Courts in cases appealed thereto from the
lower courts.
5) Petitions for review (R42) from the RTC acting
as a Special Agrarian Court. (S60 of the
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law).
(Note: See Sec. 7 of RA 1125 as amended by
RA 9282 which grants the CTA exclusive appellate
jurisdiction over RTC decisions in local tax cases, tax
crime cases, and tax collection cases).
Q.

Does the Court of Appeals have the power to try
cases and conduct hearings, receive evidence and
perform acts necessary to resolve factual issues?

A.

Under Section 9 of B.P. Blg. 129, the Court of Appeals
has the power to try cases and conduct hearings,
receive evidence, and perform acts necessary to resolve
factual issues in cases falling within its original and
appellate jurisdiction, including the power to grant and
conduct new trials or further proceedings.
14

JURISDICTION

The Supreme Court however has held that the
CA's power to receive evidence is qualified by the
CA's internal rules. Hence in accordance with such
rules, in appeals in civil cases, the CA may receive
evidence only when it grants a new trial based on
newly discovered evidence. (Crispino v. Tansay, 5
Dec 2016, Leonen, J.).
Q.

An appellant in a civil case pending in the Court
of Appeals filed a motion for the reception of
specified evidence for the purpose of clarifying
facts already in the record in order that the Court
would be better able to resolve relevant factual
issues raised in the appeal. Will the motion prosper?
Why? (87 Bar Q6)

A.

At the time the question was asked, the correct
answer was that the motion will not prosper since
Sec. 9 of B.P. Blg. 129, as amended by E.O. No. 33,
28 July 1986, provided that the CA may receive
evidence in appealed cases only when a motion for
new trial on the ground of newly discovered evidence
was granted by it.
Sec. 9 was subsequently amended by R.A. No.
7902 (approved 23 February 1995) and it provided
the Court of Appeals shall have the power to try cases
and conduct hearings, receive evidence and perform
any and all acts necessary to resolve factual issues
raised in cases falling within its original and appellate
jurisdiction, including the power to grant and conduct
new trials or further proceedings. (89 of B.P. Blg. 129,
as amended by R.A. No. 7902, approved 23 February
1995). Since under this rule, the power to receive evidence
was not circumscribed, the answer to the question
would have been that the motion will prosper.

15

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
However in Crisp/no v. Tansay, 5 December
2016, the Supreme Court held that the CA's power to
receive evidence is qualified by the CA's internal
rules. Hence in accordance with such rules, in
appeals in civil cases, the CA may receive evidence
only when it grants a new trial based on newlydiscovered evidence. In effect, Crisp/no reverted to
the rule under Sec. 9 of B.P. Blg. 129, as amended by
E.O. No. 33.
Thus the answer to the question is that the
motion will not prosper.
Q.

Outline the jurisdiction of the Regional Trial Court
in civil cases.

A
A. Original
1) Exclusive
a) Actions in which the subject of the litigation is
incapable of pecuniary estimation;
b) Actions involving title to or possession of real
property or an interest therein, where the
assessed value of such property exceeds
P20,000 or, in Metro Manila, P50,000, except
forcible entry and unlawful detainer;
c) Actions in admiralty and maritime jurisdiction
where the demand or claim exceeds P300,000
or, in Metro Manila, P400,000;
d) Matters of probate, testate or intestate, where
the gross value of the estate exceeds P300,000
or, in Metro Manila, P400,000;
e) Actions involving marriage and marital relations;
16

JURISDICTION

f) Cases not within the exclusive jurisdiction of
any court, tribunal, person or body exercising
judicial or quasi-judicial functions; (e.g., boundary
dispute between a municipality and an
independent component city [Municipality
of Kananga v. Madrona, G.R. 141375, 30
Apr 2003]);

g) Other cases where the demand, exclusive of
interest, damages, attorney's fees, litigation
expenses and costs, or the value of the property
exceeds P300,000 or, in Metro Manila,
P400,000; (See SC Circular No. 09-94).

h) Actions for annulment of MTC judgments;
i)

Actions for recognition and enforcement of
arbitration agreement, vacation or modification
of arbitration award, application for arbitration
award and supervision. (Sec. 47, Alternative
Dispute Resolution Act of 2004);

i)

Citizen suit under Section 41 of the Clean
Air Act.

.1) Petition for assistance in the liquidation of a

bank or quasi-bank filed by a receiver
pursuant to S30 of the New Central Bank Act.

2) Family Courts
a) Petitions for guardianship, custody of
children, and habeas corpus in relation to
the latter.
b) Petitions for adoption of children and
revocation thereof.

17

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
c) Complaints for annulment or nullification of
marriage, those relating to marital status
and property relations of spouses or those
living together under different status and
agreements, and petitions for dissolution of
conjugal partnership of gains.
d) Petitions for support and/or acknowledgment.
e) Summary judicial proceedings brought
under the Family Code. (Sec. 5, Family
Courts Act of 1997).
3) Special Commercial Courts
a) Cases involving violations of Intellectual
Property Rights.
b) Cases enumerated under Section 5 of PD
902-A. (Fraud scheme cases, intra-corporate
disputes, election cases, petitions for
suspension of payments and/or rehabilitation
proceedings).
c) Rehabilitation, insolvency and liquidation
(RIL) cases brought under the Financial
Rehabilitation and Insolvency Act of 2010
and those emanating from administrative
proceedings. (A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC,
as amended by S.C. Resolution dated 16
June 2015).
4) Special Agrarian Courts
a) Original and exclusive jurisdiction over all
petitions for the determination of just
compensation to landowners.

18

JURISDICTION

5) Concurrent
a) With the Supreme Court
1) Actions affecting ambassadors, other public
ministers and consuls.
6) Concurrent
a) With the Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeals
and
1) Petitions for certiorari, prohibition
mandamus against lower courts and bodies;
and
2) Petitions for habeas corpus and quo
warranto.
b) With the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals,
and Sandiganbayan.
1) Petition for writ of amparo and habeas data.
B. Appellate
All cases decided by the MTCs in their
respective territorial jurisdictions.
Q.

Outline the jurisdiction of the Municipal Trial
Court in civil cases.

A. Original
1) Exclusive
a) Actions involving personal property whose
value does not exceed P300,000 or, in
Metro Manila, P400,000;

19

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b) Actions demanding sums of money not
exceeding P300,000 or, in Metro Manila
P400,000, exclusive of interest, damages,
attorney's fees, litigation expenses, and costs;
c) Actions in admiralty and maritime jurisdiction
where the demand or claim does not exceed
P300,000 or, in Metro Manila, P400,000,
exclusive of interest, damages, attorney's
fees, litigation expenses, and costs;
d) Probate proceedings, testate or intestate,
where the gross value of the estate does
not exceed P300,000 or, in Metro Manila,
P400,000;
e) Forcible entry and unlawful detainer cases;
f) Actions involving title to or possession of
real property , or any interest therein,
where the assessed value does not exceed
P20,000 or, in Metro Manila P50,000,
exclusive of interest, damages, attorney's
fees, litigation expenses, and costs.
(Note: The RTC/MTC has concurrent jurisdiction
with the Insurance Commissioner in cases where the
amount in any single claim against the insurer,
excluding interests, costs, and attorney's fees, does
not exceed P5,000,000. [Sec. 420, Insurance Code]).
MTC has exclusive jurisdiction over action for
enforcement of an amicable settlement executed
before the Barangay regardless of the amount
involved pursuant to Sec. 417 of the Local
Government Code. (Sebastian v. Lagmay, 22
April 2015).

20

JURISDICTION

2) Delegated
a) Cadastral or land registration cases covering
lots where there is no controversy or
opposition, or contested lots the value of
which does not exceed P100,000, as may be
assigned by the Supreme Court. (S.C.
Administrative Circular No. 64-93, dated 21
April 1993).
3) Special
a) Petitions for habeas corpus in the absence
of all the Regional Trial Judges in the
province or city.
4) Summary Procedure
a) Forcible entry and unlawful detainer cases
irrespective of the amount of damages or
unpaid rentals sought to be recovered; and
b) All other court cases except probate
proceedings, where the total claim does not
exceed P100,000 or in Metro Manila, P200,000
exclusive of interest and costs.
Q.

Outline the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan in
civil cases.

A. Exclusive Original
1) Civil cases filed pursuant to Executive Orders
Nos. 1, 2, 14 and 14-A issued in 1986. (PCGG
cases for forfeiture of ill-gotten wealth).
Exclusive original jurisdiction over petitions for
certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, habeas corpus,
injunctions, and other ancillary writs and processes
21

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
in aid of its appellate jurisdiction and over petitions
of similar nature, including quo warranto, arising or
that may arise in cases filed or which may be filed
under Executive Orders No. 1, 2, 14 and 14-A,
issued in 1986; provided that the jurisdiction over
these petitions shall not be exclusive of the
Supreme Court.
2) Concurrent Original with SC, CA, and RTC.
1) Petition for writ of amparo and habeas data.
Q.

May jurisdiction be conferred by waiver?

A.

No.

Q.

May jurisdiction be conferred by !aches or estoppel?

A.

Strictly speaking, no. A party however may be barred
by laches or estoppel from challenging the jurisdiction
of the court. Thus a petition for annulment of judgment
based on lack of jurisdiction must be filed before it is
barred by !aches or estoppel. (S3 R47).

Q.

Petitioners bought a parcel of land from private
respondent Lucky Homes, Inc. Said lot was
specifically denominated in the deed of sale as
Lot 19 and was mortgaged to the SSS as security
for Petitioners' housing loan. Petitioners started
the construction of their house on Lot 18 as the
Private Respondent mistakenly identified Lot 18
as Lot 19. Upon realizing its error, the Private
Respondent advised Petitioners but the latter
offered to buy Lot 18 in order to widen their
premises. Thus Petitioners continued the construction
of their house.

22

JURISDICTION

Petitioners defaulted in their housing loan so
Lot 19 was foreclosed by the SSS and Petitioners'
title over the certificate of title was cancelled and
a new one issued in favor of the SSS. The
Petitioners then offered to swap Lot 18 and Lot 19
and demanded from Private Respondent that the
contract of sale be reformed to indicate Lot 18 as
the subject of the sale. Private Respondent refused
so the Petitioners filed an action for reformation
of contract against the Petitioner with the RTC.
After trial, the RTC rendered a decision dismissing
Petitioners' complaint for lack of merit and
ordering Petitioners to pay moral damages and
attorney's fees to the Private Respondent. The
judgment became final and a writ of execution
was issued. Petitioners opposed the writ claiming
that the RTC did not have jurisdiction. Subsequently
the Petitioners filed a complaint with the HLURB
involving the same subject matter.
The Petitioners then filed with the Court of
Appeals a petition for annulment of the RTC
judgment under R47. The Petitioners contended
that the RTC did not have jurisdiction since the
subject matter of the case was a subdivision lot
and hence the jurisdiction lies with the HLURB.
May the Court of Appeals annul the RTC decision?
A.

No. The Petitioners are estopped from challenging
the jurisdiction of the RTC. In the case at bar, it was
Petitioners themselves who invoked the jurisdiction of
the court a quo by instituting an action for reformation
of contract against Private Respondents. It appears
that, in the proceedings before the trial court,
Petitioners vigorously asserted their cause from start
to finish. Not even once did Petitioners ever raise the
issue of the court's jurisdiction during the entire
proceedings which lasted for two years. It was only
23

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
after the trial court rendered its decision and issued a
writ of execution against them did Petitioners first
raise the issue of jurisdiction — and it was only
because said decision was unfavorable to them.
Petitioners thus effectively waived their right to
question the court's jurisdiction over the case they
themselves filed. The Court frowns upon the
undesirable practice of a party submitting his case for
decision and then accepting the judgment but only if
favorable, and attacking it for lack of jurisdiction if not.
(Gonzaga v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 144025, 27
December 2002).
Actions in which the subject of the litigation is
incapable of pecuniary estimation
Q.

Which court has exclusive original jurisdiction
over a civil action in which the subject of the
litigation is incapable of pecuniary estimation?

A.

The Regional Trial Court pursuant to Sec. 19(1) of
B.P. Blg. 129.

Q.

What is meant by a civil action in which the
subject of the litigation is incapable of pecuniary
estimation?

A.

Before defining an action incapable of pecuniary
estimation, it might be worthwhile to define first an
action which is capable of pecuniary estimation.
An action capable of pecuniary estimation is one
wherein the primary or principal relief sought is a
claim for a sum of money or the assertion of title to or
possession of personal or real property. In such a
case the action is capable of pecuniary estimation
based on the amount of the monetary claim or the
value of the personal or real property.
24

JURISDICTION

Conversely an action incapable of pecuniary
estimation is one wherein the primary or principal
relief sought is not a claim for a sum of money or the
assertion of title to or possession of personal or real
property but some other primary or principal relief
which cannot be valued in money terms.
Q.

Give examples of civil actions in which the
subject of the litigation is incapable of pecuniary
estimation. (IRR CARDS)

A.
Specific performance.
Rescission or annulment of contract.
Injunction. (see also S21(c), BP Blg. 129).
Declaratory relief.
Reformation of contract.
Action for revival of judgment.
Citizen suit. (Sec. 41, Clean Air Act of 1999).
Action for abatement of nuisance.2
Q.

Can a suit for injunction be aptly filed with the
Supreme Court to stop the President of the
Philippines from entering into a peace agreement
with the National Democratic Front? (03 Bar Q11).

A

No. An action for injunction is incapable of pecuniary
estimation. Hence the Supreme Court has no jurisdiction
over the same, exclusive original jurisdiction being
vested in the RTC.

2Even if the plaintiff prays for damages. See AC. Enterprises Inc. v.
Frabelle Properties Corp., 506 SCRA 625 (2006).

25

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is an action for quasi-delict incapable of pecuniary
estimation?

A.

No. An action for quasi-delict is capable of pecuniary
estimation based on the amount of the damages
being claimed. (lniego v. Purganan, G.R. 166876, 24
March 2006).

Q.

Plaintiff laundry company filed an action for
"breach of contract" with the RTC against the
defendants spouses who had entered into a
dealership contract with plaintiff. The plaintiff
averred that defendants failed to comply with the
term in the contract that they should supply to
plaintiff at least 200 kilos of laundry items per
week and that the defendants unilaterally ceased
operations in breach of the contract. The plaintiff
in its complaint sought the recovery of P280,000
damages as an "incidence and consequence" of
the breach of contract. Did the RTC have jurisdiction
over the complaint?

A.

No. An action for "breach of contract" is capable of
pecuniary estimation where damages sought did not
exceed P300,000. An analysis of the complaint shows
that the principal relief sought by the plaintiff is the
enforcement of the penal clause for liquidated damages.
Hence, jurisdiction is with MTC. (Pajares v. Remarkable
Laundry, 20 February 2017, Del Castillo, J.).

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
refund of a security deposit of P300,000 made
pursuant to a lease contract?

A.

The MTC. The action is capable of pecuniary estimation
since it is an action for collection of sum of money. It
was wrong for the Court of Appeals to consider the
action as one incapable of pecuniary estimation.
(Phil-Japan Active Carbon Corp. v. Borgaily, 15
January 2020, Carandang, J.
26

JURISDICTION

Q.

The Palawan Council for Sustainable Development
issued a regulation that only accredited carriers
may transport live fish. An action for prohibition
was filed with the Court of Appeals assailing the
validity and constitutionality of the rule. Does the
CA have jurisdiction over the action?

A.

No. Prohibition is not proper where the rule or
regulation was issued by the government agency
pursuant not to its quasi-judicial but to its quasilegislative power. It is the RTC which has original and
exclusive jurisdiction over the action which is one for
declaratory relief and therefore incapable of pecuniary
estimation. (Chairman PCSD v. Lim, 24 August 2016,
Bersamin, J.).

Q.

Does the RTC have the jurisdiction to determine
the constitutionality or validity of a tax law (TRAIN
Law) on the ground that it conflicts with the
legislative franchise of racing clubs?

A.

No. Whether the action is denominated as one for
injunction or declaratory relief, the RTC has no jurisdiction.
The CTA has exclusive jurisdiction to determine
constitutionality or validity of tax law, rules, and
regulations. (GAB v. Klub Don Juan De Manila, 3 November
2020, Carandang, J.; citing BDO v. Republic, e.b., 16
August 2016; St. Mary's Academy v. Henares, 13
January 2021, Leonen, J.)

Q.

Is an action for foreclosure of a real estate mortgage
an action incapable of pecuniary estimation?

A.

No. It is a real action which affects the title to or
possession of the mortgaged realty as the foreclosure
sale would divest the mortgagor and the junior
encumbrancers of their title over the realty. Hence
jurisdiction is not exclusively with the RTC but with the
MTC or RTC depending upon the assessed value of
27

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the realty mortgaged. (See also FERIA & NOCHE,
THE 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE:
PROVISIONAL REMEDIES AND SPECIAL CIVIL
ACTIONS 244 [2007 ed.]).
Another view is that a foreclosure suit over real
property is incapable of pecuniary estimation and
hence should be filed in the RTC. It is submitted that
the more persuasive view is to consider the foreclosure
suit as a real action with jurisdiction depending upon
the assessed value of the property. The principal or
ultimate relief sought in a foreclosure suit is to divest
the rights in the real property of the defendants
(mortgagors and junior encumbrancers) and to vest
their rights in the purchaser. (S3 & 87 R68).
Q.

Is an action for partition of real property incapable
of pecuniary estimation?

A.

No. It is a real action capable of pecuniary estimation,
that is, the assessed value of the realty. The ultimate
purpose of partition is the distribution and delivery of a
specific portion of the property to the co-owner. If the
main purpose of the action however is the annulment
of a deed of partition and declaration of heirs, with the
partition of the property merely being incidental to the
main action, the action is incapable of pecuniary
estimation and hence within the RTC's jurisdiction.
(Russel v. Vest/I, 364 Phil. 392 [1999]).

Q.

A files an action in the Municipal Trial Court
against B, the natural son of A's father, for the
partition of a parcel of land located in Taytay,
Rizal, with an assessed value of P20,000. B
moves to dismiss the action on the ground that
the case should have been brought in the
Regional Trial Court because the action is one

28

JURISDICTION

that is not capable of pecuniary estimation as it
involves primarily a determination of hereditary
rights and not merely the bare right to real property.
Resolve the motion. (00 Bar Q18b).
A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied. The MTC
has jurisdiction over real actions over land with an
assessed value not exceeding P20,000. An action for
partition is a real action; hence the MTC has
jurisdiction since the assessed value does not exceed
P20,000. (See Huguete v. Embudo, G.R. No. 149554,
1 July 2003).

Q.

Clause 7 of the lease contract between the
Plaintiff lessor and the Defendant lessee granted
the latter, upon the expiration of the 10-year lease
contract, the right to purchase the building
subject of the lease and that should the Defendant
not exercise this right, the lease shall be
automatically renewed and that in case of said
renewal, the rental shall be adjusted by the parties
depending on the prevailing business condition.
The Defendant did not exercise his right so he
contended that the lease was automatically
renewed. On the other hand the Plaintiff contended
that the lease could only be automatically
renewed upon a new agreement of the parties.
The Plaintiff filed with the municipal court an
action for unlawful detainer against the Defendant.
In his answer the Defendant raised the issue that
the municipal court did not have jurisdiction since
the action is incapable of pecuniary estimation as
the controversy hinges on the interpretation of
clause 7. Does the municipal court have jurisdiction?

29

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. The complaint and the answer show that the
jugular vein of the controversy hinges on the correct
interpretation of clause 7 of the lease contract. Hence
the action was not for unlawful detainer but one
incapable of pecuniary estimation and beyond the
competence of the municipal court. (Vda. de Murga v.
Chan, 25 SCRA 441 [1968]; see however the next
case of Union Bank v. Maunlad Homes, Inc.).

Q.

Union Bank as the owner of the Maunlad Shopping
Mall entered into a contract to sell over the mall in
favor of Maunlad Homes Inc. The price was payable
in installments and upon full payment Union Bank
would execute a deed of absolute sale in favor of
Maunlad Homes. Under the contract, in event of
rescission due to failure to pay or to violation of
the contract, Maunlad Homes would be immediately
required to vacate the property and turn over
possession to Union Bank. Maunlad Homes failed
to pay succeeding installments and so Union
Bank served a notice of rescission and then a
notice to pay and vacate which Maunlad Homes
did not heed. Union Bank filed an action for
unlawful detainer with the MeTC against Maunland
Homes. Maunlad Homes raised the defense that it
was the owner of the mall since Union Bank did
not reserve ownership in the contract. The MeTC
dismissed the action for lack of jurisdiction. The
RTC and the CA affirmed the MeTC's decision.
The CA ruled that Union Bank's cause of action is
premised on the interpretation of the contract and
the determination of the validity of the rescission,
both of which are matters beyond the MeTC's
jurisdiction. Did the MeTC have jurisdiction over
the case?

30

JURISDICTION

A.

Yes. In ejectment cases, the MTC has the jurisdiction
to preliminarily determine the issue of ownership in
order to determine the issue of possession. The
authority granted to the MeTC to preliminarily resolve
the issue of ownership to determine the issue of
possession ultimately allows it to interpret and enforce
the contract or agreement between the plaintiff and
the defendant. To deny the MeTC jurisdiction over a
complaint merely because the issue of possession
requires the interpretation of a contract will effectively
rule out unlawful detainer as a remedy. In an action
for unlawful detainer, the defendant's right to possess
the property may be by virtue of a contract, express or
implied; corollarily, the termination of the defendant's
right to possess would be governed by the terms of
the same contract. Interpretation of the contract
between the plaintiff and the defendant is inevitable
because it is the contract that initially granted the
defendant the right to possess the property; it is this
same contract that the plaintiff subsequently claims
was violated or extinguished, terminating the defendant's
right to possess. (Union Bank v. Maim/ad Homes,
Inc., G.R. 190071, 15 August 2012). (Note: The
doctrine in Union Bank overturns that laid down in
Vda. de Murga v. Chan, 25 SCRA 441).

Q.

Plaintiff Lapitan filed with the CFI a complaint
against Scandia Inc. for rescission of contract and
for damages of P8,735. The complaint alleges that
Plaintiff bought from Defendant a 16-horsepower
ABC diesel engine for P3,735; that he bought the
same for running a rice and corn mill; that
Defendant had warranted that all spare parts for
said engine are kept in stock in its stores; that the
cam rocker of the engine broke down due to faulty
workmanship; that it took 2 months for Defendant
to send him a replacement part; and that the new
part soon broke down again. Plaintiff prayed for
31

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the rescission of the contract, the reimbursement
of the price, and actual damages of P4,000. After
filing its answer disclaiming liability, the Defendant
moved to dismiss the complaint on the ground of
lack of jurisdiction since the amount claimed,
P8,735, is below the jurisdictional amount of
P10,0000 and thus within the jurisdiction of the
municipal court. Should the trial court grant the
motion to dismiss?
A.

No. The subject matter of actions for rescission of
contracts is not capable of pecuniary estimation. If an
action is primarily for the recovery of a sum of money,
it is one capable of pecuniary estimation. However
where the basic issue is something other than the
right to recover a sum of money, or where the money
claim is purely incidental to, or a consequence of, the
principal relief sought, the action would be one
incapable of pecuniary estimation. No award for
damages may be had in an action for rescission
without first conducting an inquiry into matters which
would justify the setting aside of a contract. (Lapitan
v. Scandia, Inc., 24 SCRA 479 [1968]). It should be
noted that the trial court had to inquire into specific
facts, i.e., whether sufficient stock of spare parts was
kept by Defendant, in order to determine whether
Plaintiff was entitled to relief.

Q.

In 1969 Ortigas & Company, Ltd. and Samson
entered into an agreement whereby in consideration
of P55,430 the former agreed to sell to the latter a
land with a condition that should Samson complete
the construction and painting of his house on the
lot within 2 years, Ortigas & Company would
agree to refund to Samson the amount of P4,820.
Upon failure of Ortigas to pay its obligation, Samson
filed a complaint for sum of money and damages
with the City Court of Manila against Ortigas,
32

JURISDICTION

wherein Samson sought the refund of the P4,820.
Ortigas filed a motion to dismiss on the ground
that the City Court has no jurisdiction. Samson
countered that the amount of the refund claim is
below the jurisdictional amount of P10,000.
Should the City Court dismiss the complaint?
A.

Yes. The action involved is one for specific
performance and not for a sum of money and
therefore incapable of pecuniary estimation. This is
because what Samson seeks is the performance of
Ortigas' obligation under a written contract to make
refund but under certain specific conditions still to be
proved or established. In the case for the recovery of
a sum of money, as the collection of a debt, the claim
is considered capable of pecuniary estimation because
the obligation to pay the debt is not conditioned upon
any specific fact or matter. But when a party to a
contract has agreed to refund to the other party a sum
of money upon compliance by the latter of certain
conditions and only upon compliance therewith may
what is legally due him under the written contract be
demanded, the action is one not capable of pecuniary
estimation. The payment of a sum of money is only
incidental which can only be ordered after a
determination of certain acts the performance of which
being the more basic issue to be inquired into. (Ortigas
& Company, Ltd. v. Herrera, 120 SCRA 89 [1983]).

Q.

In the preceding question, would your answer be
the same if Ortigas & Company, Ltd. agreed to
refund Samson after 2 years from the contract
date and Samson filed a complaint against Ortigas
& Company for the refund?

A.

No, my answer would not be the same. Here the
refund of P4,820 is not conditioned upon any specific
fact or matter but upon the mere expiration of 2 years
33

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
from the execution of the contract. Hence the action is
capable of pecuniary estimation and is within the
jurisdiction of the City Court.
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over expropriation
cases?

A.

Jurisdiction over eminent domain cases lies with the
RTC. An expropriation case is one whose subject
matter is incapable of pecuniary estimation. The
subject of an expropriation case is the determination
of the government's right to take private property for
public use. (Brgy. San Roque v. Pastor, G.R. 138896,
20 June 2000).

Q.

Petitioner's father was granted a free patent over
land. The land was sold within the prohibitory 5-year
period by the father to Respondent. Petitioners
filed with the RTC of Davao Oriental an action for
repurchase against Respondent based on Section
119 of the Public Land Act. Respondent filed a
motion to dismiss on ground of lack of jurisdiction
alleging that the assessed value of the land does
not exceed P20,000. Rule on the motion.

A.

Motion to dismiss denied. The complaint to redeem a
land subject of a free patent is a civil action incapable
of pecuniary estimation. At first blush, it appears that
the action filed by petitioners involves title to or
possession of the lots he sold to respondents. Since
the total selling price is less than PhP 20,000, then
the MTC, not the RTC, has jurisdiction over the case.
This proposition is incorrect for the re-acquisition of
the lots by the petitioners is but incidental to and an
offshoot of the exercise of the right by the latter to
redeem said lots pursuant to Sec. 119 of CA 141. The
reconveyance of the title to petitioners is solely
dependent on the exercise of such right to repurchase
the lots in question and is not the principal or main
34

JURISDICTION

relief or remedy sought. Thus, the action of petitioners
is, in reality, incapable of pecuniary estimation, and
the reconveyance of the lot is merely the outcome of
the performance of the obligation to return the
property conformably to the express provision of CA
141. (Heirs of Bautista v. Lindo, 10 March 2014)
(Note: Applying the ultimate relief test, it is believed
that the action to repurchase is a real action since the
ultimate objective is to obtain title or possession over
the land).
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action filed
to determine whether the Ombudsman had the
power to inquire into bank deposits under Section
15(8) of RA 6770 even if there is no pending case?

A.

The RTC. The action is one for declaratory relief
The SC held that the RTC has original and exclusive
jurisdiction over an action for declaratory relief
pursuant to S1 R63 and Sec. 19(1) of BP 129. (Office
of the Ombudsman v. lbay, 3 September 2001).

Q.

Petitioners filed an action for injunction with the
Supreme Court seeking to enjoin the Bases Conversion
and Development Authority from demolishing the
remaining structures in the JUSMAG area in Fort
Bonifacio, Taguig. Would the Supreme Court have
jurisdiction over the action?

A

Yes. Section 21 of RA 7227, otherwise known as the
Bases Conversion and Development Act, solely
authorizes the Supreme Court to issue injunctions to
restrain or enjoin "Mlle implementation of the projects
for the conversion into alternative productive uses of
the military reservations." Section 21 reads as follows:

35

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Section 21. Injunction and Restraining Order. The implementation of the projects for the
conversion into alternative productive uses of the
military reservations are urgent and necessary and
shall not be restrained or enjoined except by an
order issued by the Supreme Court of the
Philippines.
(Consular Area Residents Association v. Casanova,
12 April 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Ultimate Objective Test
Q.

A filed with the Metropolitan Trial Court of Manila
an action for specific performance against B, a
resident of Quezon City, to compel the latter to
execute a deed of conveyance covering a parcel
of land situated in Quezon City having an assessed
value of P19,000.00. B received the summons and
a copy of the Complaint on 2 January 2003. On 10
January 2003, B filed a Motion to Dismiss the
Complaint on the ground of lack of jurisdiction
contending that the subject matter of the suit was
incapable of pecuniary estimation. The court
issued an Order denying the motion. In due time,
B filed with the Regional Trial Court a Petition for
Certiorari praying that the said Order be set aside
because the Metropolitan Trial Court had no
jurisdiction over the case.
On 13 February 2003, A filed with the Metropolitan
Trial Court a motion to declare B in default. The
motion was opposed by B on the ground that his
Petition for Certiorari was still pending.
a) Was the denial of the Motion to Dismiss
the Complaint correct?
b) Resolve the Motion to Declare the Defendant
in Default (03 Bar Q2ed).
36

JURISDICTION

A

a) The denial of the Motion to Dismiss the Complaint
was correct.
The Supreme Court has held that even if the
action is one for specific performance but the ultimate
objective of the plaintiff is to obtain title to real
property, the action is a real action and not one
incapable of pecuniary estimation. (Ruby Shelters
Builders v. Formaran, G.R. No. 175914, 10 February
2009; Gochan v. Gochan, 423 Phil. 491 [2001]).
Here the ultimate objective of A was to obtain
title to the land. Hence the action is a real one and
since the assessed value does not exceed P20,000,
the MeTC has jurisdiction.
b) The Motion to Declare Defendant in Default
should be granted.
The Supreme Court has held that the pendency
of certiorari proceedings does not excuse the
defendant from filing an answer unless he has
obtained a restraining order or injunction suspending
proceedings in the case. (China Bank v. Oliver, 390
SCRA 263 [2002]).
Here the RTC did not issue any injunction or
restraining order nor did B file an answer within the
reglementary period. Hence B was properly declared
in default.

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for annulment of deed of
sale over land having an assessed value of
P20,000. A perusal of the complaint shows that
the ultimate objective of the Plaintiff is to obtain title
over the land. Which court would have jurisdiction?

37

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

The MTC. A complaint for annulment of deed of sale
is not an action incapable of pecuniary estimation
where the ultimate objective of the Plaintiffs is to
obtain title to real property. In such a case it is a real
action and jurisdiction is determined by the assessed
value of the real property, not its market value. Since
the assessed value did not exceed P20,000, it is the
MTC which has jurisdiction. (Barangay Piapi v. Talip,
7 September 2005).3

Q.

A brings an action in the Metropolitan Trial Court
of Manila against B for the annulment of an
extrajudicial foreclosure sale of real property with
an assessed value of P50,000 located in Laguna.
The complaint alleged prematurity of the sale for
the reason that the mortgage was not yet due. B
timely moved to dismiss the case on the ground
that the action should have been brought in the
Regional Trial Court of Laguna. Decide with
reasons. (00 Bar 0 18a).

A

Insofar as the motion to dismiss is based on lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction - since it argued that the
action should have been brought in the RTC - the
same should be denied.
The action for annulment of the extrajudicial
foreclosure sale of real property is a real action since
there has been a foreclosure sale and thus the action
affects title to the real property mortgaged. (See Chua
v. Total Office Products & Services, 30 September
2005). Since the real action was brought in Metro
Manila and the assessed value does not exceed
P50,000, it is the MTC which has jurisdiction.

3The complaint alleged that the subject land had a market value of
P15,000. Necessarily the land's assessed value would not exceed the then
jurisdictional amount of P20,000.

38

JURISDICTION

Q.

0 entrusted the owner's duplicate certificate of
title No. 105602 over her lot to his broker X so as
to subdivide the lot X subdivided the lot into
several titles. X forged the signature of 0 in a
deed of sale and sold one of the lots covered by a
title to B. B then sold the lot to C. A new certificate
of title No. 137466 was issued in the name of C.
0 filed with the RTC an action for cancellation of
TCT No. 137466 of C and the revival of TCT No.
105602. The complaint alleged that the land was
bought by C for P15,000. Judgment was rendered
in favor of 0. On appeal, C moved to set aside the
judgment on the ground that the same was a real
action and since the value of the land was only
P15,000, then the RTC did not have jurisdiction.
May the RTC's judgment be set aside for lack of
jurisdiction?

A

Yes. An action for cancellation of TCT is a real action
where the court has to determine which of two titles
over the same lot is valid. In such a case, jurisdiction
depends upon assessed value. Since the complaint
did not allege the assessed value, the RTC did not
acquire jurisdiction. Lack of jurisdiction may be raised
at any stage even on appeal. (PadIan v. Dinglasan,
20 March 2013, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Petitioners filed an action for recovery of possession
of land against the Respondents before the RTC of
Baguio City. After trial, judgment was rendered in
favour of the Petitioners. On appeal, the Respondents
raised for the first time the issue of lack of
jurisdiction contending that the assessed value of
the subject realty was not averred in the complaint.
May the Court of Appeals dismiss the complaint
for lack of jurisdiction?

39

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
A.

Yes. Based on Sections 19 and 33 of B.P. Big. 129, it
is clear that in an action for recovery of possession,
the assessed value of the property sought to be
recovered determines the court's jurisdiction.
Here, for the RTC to exercise jurisdiction, the
assessed value of the subject property must exceed
P20,000.00. Since petitioners failed to allege in their
Complaint the assessed value of the subject property,
the CA correctly dismissed the Complaint as petitioners
failed to establish that the RTC had jurisdiction over it.
In fact, since the assessed value of the property was
not alleged, it cannot be determined which trial court
had original and exclusive jurisdiction over the case.
The fact that lack of jurisdiction was raised for
the first time on appeal is of no moment. The defense
of lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter may be
raised at any stage of the proceedings, even for the
first time on appeal. (Heirs of Julao v. Sps. De Jesus,
29 September 2014; Salvador v. Patricia, Inc., 9
November 2016, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

The Court of Appeals dismissed, without prejudice,
the complaint for recovery of possession and
damages that the petitioner filed before the
Regional Trial Court of Kabankalan City, Negros
Oriental, because the complaint failed to allege
the assessed value of the disputed property in the
case. Attached to the complaint however was a
copy of a Declaration of Real Property indicating
that the assessed value of the disputed property
is P20,790.00. Was the CA's dismissal proper?

A

No. The factual allegations in a complaint should be
considered in tandem with the statements and inscriptions
on the documents attached to it as annexes or
integral parts. The CA should have considered the
facts contained in the Declaration of Real Property
40

JURISDICTION

attached to the complaint in determining whether the
RTC had jurisdiction over the petitioner's case. A mere
reference to the attached document could facially
resolve the question on jurisdiction and would have
rendered lengthy litigation on this point unnecessary.
(Tumpag v. Tumpag, 29 September 2014).
Q.

In 1998, Respondents filed with the RTC an action
for recovery of a 44-hectare parcel of land against
petitioner. The assessed value of the land was
not indicated in the complaint The petitioner filed
a motion to dismiss on the grounds that the
action was for ejectment or that if it was an accion
publiciana, the court still did not have jurisdiction
since the assessed value was not stated in the
complaint The RTC denied the petitioner's motion
to dismiss holding that it had jurisdiction over the
case because the area of the subject properties was
44 hectares, more or less, and "it is safe to presume
that the value of the same is more than P20,000."
Was the denial of the motion to dismiss proper?

A.

No. Jurisdiction is conferred by law. It cannot be presumed.
When respondents filed the complaint in 1998,
RA 7691 was already in force as it was approved on
March 25, 1994 and took effect on April 15, 1994. As
such, it is necessary that the assessed value of the
subject properties, or its adjacent lots (if the properties
are not declared for taxation purposes) be alleged to
ascertain which court has jurisdiction over the case.
Despite the fact that the parcel of land was 44
hectares, it was error for the trial court to take
cognizance of the case on a presumption. The reason
is that jurisdiction cannot be presumed or conferred
by the agreement of the parties. (Regalado v. Dela
Rama, 13 December 2017, Del Castillo, J.).
41

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In a complaint for recovery of a parcel of land filed
with the RTC, what was alleged was the market
value of the land, not its assessed value. Would
the RTC have jurisdiction over the action?

A.

No. RTC is without jurisdiction over real action if what
was alleged is market value, not assessed value.
(Cabrillo v. Heirs of Pastor, 2 Oct 2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed with the RTC of Tuguegarao City an
action to recover a parcel of land. The complaint
alleged that the assessed value of the land is
P25,000. Defendant filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground of lack of jurisdiction. Defendant
alleged that the portion of the land which was
actually in dispute had an assessed value of only
P15,000. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. Jurisdiction over a real action is determined by
allegations in complaint, not the averment in answer.
(Berbano v. Tapulao, 1 July 2019, Lazaro-Javier, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed with the MTC a case for unlawful
detainer against the Defendant. The Plaintiff
averred that he had bought the property from the
seller but had found the Defendant staying thereon,
that he allowed Defendant to stay provided that
Defendant will immediately vacate the land upon
Plaintiff's prior notice that he will be needing the
land, and that Defendant refused to vacate despite
notice to do so. The MTC rendered judgment
dismissing the complaint for lack of jurisdiction,
stating that the proof showed that the issue of
possession cannot be properly determined without
settling the issue of possession.
On appeal by the Plaintiff, the RTC agreed
with the MTC that jurisdiction lies with the RTC.
The RTC then took cognizance of the case and
42

JURISDICTION

rendered a decision in favor of the Plaintiff
ordering the Defendant to vacate the premises.
On appeal by Defendant, the CA reversed and set
aside the RTC Decision. The CA held that the RTC
did not acquire jurisdiction over the case for
Plaintiffs failure to allege the assessed value of
the subject property and, as a consequence, the
assailed RTC Decision is null and void. Was the
CA decision correct?
A

No. In real actions there is a need to allege the
assessed value of the real property subject of the
action, or the interest therein, for purposes of
determining which court (MTC or RTC) has jurisdiction
over the action. However, it must be clarified that this
requirement applies only if these courts are in the
exercise of their original jurisdiction. Here, the RTC
was exercising its appellate, not original, jurisdiction
when it took cognizance of Plaintiffs appeal and
Section 22 of B.P. Big. 129 does not provide any
amount or value of the subject property which would
limit the RTC's exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
over cases decided by first level courts. Clearly then,
in the instant case, contrary to the ruling of the CA,
the assessed value of the disputed lot is immaterial
for purposes of the RTC's appellate jurisdiction.
Indeed, all cases decided by the MTC are generally
appealable to the RTC irrespective of the amount
involved. Hence, the CA erred in nullifying the RTC
decision for lack of jurisdiction. (Arrienda v. Kalaw, 6
April 2016, Peralta,

4It should be noted that the MTC actually had subject matter jurisdiction
since it is axiomatic in ejectment cases that the court may resolve the issue of
ownership for the limited purpose of determining the issue of possession. (516
R70). Hence the result reached was correct for the reason that the action in the
MTC was an ejectment suit. The holding however that the requirement of stating
the assessed value does not apply to the exercise of appellate jurisdiction
appears faulty. If the MTC had no subject matter jurisdiction, this defect cannot
be cured by an appeal unless it comes within the terms of 58 R40. Here S8 R40

43

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Plaintiff engaged X to construct a water tank for
him for a price of P1,000,000. Plaintiff withheld
delivery of the last payment of P30,000 to X since
X's supplier S had made a claim to the same.
Unable to determine who between X and S is
entitled to the P30,000 payment, Plaintiff filed with
the RTC of Las Pinas City an action for
interpleader against X and S to determine who
between them is entitled to the P30,000. X filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground that the RTC has
no jurisdiction over the action. Should the motion
to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. The RTC has no jurisdiction over the case since
the amount subject of the interpleader does not
exceed P400,000. Under B.P. Big. 129, the MTC has
exclusive jurisdiction over civil actions where the value
of the personal property, estate, or amount of the
demand does not exceed P400,000. (See Makati Dev't
Corp. v. Tanjuatco, 27 SCRA 401 [1969]).5

Q.

P filed with the MTC an action for consignation
seeking to compel D to accept P250,000 in
payment of P's obligation to D. D filed a motion to
dismiss arguing that an action for consignation is
incapable of pecuniary estimation and hence
within the jurisdiction of the RTC. Should the MTC
grant the motion to dismiss?

cannot come into play since the RTC does not have original jurisdiction precisely
because of the failure to allege the assessed value in the complaint.
5The ruling is arguable. In interpleader, the plaintiff has no interest in and
is not making any demand or asserting any right on the property but is seeking
only to compel the defendants to interplead among themselves. In essence, the
suit is among the conflicting claimants, the plaintiff not making any demand
against them. Hence, it is opined that the subject of the litigation is incapable of
pecuniary estimation.

44

JURISDICTION

A

No, the MTC should not grant the motion to dismiss.
The Supreme Court has held that an action for
consignation is capable of pecuniary estimation as the
amount sought to be consigned determines the
jurisdiction of the court.
Here the amount sought to be consigned is
P250,000 which is within the jurisdictional amount of
the MTC. Hence it is the MTC which has jurisdiction.
(Ascue v. Court of Appeals, 196 SCRA 804 [1991]).

Q.

Plaintiff filed with the RTC an action for specific
performance to compel a builder to finish the
construction of the house or to pay him the sum
of P250,000. The Defendant builder filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground that jurisdiction is with
the MTC since the amount of the claim does not
exceed P300,000. The Plaintiff opposed the motion
to dismiss arguing that the complaint to compel
defendant to finish the construction is one for
specific performance and thus an action incapable
of pecuniary estimation.
a) Should the RTC grant the motion to dismiss?
b) Would your answer be the same if what the
Plaintiff filed was an action for specific
performance to compel the buider to finish
the construction of the house and to pay him
P250,000?

A.
a) Yes. The alternative relief for damages made the
action for specific performance capable of pecuniary
estimation. Hence the jurisdiction lies with the MTC
since the amount of the claim does not exceed
P300,000. (See Cruz v. Tan, 87 Phil. 627).
45

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b) No my answer would not be the same. In that
case the action would be for specific performance
and thus incapable of pecuniary estimation. The
claim for P250,000 is not an equivalent of the action
for specific performance since it was prayed for
as additional rather than an alternative relief
Q.

P was a record owner of 100 shares of stock in
the Manila Golf Club. Upon his return from the
U.S., he discovered that the shares in his name
were cancelled and new shares issued in favor of
the National Steel Corporation., P filed an action
against NSC and MGC to compel the assignment
of shares of stock in his favor. Was the action to
compel the assignment of shares of stock one
which is incapable of pecuniary estimation?

A.

No. An action to compel the assignment of shares of
stock is an action for recovery of personal property
rather than one incapable of pecuniary estimation.
(Gochan v. Gochan, G.R. No. 146089, 13 December
2001). Jurisdiction would be based on the value of
the shares of stock.

Q.

Philippine Bank of Communications (PBCOM)
filed a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure of the
real estate mortgage executed in its favor by First
Sarmiento Property Holdings, Inc. (First Sarmiento).
The real estate was auctioned and sold to PBCOM
as the highest bidder. First Sarmiento filed a
complaint for annulment of the REM with the RTC.
First Sarmiento paid the docket fees for actions
incapable of pecuniary estimation. After the
complaint had been filed, the ex-officio sheriff
issued the certificate of sale in PBCOM's favor.
PBCOM asserted that the Regional Trial Court
failed to acquire jurisdiction over First Sarmiento's
Complaint because the action for annulment of
46

JURISDICTION

mortgage was a real action; thus, the filing fees
filed should have been based on the fair market
value of the mortgaged properties. The RTC
dismissed the complaint for lack of jurisdiction,
holding that First Sarmiento failed to pay the
appropriate filing fees. Was the dismissal of the
action correct?
A.

No. The complaint for annulment or cancellation of a
REM is incapable of pecuniary estimation, even if the
property had already been foreclosed when the complaint
was filed, since the ownership and possession of the
property remained with petitioner. This is because at
the time the complaint was filed, the certificate of sale
was not yet registered with the Registry of Deeds.
(First Sarmiento Holdings, Inc. v. Phil. Bank of
Communications, 19 June 2018, Leonen, J.).°

Q.

In 1994 the Polomok Water District, a governmentowned and controlled corporation engaged in the
supply of potable water to the Municipality of
Polomok, passed P1ND Resolution No. 94-023 imposing
new and higher water rates upon its customers. In
1994 the Polomok General Consumers Association,
Inc. filed with the RTC a class suit for the declaration
of nullity of the Resolution on the ground that it
was passed without due notice to the members
and hearing as required by P.D. No. 198. Does the
RTC have jurisdiction over the class suit?

A

Yes. The issue before the RTC was the validity of
PWD Resolution No. 94-023 which is incapable of
pecuniary estimation. (Polomok Water District v.
Polomok General Consumers Association, Inc., G.R.
No. 162124, 18 October 2007).

6This modifies the ruling in Chua v. Total Office Products & Services, 30
September 2005, that an action for annulment of real estate mortgage is a real
action if there has already been a foreclosure sale.

47

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Cases not within the exclusive jurisdiction of any court
or quasi-court
Q.

Which court or body has jurisdiction over a boundary
dispute between a municipality (Kananga, Leyte)
and an independent component city (Ormoc City)?

A.

The Regional Trial Court. Under Section 19(6) of B.P.
Blg. 129, the RTC shall exercise exclusive original
jurisdiction "[i]n all cases not within the exclusive
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal, person or body
exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions." Under
Section 118 of the Local Government Code, a boundary
dispute between a component city or a municipality
and a highly urbanized city shall be jointly referred for
settlement to the respective sanggunians of the parties.
While Kananga is a municipality, Ormoc is an
independent component city. Section 118 is thus
inapplicable. Since there is no law providing for the
exclusive jurisdiction of any court or agency over the
settlement of boundary disputes between a municipality
and an independent component city of the same
province, the RTC would have jurisdiction pursuant to
Section 19(6) of B.P. Big. 129. (Municipality of Kananga
v. Madrona, G.R. No. 141375, 30 April 2003).

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
recognition and enforcement of a foreign
judgment, in this case, the judgment of the Hawaii
District Court against the estate of Ferdinand
Marcos awarding US$1.9 billion damages to the
human rights victims?

A

The Regional Trial Court. Under Section 19(6) of B.P.
Blg. 129, the RTC shall exercise exclusive original
jurisdiction "[i]n all cases not within the exclusive
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal, person or body
exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions." An
48

JURISDICTION

examination of Section 19(6) reveals that the instant
complaint for enforcement of a foreign judgment, even
if capable of pecuniary estimation, would fall under
the jurisdiction of the Regional Trial Courts. This
would be so even if the foreign judgment award did
not exceed the jurisdictional amounts for the MTC.
(M(ares v. Ranada, G.R. 139325, 12 April 2005).7
Claim formoney, exclusions fromjurisdictionalamount
Q.

P is going to file in Makati a complaint against D
for collection of a promissory note in the amount
of P350,000. The complaint also prays for moral
damages of P50,000, exemplary damages of P50,000,
and attorney's fees of P40,000. Which court would
have jurisdiction over the complaint of P?

A

The MeTC. In computing the jurisdictional amount,
damages, attorney's fees, litigation expenses, and
costs are excluded. (Sec. 19 & 33, B.P. Blg. 129).
Here excluding the moral and exemplary damages and
the attorney's fees, the amount claimed is P350,000
which is within the jurisdiction of the MeTC.

Q.

Alfredo Reyes borrowed P300,000 from Danilo
Chan, a resident of Makati, Metro Manila, for
which he executed a promissory note dated 14
June 2006. In said promissory note, Reyes agreed
to pay on or before 15 June 2008 the amount of
P300,000 with interest thereon at 21% per annum.

7It is submitted that the more precise basis for the RTC's jurisdiction is
S19(1) regarding actions incapable of pecuniary estimation. As Mijares itself
states, the complaint for enforcement does not assert rights and interests over
property or a sum of money but has rather for its subject matter the foreign
judgment itself.

49

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Reyes defaulted. Hence Chan filed a complaint
for collection against Reyes with the RTC of
Makati. The complaint recites in detail the terms
of the promissory note and ends with this prayer:
"WHEREFORE, it is respectfully prayed that,
after due trial, judgment be rendered against
Alfredo Reyes ordering him to pay plaintiff Danilo
Chan the principal sum of P426,000."
The counsel for Reyes moved to dismiss on
the ground that the court had no jurisdiction over
the subject matter of the suit since the principal
indebtedness of Reyes was only P300,000. The
motion to dismiss asserted that the difference
between the sum of P426,000 claimed in the
complaint and the debt of P300,000 represented
the stipulated interest of 21% per annum for the
period from 14 June 2006 to 15 June 2008.
After due hearing the court denied the motion
to dismiss for the reason that the ground invoked
"does not appear to be indubitable." The counsel
for the defendant filed a motion for reconsideration,
which was also denied.
a) xxx
b) How valid was the posture of the defendant
in filing the motion to dismiss? Explain.
(83 Bar Q17 ed).
A.
b) The posture of the defendant in filing the motion
to dismiss is not valid.
The Supreme Court has held that the accrued
interest on a loan is a primary and inseparable
component of the cause of action, not merely
50

JURISDICTION

incidental thereto, and must be included in the
computation of the jurisdictional amount, where the
debtor had agreed in writing to pay interest and the
accrued interest is determinable at the time of the
filing of the complaint. (See Gomez v. Montalban,
548 SCRA 693 [2008]).
Here the accrued interest of P126,000 should be
added to the principal amount of P300,000. Hence
the total amount of the demand is P426,000 which is
in excess of the jurisdictional amount of P400,000 and
thus within the jurisdiction of the RTC.
Q. In the preceding problem, assume that the RTC
denied the motion to dismiss. After trial, the RTC
found that the accrued interest to which Danilo
Chan is entitled to is only P96,000. The RTC then
rendered judgment dismissing the case for lack of
jurisdiction, stating that the total amount to which
Chan is entitled to is only P396,000 and thus not
exceeding the jurisdictional amount of P400,000.
Was the RTC's judgment correct?
A.

No. Jurisdiction is determined by the cause of action
as alleged in the complaint and not by the amount
ultimately substantiated and awarded. Here the
amount of the demand as stated in the complaint was
P426,000 which is within the RTC's jurisdiction.
Hence the fact that the amount ultimately substantiated
and awarded was only P396,000 would not oust the
court of the jurisdiction it had acquired. (Id.).

Q.

P was bumped by D's car which was recklessly
driven by D. P files an action for quasi-delict
against D with the RTC of Makati. P's complaint
prayed for actual damages of P350,000, moral damages
of P50,000, exemplary damages of P50,000, and
attorney's fees of P40,000. Does the RTC of
Makati have jurisdiction over the case?
51

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. Under SC Circular 09-94 the exclusion of
"damages of whatever kind" in determining the
jurisdictional amount under R.A. 7691 "applies only to
cases where the damages are merely incidental to or
a consequence of the main cause of action.
However in cases where the claim for damages is the
main cause of action, or one of the causes of action,
the amount of such claim shall be considered in
determining the jurisdiction of the court."
Here the claim for damages is the main cause of
action since this is a complaint for quasi-delict or torts.
Hence the moral and exemplary damages should be
added to the claim for actual damages of P350,000
and the total jurisdictional amount is P450,000 which
is thus within the RTC's jurisdiction.
(Note: The wording of Circular 09-94 is imprecise
since a claim for damages is not a cause of action but
a relief sought by the plaintiff. It is suggested that the
Circular be worded as follows: ")ocxx However in
cases where the cause of action principally involves a
claim for damages (as in a torts case), the amount of
such claim shall be considered in determining the
jurisdiction of the court.")

Q.

Santos's car was bumped by a truck driven by
Pinion and owned by lniego, the employer of
Pinion. Santos filed an action for quasi-delict against
Pinion and Iniego with the RTC of Manila. In the
prayer of his complaint, Santos asked for P40,000
as actual damages, P300,000 as moral damages,
P150,000 as exemplary damages, and attorney's
fees of P50,000. The moral damages and exemplary
damages were prayed for because of Defendant's
adamantine refusal to admit liability and to pay
the actual damages. Who has jurisdiction over the
action? The RTC or the MTC?
52

JURISDICTION

A.

It is the RTC which has jurisdiction. The moral
damages and exemplary damages are included in
computing the jurisdictional amount of P400,000 since
said damages arose from the same cause of action,
that is, quasi-delict. The total claim of P490,000 thus
falls within the jurisdiction of the RTC. (lniego v.
Purganan, G.R. 166876, 24 March 2006; See S.C.
Circular No. 09-94. Note that the attorney's fees were
excluded in computing the jurisdictional amount. Another
way of looking at it is that since the action is principally
for recovery of damages, then the damages should be
included in computing the jurisdictional amount).

Q.

Petitioner filed on 22 August 1996 with the MTC
an action "for damages with writ of replevin"
against the Respondent wherein it prayed for the
return of the forklift or in the alternative if the
return cannot be made the payment of its actual
market value of P150,000 and for the payment of
unpaid rentals of P11,000 a month starting from
April 1995 until repossession of the forklift. At the
time of the complaint's filing, the outstanding and
unpaid rentals had amounted to P180,000. Petitioner
also prayed for exemplary damages of P1,000,000
and attorney's fees of P50,000. Does the MTC
have jurisdiction over the Petitioner's complaint?

A.

No. The value of the forklift is P150,000. It cannot be
said that the actual damages in the form of unpaid
rentals is just incidental to the action for the return of
the forklift, considering that the Petitioner had specifically
sought not only the seizure of the forklift but likewise
the unpaid and outstanding rentals. Pursuant to SC
Ad. Cir. 09-94 the P180,000 is included in the
computation. P150,000 + P180,000 = P330,000 which
is over the jurisdictional amount of P200,000. Hence

53

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the MTC does not have jurisdiction. (Movers-Baseco
Integrated Port Services, Inc. v. Cyborg Leasing Corp.,
G.R. 131755, 25 Oct 99). Note that the exemplary
damages and attorney's fees are not included in the
computation.
Q.

Filomeno brought an action in the MeTC of Pasay
City against Marcelino pleading two causes of
action. The first was a demand for the recovery of
physical possession of a parcel of land situated in
Pasay City with an assessed value of P40,000; the
second was a claim for damages of P500,000 for
Marcelino's unlawful retention of the property.
Marcelino filed a motion to dismiss on the ground
that the total amount involved, which is P540,000,
is beyond the jurisdiction of the MeTC. Is Marcelino
correct? (08 Bar Q4).

A.

Marcelino is not correct. The MeTC has jurisdiction
over the action.
Under Section 33 of B.P. Blg. 129, the MeTC has
jurisdiction over real actions where the assessed
value of the realty does not exceed P50,000 in Metro
Manila. Said provision also states that damages are
excluded in computing the jurisdictional amount.
Here the claim for damages was merely incidental
to the cause of action involving the claim for recovery
of possession. Hence the MeTC has jurisdiction over
the action for recovery of possession of land since its
assessed value did not exceed P50,000.
(Note: There is an imperfection in the drafting of
the question. The claim for recovery of possession
and for damages are not causes of action but simply
the relief sought by Filomeno. There is only cause of
action: Marcelino's unlawful retention of the property.
[See discussion of cause of action under Rule 2]).
54

JURISDICTION

Special Commercial Court
Q.

Petitioners filed with the RTC of Muntinlupa City a
complaint against Respondent GJH Land Inc. and
Respondent officers of GJH Land seeking to
enjoin the sale of GJH Land shares. The Petitioners
alleged that they had fully paid for GJH Land Inc.
shares but the same were still offered for sale by
Respondents to GJH stockholders. The case was
docketed as Civil Case No. 11-077 and raffled to
Branch 276, which is not a Special Commercial
Court. After filing their respective answers to the
complaint, respondents filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction over the
subject matter, pointing out that the case involves
an intra-corporate dispute and should, thus, be
heard by the designated Special Commercial
Court of Muntinlupa City. Branch 276 granted the
motion to dismiss filed by respondents. It found
that the case involves an intracorporate dispute
that is within the original and exclusive jurisdiction
of the RTCs designated as Special Commercial
Courts. It pointed out that the RTC of Muntinlupa
City, Branch 256 was specifically designated by
the Court as the Special Commercial Court; hence,
Branch 276 had no jurisdiction over the case and
cannot lawfully exercise jurisdiction on the matter.
Accordingly, it dismissed the case. Did RTC
Branch 276 act correctly in dismissing the case?

A.

No. A court's acquisition of jurisdiction over a particular
case's subject matter is different from incidents
pertaining to the exercise of its jurisdiction. Jurisdiction
over the subject matter of a case is conferred by
law, whereas a court's exercise of jurisdiction,
unless provided by the law itself, is governed by the
Rules of Court or by the orders issued from time to
time by the Court. The matter of whether the RTC
55

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
resolves an issue in the exercise of its general
jurisdiction or of its limited jurisdiction as a
special court is only a mailer of procedure and
has nothing to do with the question of jurisdiction.
In such a scenario, the proper course of action was
not for the commercial case to be dismissed; instead,
Branch 276 should have first referred the case to the
Executive Judge for re-docketing as a commercial
case; thereafter, the Executive Judge should then
assign said case to the only designated Special
Commercial Court in the station, Le, Branch 256.
(Gonzalez v. GJH Land, Inc., 10 November 2015,
e.b., Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Note that the procedure would be different where
the RTC acquiring jurisdiction over the case has
multiple special commercial court branches; in
such a scenario, the Executive Judge, after redocketing the same as a commercial case, should
proceed to order its re-rafflinq among the said
special branches. (Id.).
Q.

Petitioner Condominium Corporation filed an action
for injunction with damages against Respondents
before the RTC of Makati City. The action was
properly docketed as an ordinary civil case — not
a commercial case — and scheduled for general
raffle among all branches of the Makati RTC,
including Branch 149, which is a Special Commercial
Court (SCC). The case was raffled to Branch 149.
Respondents filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that Branch 149, an SCC, has no subjectmatter jurisdiction over an ordinary civil case.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted? If not,
may Branch 149 take cognizance of the case?

56

JURISDICTION

A.

No, the motion to dismiss should not be granted.
Branch 149 may take cognizance of the case. The
designation of Branch 149 as an SCC by no means
diminished its power as a court of general jurisdiction
to hear and decide cases of all nature, whether civil,
criminal, or special proceedings. The Makati RTC,
Branch 149, erred in dismissing the petition for
injunction with damages, which is clearly an ordinary
civil case. As courts of general jurisdiction, the
designated SCCs and the regular RTCs are both
conferred by law the power to hear and decide civil
cases in which the subject of the litigation is incapable
of pecuniary estimation, such as an action for
injunction. Branch 149 therefore has jurisdiction over
the case and should take cognizance of the same.
(Concorde Condominium Inc. v. Baculio, 17 February
2016, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Petitioner Corporation filed an action for injunction
with damages against Respondents before the
RTC of Makati City. The action was erroneously
docketed as a commercial case — not an ordinary
civil case — and scheduled for limited raffle among
all the SCCs of the Makati RTC, including Branch
149. The case was raffled to Branch 149.
Respondents filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that Branch 149, an SCC, has no subjectmatter jurisdiction over an ordinary civil case.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted? If not,
what should Branch 149 do?

A.

No, the motion to dismiss should not be granted for
the same reasons as stated in Gonzalez v. GJH Land
Inc., supra. However, Branch 149 cannot take cognizance
of the case as the same was "wrongly raffled," that is,
erroneously docketed as a commercial case and
scheduled for limited rather than general raffle. The
case should be referred to the Executive Judge for re57

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
docketing as an ordinary civil case; thereafter, the
Executive Judge should then order the general
raffling of the case to all branches of the Makati RTC,
including the SCCs. (Concorde Condominium Inc. v.
Baculio, 17 February 2016, Peralta, J.).
Q.

K opened a securities trading account with RCBC
Securities Inc. a firm engaged in securities
brokerage. Later K discovered that X, an employee of
RCBC Securities had made unauthorized trades
and diverted some of K's securities to other
accounts. K thus filed with the RTC of Makati a
complaint against RCBC Securities wherein he
prayed for recovery of the money from
unauthorized trades and the securities diverted to
other accounts. The case was raffled to Branch
63, a non-commercial court, which referred it back
to the Executive Judge because it was an "infracorporate dispute." Was the referral proper?

A.

No. the case is not an intra-corporate dispute and,
instead, is an ordinary civil action triable by a noncommercial court. There are no intra-corporate relations
between the parties. K is neither a stockholder, partner,
member, or officer of RCBC Securities Inc. The
parties' relationship is limited to that of an investor
and a securities broker. Moreover, the questions
involved neither pertain to the parties' rights and
obligations under the Corporation Code, if any, nor to
matters directly relating to the regulation of the
corporation. (Ku v. RCBC Securities Inc., 17 Oct
2018, Peralta, J.).

58

JURISDICTION

Family Court
Q.

A petition for declaration of nullity of marriage
was filed with the Angeles City RTC. It was raffled
to Branch 59, the designated family court. Branch
59 however ordered the re-raffle of the case to
other branches on its perception that the case did
not fall within the jurisdiction of the family court.
The case was re-raffled to Branch 60 of the Angeles
City RTC, which dismissed the case for lack of
jurisdiction. Was the order of dismissal correct?

A.

Yes. Where there are family courts, RTCs in the same
area (here Angeles City) have no jurisdiction over a
petition for nullification of marriage. RTC Branch 60
should not order the transfer of the case to the family
court but should dismiss the case for lack of
jurisdiction. (David v. Cal/lung, 26 January 2021, e.b.,
Delos Santos, J.)

Special Agrarian Court
Q.

What is the jurisdiction of the RTC, sifting as a
Special Agrarian Court (SAC)?

A.

The SAC shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction
over all petitions for the determination of just compensation
to landowners. (Sec. 57, CARL).

Q.

X was the owner of several lots. For purposes of
placing those lands within the coverage of the
CARL, the Department of Agrarian Reform Adjudication
Board (DARAB) sent to X several Notices of Land
Valuation and Acquisition by which her lands
were valued for acquisition by the DAR. After X
rejected such valuation of her lands, the DARAB
conducted summary administrative proceedings
for the determination of just compensation. The
59

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
DARAB issued its order affirming the valuation of
the lands upon finding the valuation consistent
with existing administrative guidelines on land
valuation.
Two months from her receipt of the DARAB'S
order, X filed in the Regional Trial Court (RTC),
sifting as a Special Agrarian Court (SAC), a
complaint for the fixing of just compensation for
her lands, impleading as defendant the Land Bank
of the Philippines (LBP) and the DAR. The
Petitioner prayed that the DARAB valuation be set
aside and declared null and void, and that in its
stead the price of her lands be fixed based on the
fair market value thereof. The Defendants filed a
motion to dismiss citing Section 51 of the CARL
and Section 11 of Rule XIII of the 1994 DARAB
Rules of Procedure which provides that the complaint
should have been filed within 15 days from notice
of the assailed order. The RTC as the SAC granted
the respondents' motion to dismiss. Was the
grant of the motion to dismiss proper?
A.

No. the RTC, acting as SAC, had original and
exclusive jurisdiction over all petitions for the
determination of just compensation. The original and
exclusive jurisdiction of the SAC would be undermined if
the DAR would vest in administrative officials the
original jurisdiction in compensation cases and make
the SAC an appellate court for the review of
administrative decisions.
Since the determination of just compensation is a
judicial function, the Supreme Court abandoned its
ruling in Veterans Bank, Martinez and Soriano that a
petition for determination of just compensation before
the SAC shall be proscribed and adjudged dismissible
if not filed within the 15-day period prescribed under
the DARAB Rules.
60

JURISDICTION

To maintain the rulings would be incompatible
and inconsistent with the legislative intent to vest the
original and exclusive jurisdiction in the determination
of just compensation with the SAC. Indeed, such
rulings judicially reduced the SAC to merely an
appellate court to review the administrative decisions
of the DAR. This was never the intention of the
Congress. (Land Bank v. Dalauta, 8 August 2017,
e.b., Mendoza, J.).
Jurisdiction over labor matters
Q.

P was a sales representative of Georg Grotjahn
GMBH & Co. She obtained loans and cash advances
from the company. Later she was dismissed and
she filed an illegal dismissal case against the
company with the labor arbiter. The company filed
a suit with the RTC to collect the loans from P. P
filed a motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction,
contending that it is the labor arbiter which has
jurisdiction over claims arising from employeremployee relations. The RTC granted the motion
to dismiss. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. The jurisdiction of the labor arbiters and the
NLRC under Art. 217(5) of the Labor Code is limited
to disputes arising from an employer-employee
relationship which can only be resolved by reference
to Labor Laws or the collective bargaining agreement.
Where the claim to the principal relief sought is to be
resolved not by reference to the labor laws or the
CBA but by the general civil law, the jurisdiction
belongs to the regular courts of justice and not the
labor arbiter or the NLRC. Here what is involved is a
simple loan collection case which can be resolved by
the Civil Code provisions on obligations and contracts.

61

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(Georg Grotjahn GMBH & Co. v. Isnani, G.R. No.
109272, 10 August 1994). Otherwise put while the
claim is between an employer and an employee, the
same did not arise from employer-employee relations.
Q.

Employee filed an illegal dismissal case with the
labor arbiter against employer. The employer in
its defense contended that it had dismissed the
employee on the ground that the latter was selling
the products of a competitor, Acme Corporation.
The labor arbiter decided in favor of the employee
and awarded damages and separation pay. Later
the employer filed a damage suit with the RTC
against the employee. The employer alleged that
the employee was promoting the products of
Acme Corporation to the detriment of the employer
and thus it sustained damages. The employee
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of lack
of jurisdiction. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?

A.

Yes. The SC held that the employer's claim against
employee for alleged double dealing is one that
should have been raised as a compulsory counterclaim
in the labor case for illegal dismissal filed by the
employee against the employer; the RTC has no
jurisdiction over the case. (Baciez v. Valdevilla, GR
128024, 9 May 2000).
Note: Here the ground for the dismissal and the
damage suit involved the same subject, the alleged
double-dealing. Compare with Grotjahn where there
was no showing of a nexus between the ground for
the illegal dismissal and the non-payment of the loans.

62

JURISDICTION

Q.

Unicorn Security Services Inc. (USSI) is a security
agency which provides guards for Philippine
Airlines (PAL). Because of USSI's breach of the
security service agreement, PAL terminated the
same after 30-day notice. USSI "as trustee" for its
security guards filed an action for recovery of
termination pay benefits against PAL before the
Labor Arbiter. PAL filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that there is no employer-employee
relationship between USSI and its employees on
one hand and PAL on the other. The Labor Arbiter
did not rule on the motion to dismiss. Later on
the Labor Arbiter rendered a decision in favor of
USSI. The Labor Arbiter stated that since PAL is
an "indirect employer" under Article 107 of the
Labor Code, there is an employer-employee relationship
between PAL and the security guards. Did the
Labor Arbiter have jurisdiction over the case?

A.

No. The Supreme Court held that while PAL may be
an "indirect employer" under Article 107, a perusal of
Articles 106 and 107 reveals that a company is only
an "indirect employer" for purposes of liability for wages
but not for any other purpose. There being no
employer-employee relationship between PAL, on
one hand, and the security guards and USSI on the
other, the Labor Arbiter was without jurisdiction.
USSI's complaint should have been filed with the
regular courts. (Philippine Airlines it NLRC, G.R. No.
120506, 28 October 1996).

Q.

Petitioner, a freight forwarder, hired the Respondent
as an employee. The Respondent resigned from
the Petitioner and forthwith started working for
Aspac, another freight forwarder. The Petitioner
then filed an action for injunction with the RTC
praying that the Respondent be enjoined from
working for Aspac and that damages be awarded
63

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
to it for Respondent's violation of the 2-year,
no-compete clause in Respondent's employment
contract Upon Respondent's motion, the RTC
dismissed the complaint stating that jurisdiction
over the matter was with the Labor Arbiter. Which
has jurisdiction over the case, the labor arbiter or
the RTC?
A.

The RTC. When as here the cause of action is based
on tort, which has no reasonable causal connection
with any of the claims in Art. 217 of the Labor Code,
the jurisdiction over the action is with the regular
courts. Petitioner does not ask for any relief under
the Labor Code but merely seeks to recover damages
based on the breach of contract. Such case is within
the realm of Civil Law more so where the stipulation
refers to the post-employment relations of the parties.
(Yusen Air & Sea Service, Inc. v. Villamor, G.R.
154060, 16 Aug 05).

Q.

What is a post-employment matter?

A.

It is a dispute between an employer and a former
employee where the material or operative facts
occurred after the employer-employee relationship
had been terminated.

Q.

Josephine was a bank teller at PCIB. She accepted a
bank draft for deposit to the account of Harrington,
after consulting with her bank manager. Later an
impostor was able to make withdrawals from
Harrington's account PCIB had to refund Harrington
the amount of the unauthorized withdrawals.
Subsequently PCIB started deducting the amount
of the unauthorized withdrawals from Josephine's
salary, contending that Josephine was negligent
in allowing the deposit of the bank drafts.
Josephine filed a complaint for damages with the
64

JURISDICTION

RTC of Makati City. She claimed that the PCIB had
abused its right by gradually deducting from her
salary the amount the bank had to pay Harrington.
PCIB filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that
it is the labor arbiter which has jurisdiction over
the case. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

No. Article 217 of the Labor Code provides that the
Labor Arbiters have original and exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and decide claims for actual, moral,
exemplary, and other forms of damages arising from
employer-employee relations. Nevertheless, when the
cause of action has no reasonable connection with
any of the claims provided for in Article 217 of the
Labor Code, jurisdiction over the action is with the
regular courts. Here, since Josephine's cause of
action is based on a quasi-delict or tort under Article
19 in relation to Article 21 of the Civil Code, the civil
courts (not the labor tribunals) have jurisdiction over
the subject matter of this case. (Philippine Commercial
International Bank v. Gomez, 23 November 2015,
Brion, J.).

Q.

Diana was hired by Malayan Insurance Company
in 2004. As an employee, she was able to avail of
a car plan, in which she executed a promissory
note promising to pay her 50% equity in the car to
Malayan in installments while the other 50%
would be shouldered by Malayan. The car plan
stipulated that if Diana was terminated within 3
years from her hiring, she should pay Malayan's
equity and return the car immediately if she is
unable to pay. Just a year into her hiring, Diana
was terminated on the ground of redundancy.
She was unable to pay her obligation to Malayan
and also refused to surrender the car. Malayan
brought an action for replevin with the RTC to
recover the car (which was valued at P600,000)
65

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
from Diana. Subsequently Diana brought an illegal
dismissal case before the Labor Arbiter against
Malayan. Does the RTC have jurisdiction over the
replevin case?
A.

Yes. The action involves the parties' relationship as
debtor and creditor, not their "employer-employee"
relationship. Malayan's demand for Diana to pay the
50% company equity over the car or, to surrender its
possession, is civil in nature. The issue in the replevin
case is separate and distinct from the illegal dismissal
case. (Malayan Insurance Co. v. Alibudbud, 20 April
2016, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Respondent was directly hired while on tourist
status by the PNB Branch in Singapore. She was
subsequently dismissed by the head of the PNB
Singapore Branch without notice and hearing.
Back in the Philippines, she filed an illegal dismissal
case against the PNB with the Regional Arbitration
Branch of Quezon City where she resides. It is
contended that the RAB has no jurisdiction over
the complaint since Respondent was hired in
Singapore and thus governed by Singaporean
law. Does the Labor Arbiter have jurisdiction over
the complaint for illegal dismissal?

A.

Yes. Section 10 of the Migrant Workers and Overseas
Filipinos Act of 1995 provides that Labor Arbiters of
the NLRC shall have original & exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and decide claims arising from an employeremployee relationship or by virtue of any law or
contract involving Filipino workers for overseas deployment.
(PNB v. Cabansag, 21 June 05).

66

JURISDICTION

Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board
Q.

What is the exclusive jurisdiction of the Housing
and Land Use Regulatory Board?

A.

The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board
(HLURB) has the exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
decide cases of the following nature:
1)

Unsound real estate business practices.

2) Claims involving refund and any other claims
filed by subdivision lot or condominium unit
buyer against the project owner, developer,
dealer, broker, or salesman; and
3)

Q.

Cases involving specific performance of
contractual and statutory obligations filed by
buyers of subdivision lot or condominium unit
against the owner, developer, dealer, broker or
salesman. (See P.D. No. 1344, E.O. No. 648
and E.O. No. 90).

France! Realty Corp. filed a complaint with the
Regional Trial Court against the Defendant Sycip
for collection of the balance of the price of house
and lot under a contract to sell. Previously Sycip
had filed a complaint with the HLURB against
France! for "unsound business practices" involving
the sale of the same house and lot. Defendant
filed with the RTC a motion to dismiss on the
ground that the jurisdiction is with the HLURB
rather than the RTC.
a) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
b) Would your answer be the same if there was no
prior case filed by Sycip against France!?

67

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.
a) Yes. FRC contends that the case is not cognizable
by the HLURB because it was filed by the
developer rather than by the buyer, as provided
under P.D. 1344. This contention is untenable.
FRC's complaint should have been filed with the
HLURB as a compulsory counterclaim pursuant
to 57 R6 of the Rules of Court. (France! Realty
Corp. v. Sycip, G.R. 154684, 8 September 2005).
b) No. In that case it would be the RTC which would
have jurisdiction. The HLURB has no jurisdiction
to take cognizance of a complaint filed by the
subdivision owner or developer against the subdivision
unit buyer. The wordings of PD 1344 reveal that
it has jurisdiction over cases filed by the subdivision
or condominium unit buyer against the subdivision or
condominium owner or developer but not the
other way around. The only instance when the
HLURB would have jurisdiction over a case filed
by the subdivision or condominium unit owner or
developer is if such case is filed as a compulsory
counterclaim to an existing suit filed by the
subdivision or condominium unit buyer against
the developer as in France! Realty Corporation.
(Delos Santos v. Spouses Sarmiento, G.R. No.
154877, 27 March 2007).
Q.

Which has jurisdiction over an action by a
condominium unit buyer to annul a mortgage over
the condominium unit by the project owner
without the buyer's consent and without HLURB
approval?

A.

The HLURB since it involves an unsound real estate
practice on the part of the project owner. Sec. 18 of
P.D. No. 957 provides that no mortgage on any
condominium unit or subdivision lot shall be made by
68

JURISDICTION

the owner or developer without prior written approval
of the HLURB. (Concorde Condominium Inc. v. PNB,
26 Nov 2018, Gesmundo, J.).
Department of Agrarian Relations Adjudication Board
Q.

X files an unlawful detainer case against Y before
the appropriate Metropolitan Trial Court. In his
answer, Y avers as a special and affirmative defense
that he is a tenant of X's deceased father in whose
name the property remains registered. What should
the court do? Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q8a)

A.

The court should conduct a preliminary hearing to
determine the truth of Y's special and affirmative
defense which is in essence a claim that the MTC has
no jurisdiction.
The hearing is essential since if there is a
tenancy arrangement between V and X's predecessor,
then it would be the Department of Agrarian Relations
Adjudication Board rather than the MTC which would
have jurisdiction. If the court finds that such is the
case, then it should dismiss the complaint.

Q.

Does the RTC have jurisdiction over an action to
quiet title over a public land within the Baguio
Townsite Reservation?

A.

No. The trial court had no jurisdiction to determine
who among the parties has a better right over the
disputed property which is admittedly still part of the
public domain. The Public Land Act lodges the power
of executive control, administration, disposition and
alienation of public lands with the Director of Lands
subject to the control of the Secretary of Environment
and Natural Resources. (Heirs of Pocdo v. Avila, 19
March 2014).
69

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Who has exclusive and original jurisdiction over
issues regarding the cancellation of Certificates of
Land Ownership Awards (CLOAs), Emancipation
Patents, and other titles issued under any
agrarian reform program?

A.

The Department of Agrarian Reform Secretary. In
2009, Congress amended the Comprehensive Agrarian
Reform Law through Republic Act No. 9700. Under
the new Section 24, all cases involving the cancellation
of registered emancipation patents, certificates of land
ownership awards, and other titles issued under any
agrarian reform program are now within the exclusive
original jurisdiction of the Department of Agrarian
Reform Secretary. He or she takes jurisdiction over
cases involving the cancellation of titles issued under
any agrarian reform program, whether registered with
the Land Registration Authority or not. (Secretary of
the Department of Agrarian Reform v. Heirs of
Redemptor, 12 March 2019, e.b., Leonen, J.).

Commission on Audit
Q.

D.M. Consunji, Inc. (DMCI) entered into a contract
with the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
(MMDA) for the construction of an interim waste
management project for Metro Manila. However
the project was not completed because of TROs
issued by various courts and because the contract
was not signed by then President Estrada. DMCI
thus filed with the RTC an action for collection of
P19 million against the MMDA representing
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the partial
execution of the interim waste management
project. The RTC ruled in favor of DMCI. May the
judgment of the RTC be set aside?

70

JURISDICTION

A.

Yes. A liquidated claim against the government falls
within the primary jurisdiction of the Commission on
Audit (COA). A liquidated claim is one which is
determined or readily determinable from vouchers,
invoices, and such other papers within reach of
accounting officers. This case is one over which the
doctrine of primary jurisdiction clearly held sway for
although DMCI's collection suit was within the jurisdiction
of the RTC, it was the COA which had primary
jurisdiction since the case involved a liquidated claim.
The doctrine of primary jurisdiction does not warrant a
court to arrogate unto itself authority to resolve a
controversy the jurisdiction over which is initially
lodged with an administrative body of special competence.
All the proceedings of the court in violation of the
doctrine and all orders and decisions rendered thereby
are null and void. (Metropolitan Manila Development
Authority v. D.M. Consunji, Inc., 20 February 2019,
Carpio, J.).

Q.

Taisei Shimizu Joint Venture (petitioner) entered
into a contact for the construction of the New
Iloilo Airport with the respondent Department of
Transportation. Following the project's delivery,
petitioner brought a request for arbitration against
the respondent before the Construction Industry
Arbitration Commission (CIAC) to collect on
unpaid billings. The CIAC rendered a final award
granting the petitioner's claim. The petitioner filed
a petition for enforcement of the arbitral award
with the Commission on Audit (COA). In its
decision, the COA approved payment of only half
of the award after reviewing the evidence. Did the
COA act correctly in reducing the CIAC award?

71

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. The Commission on Audit's jurisdiction over final
money judgments rendered by courts/tribunals pertain
only to the execution stage; COA cannot modify a
court or quasi-judicial body's final & executory
judgment. (Taisei Shimizu Joint Venture v. COA, 2
June 2020, e.b., Lazaro-Javier, J.).

National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP)
Q.

Respondents, claiming to be the owners of an
unregistered parcel of land in Talakag, Bukidnon,
filed with the RTC in 2004 a complaint for accion
reivindicatoria against the Petitioners. The Petitioners
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction. The Petitioners alleged that they are
members of the Talaandig tribe and that a Certificate
of Ancestral Domain Title (CADT) over the subject
land was issued in their favor in 2003 by President
Arroyo. They alleged that pursuant to Section 66
of the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act (IPRA), it is
the NCIP not the RTC which has exclusive and
original jurisdiction over the case, as the subject
matter concerns a dispute and controversy over
an ancestral land/domain of Indigenous Cultural
Communities (ICCs)/Indigenous Peoples (Ms).
Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. Section 66 of the IPRA provides for the NCIP's
jurisdiction as follows:
Sec. 66. Jurisdiction of the NCIP. - The NCIP,
through its regional offices, shall have jurisdiction over
all claims and disputes involving rights of ICCs/lPs;
Provided, however, That no such dispute shall be
brought to the NCIP unless the parties have exhausted
all remedies provided under their customary laws. For
this purpose, a certification shall be issued by the
Council of Elders/Leaders who participated in the
72

JURISDICTION

attempt to settle the dispute that the same has not been
resolved, which certification shall be a condition
precedent to the filing of a petition with the NCIP.
A careful review of Section 66 shows that the
NCIP shall have jurisdiction over claims and disputes
involving rights of ICCs/lPs only when they arise
between or among parties belonging to the same
ICC/IP. This can be gathered from the qualifying
provision that "no such dispute shall be brought to the
NCIP unless the parties have exhausted all remedies
provided under their customary laws. For this purpose, a
certification shall be issued by the Council of
Elders/Leaders who participated in the attempt to
settle the dispute that the same has not been resolved,
which certification shall be a condition precedent to
the filing of a petition with the NCIP."
Therefore, pursuant to Section 66 of the IPRA,
the NCIP shall have jurisdiction over claims and
disputes involving rights of ICCs/IPs only when they
arise between or among parties belonging to the
same ICC/IP. When such claims and disputes arise
between or among parties who do not belong to the
same ICC/IP, Le., parties belonging to different
ICC/IPs or where one of the parties is a non-ICC/IP,
the case shall fall under the jurisdiction of the proper
Courts of Justice, instead of the NCIP. In this case,
while most of the petitioners belong to Talaandig
Tribe, respondents do not belong to the same ICC/IP.
Thus, even if the real issue involves a dispute over
land which appear to be located within the ancestral
domain of the Talaandig Tribe, it is not the NCIP but
the RTC which shall have the power to hear, try and
decide this case. (Unduran v. Aberasturi, 20 October
2015, e.b., Peralta, J.).

73

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Does Section 66 of the IPRA confer primary or
exclusive jurisdiction to the NCIP over all claims
and disputes involving rights of ICCs/lPs to the
exclusion of the regular courts?

A.

No. Section 66 does not state that the NCIP has
exclusive jurisdiction over all claims and disputes
involving rights of ICCs/lPs. Despite the language that
the NCIP shall have jurisdiction over all claims and
disputes involving rights of ICCs/lPs, we cannot deduce
primary sole NCIP jurisdiction over all ICCs/lPs claims
and disputes to the exclusion of the regular courts.
If it were the intention of the legislative that: (1) the
NCIP exercise primary jurisdiction over, and/or (2) the
regular courts be excluded from taking cognizance of,
claims and disputes involving rights of ICCs/lPs, the
legislature could have easily done so as in other
instances conferring primary, and original and exclusive
jurisdiction to a specific administrative body. At best,
the limited jurisdiction of the NCIP is concurrent with
that of the regular trial courts in the exercise of the
latter's general jurisdiction extending to all
controversies brought before them within the legal
bounds of rights and remedies. (Lim v. Gamosa, 2
December 2015, Perez, J.).

Q.

Private respondents filed a petition for issuance
of Certificate of Ancestral Land Title (CALT) with
the NCIP. The NCIP granted the petition. The
Republic filed an action for reversion with the
RTC seeking the nullification of the CALT on the
ground that it was issued over inalienable land of
the public domain. The RTC dismissed the case
for lack of jurisdiction holding that the proper
remedy was a review of the NCIP decision. The
Republic filed a petition for certiorari with the CA
to set aside the RTC dismissal. The petition for

74

JURISDICTION

certiorari was dismissed by the CA since it was
filed beyond the 60-day period for filing a petition
for certiorari. Did the CA act correctly?
A.

No. The complaint for reversion and cancellation of
certificate of title falls within the original and exclusive
jurisdiction of the RTC pursuant to Section 19(2) of
B.P. Blg. 129. The argument that the proper remedy
was a review is not correct since a reversion suit is an
attack not against the judgment but against the
certificate of title that is issued. The fact that the
petition for certiorari was filed beyond the 60-day
period is not a fatal defect since the issuance of a
certificate of title over inalienable land of the public
domain is void and thus may be attacked at any time
by the State. (Republic v. Heirs of Paus, 14 August
2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Which body has jurisdiction over a petition for the
issuance of a new owner's duplicate certificate of
title emanating from a Certificate of Land Ownership
Award (CLOA)? Is it the RTC or the Department of
Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board?

A.

The RTC has exclusive original jurisdiction over petition
for issuance of new duplicate certificate of title, even
one emanating from a CLOA. The DARAB has no
jurisdiction since it is not an agrarian dispute or
agrarian reform matter. (Patungan v. RD of Pangasinan,
28 June 2021, Inting, J.).

Barangay conciliation
Q.

What disputes are required to undergo amicable
settlement before the !upon of a barangay?

A.

Disputes between parties actually residing in the
same city or municipality except: (Keyword: PDG
RON JVC PAL)
75

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
1) Where one party is the government or any
subdivision or instrumentality thereof; even if the
government is just one of three or more parties,
referral to the Lupon is still mandatory (Gegare v.
Court of Appeals, 177 SCRA 471);
2) Where one party is a public officer or employee,
and the dispute relates to the performance of his
official functions;
3) Offenses punishable by imprisonment exceeding
1 year or a fine exceeding P5,000;
4)

Offenses where there is no private offended
party;

5) Where the dispute involves real properties located
in different cities or municipalities unless the
parties thereto agree to submit their differences to
amicable settlement by an appropriate !upon;
6) Disputes involving parties who actually reside in
barangays of different cities or municipalities ,
except where such barangay units adjoin each
other and the parties thereto agree to submit their
differences to amicable settlement by an
appropriate lupon;
7) Such other classes of disputes which the
President may determine in the interest of justice
or upon the recommendation of the Secretary of
Justice; (Sec. 408, Local Government Code).
8) Where the dispute arises from the Comprehensive
Agrarian Reform Law (Secs. 46 & 47, R.A. No.
6657);
9)

Labor disputes or controversies arising from
employer-employee relations (Montoya v. Escayo,
171 SCRA 442);
76

JURISDICTION

10) Actions to annul compromise
(Sanchez v. Tupaz, 158 SCRA 459);

judgment

11) Any complaint by or against corporations,
partnerships or juridical entities (Sec. 1, Rule
VI, Katarungang Pambarangay Rules; Par. 1.4,
SC Administrative Circular No. 14-93; Vda. De
Borromeo v. Pogoy, 126 SCRA 217 [1983D;
12) Proceedings where relief is sought under R.A. No.
9262 or the Anti-Violence against Women and
their Children Act (Sec. 33, R.A. No. 9262).
Q.

A, B, C, D, and E are siblings who are the coowners of Lot A in Roxas City. Their father
allowed X to occupy the same provided X will
vacate the property when needed by his children.
X refused to vacate when asked to do so. Thus A,
B, and C (in his own behalf and as attorney-in-fact
of D and E) filed an unlawful detainer case against
X. X moved to dismiss on the ground of lack of
barangay conciliation since A, B, C and X all
reside in Roxas City. A, B, and C argued that D
and E are not residents of Roxas City. X
contended that D and E had already executed an
SPA in favor of C who resides in Roxas City. May
the complaint be dismissed for failure to undergo
barangay conciliation?

A.

No. Here, the Complaint specifically alleged that not
all the real parties in interest in the case actually
reside in Roxas City. As such prior referral of the case
for barangay conciliation is not a precondition to its
filing in court.
This is true regardless of the fact that D and E
had already authorized C to act as their attorney-infact in the ejectment proceedings before the MTC.
The residence of the attorney-in-fact of a real party in
77

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
interest is irrelevant in so far as the "actual residence"
requirement under the LGC for prior barangay conciliation
is concerned. (Abagatnan v. Clarito, 7 August 2017,
Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

For failure of the tenant, X, to pay rentals, A, the
court-appointed administrator of the estate of
Henry Datu, decides to file an action against the
former for the recovery of possession of the
leased premises located in Davao City and for the
payment of the accrued rentals in the total
amount of P25,000.
a) Is prior referral to the Lupon necessary?
b) Supposing that referral is necessary, but the
complaint is filed without such referral, may it
be dismissed on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction? (91 Bar Q1)

A

a) No, prior referral to the Lupon is not necessary.
The Supreme Court has held that the barangay
conciliation procedure applies only to disputes
between natural persons and does not apply where
one party is a juridical entity such as the estate of a
deceased person. (Vda. de Borromeo v. Pogoy, 126
SCRA 217).
b) No. Lack of referral to the Lupon is not jurisdictional
but merely results in the complaint being dismissible
for failure to comply with a condition precedent.
(SID] R16).

78

JURISDICTION

Q.

B and C, both residents of Marikina, Metro Manila,
had opposing and exclusive claims of ownership
over a parcel of land located in Morong, Rizal. B
filed suit for title or ownership without, however,
bringing the dispute to the Lupong Tagapayapa
for settlement. C filed an answer raising the
affirmative defense of failure to comply with a
condition precedent, that is, B's failure to resort
to barangay conciliation. May the court grant the
affirmative defense?

A.

Yes. The real property here is located in only one
municipality, Morong, Rizal. Hence the exception
under Section 408(e) of the Local Government Code
does not apply. The fact that the real property is
located in a municipality or city different from where
the parties reside is of no moment, since Section
408(e) does not distinguish. What matters is that the
parties reside in the same city or municipality.

Q.

What are the instances where the parties may go
directly to court without the need of prior
barangay conciliation? (Keyword: PaPaHiD)

A

1) Where the accused is under detention;
2) Where a person has otherwise been deprived of
personal liberty calling for habeas corpus
proceedings;
3) Where actions are coupled with provisional
remedies such as preliminary injunction, attachment,
replevin, and support pendente lite;
4) Where the action may otherwise be barred by the
statute of limitations. (Sec. 412, LGC).

'Based on 1987 Remedial Law Bar Exam Question No. 5(b).

79

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed with the RTC a complaint for damages, with
application for preliminary attachment, against D for
physical injuries arising from a vehicular collision.
P and D are both residents of Las Pinas City. D
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that there
was no prior resort to barangay conciliation.
Should the RTC grant the motion to dismiss?

A.

No. Since the action was coupled with a provisional
remedy, P may go directly to court. (Sec. 412[b][3],
Local Government Code).

Q.

Petitioner filed with the RTC of Davao City a
complaint for nullification of deed of sale of land
with prayer for preliminary injunction against the
respondent. The petitioner alleged that he never
signed the questioned deed of sale. The respondent
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of failure
to comply with a condition precedent, that is prior
barangay conciliation. The trial court granted the
motion to dismiss. It found that the petitioner's
prayer for the issuance of a writ of preliminary
injunction is a mere ploy to avoid the requirement
of a barangay conciliation, since a simple annotation
of a notice of us pendens would achieve the same
effect without having to undergo trial or post a
bond. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. Section 412 of the Local Government Code
provides that parties may go directly to cou:rt where
the action is coupled with provisional remedies such
as preliminary injunction. As good faith is always
presumed, in the absence of proof of improper motive
on the part of the petitioner, the lower court's
assumption that petitioner was solely intent on
evading the requirements of the LGC in applying for a
preliminary injunction cannot be countenanced. A

80

JURISDICTION

dismissal of an action cannot be sustained on
account of an unproven assertion of bad faith.
(Racpan v. Barroga-Haigh, 6 June 2018, Velasco, J.).
Q.

What is the venue of the barangay conciliation?

A.

1) If the parties reside in the same barangay - the said
barangay.
2) If the dispute involves actual residents of different
barangays within the same municipality/city - the
barangay where the respondent or any of the
respondent actually resides, at the election of the
complainant.
3) If the dispute involves real property or interest
therein - the barangay where the real property or
the larger portion thereof is situated.
4) Disputes arising at the workplace where the
contending parties are employed or at the
institution where the contending parties are enrolled
for study — barangay where such workplace or
institution is located. (Sec. 409, LGC).9

Q.

How shall objections to venue be raised?

A.

Objections to venue shall be raised in the mediation
proceedings before the punong barangay; otherwise
the same shall be deemed waived. (Id.).

Q.

May the parties agree to arbitration before the
Barangay?

A.

Yes. The parties may at any stage of the proceedings
agree in writing that they shall abide by the arbitration
award of the lupon chairman or the pangkat.

9 Note that in Nos. 3 and 4, the venue may be placed in a city or
municipality different from where the parties reside.

81

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Q.

Are lawyers allowed to appear at the barangay
conciliation proceedings?

A

No. In all katarungang pambarangay proceedings, the
parties must appear in person without the assistance
of counsel or representative, except for minors and
incompetents who may be represented by their nextof-kin who are not lawyers. (Sec. 415, LGC).

Q.

What is the effect of the amicable settlement and
arbitration award?

A.

The amicable settlement and arbitration award shall
have the force and effect of a final judgment of a court
upon the expiration of 10 days from the date thereof,
unless repudiation of the settlement has been made
or a petition to nullify the award has been filed before
the proper MTC within the said 10-day period. (Sec.
416, LGC).

Q.

How is the amicable settlement or arbitration
award enforced?

A.

The amicable settlement or arbitration award may be
enforced by execution by the !upon within 6 months
from the date of the settlement. It is not the sheriff or
court officer who enforces the same but the !upon
itself. After the lapse of such time, the settlement or
award may be enforced by action in the appropriate
MTC. (Sec. 417, LGC).1°

101he third sentence of Section 417 of the LGC omitted barangay
arbitration award but this omission should be considered as merely inadvertent.
Hence the MTC also has jurisdiction over an action to enforce a barangay
arbitration award. (See Sebastian v. Lagmay, 22 April 2015). This can be
gleaned from Section 419 of the LGC which provides that the amicable
settlement or arbitration award shall be forwarded by the [upon to the appropriate
city or municipal court.

82

JURISDICTION

Q.

Portia filed a collection case for P500,000 against
Dina before the RTC of Manila, where both parties
reside. Dina filed her answer raising the sole
defense of payment. Pre-trial was terminated and
the trial set a month thereafter.
a) May the trial court before trial, dismiss the case
motu proprio or upon motion on the ground of
lack of barangay conciliation?
b) May the trial court before trial, motu proprio
refer the case to the Lupon concerned for
amicable settlement?
c) Assuming that the case was referred to the
Lupon and the parties agreed to a compromise
settlement before the Lupon, may the compromise
settlement be enforced upon the lapse of 10
days from its date?
d) How shall the compromise settlement be enforced?

A

a) No. The defense of lack of barangay conciliation,
which is a failure to comply with a condition
precedent, was waived when it was not raised either
in a motion to dismiss or in the answer. (Si R9;
Baares v. Balising, 13 March 2000).
b) Yes. While the trial court may no longer dismiss
the case, it may however motu proprio refer the
case to the !upon concerned for amicable settlement.
(Sec. 408, LGC, SC Adm. Cir. 14-93, dated 15 July
1993). Proceedings in the trial court shall be
suspended in the meantime.
c) No. Where the case was referred by the court to
the lupon concerned, the compromise settlement
will not have the force and effect of a final judgment
unless is it first submitted to and approved by the
court. (Sec. 416, LGC).
83

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
d) By filing a motion for execution with the RTC of
Manila, the court which referred the case to the
!upon. (Sec. 416, LGC). The judgment, being a
compromise judgment, is immediately final and
executory.
Q.

Mila filed an unlawful detainer case against Fred
for the latter's unpaid rentals and violation of the
terms of the lease over a lot. Mila and Fred
appeared before the Barangay Chairman's office
for mediation but the parties failed to reach a
settlement. The Lupon Secretary thus issued a
certificate to file action which was attested by the
Barangay Chairman. No pangkat was constituted.
Mila filed the ejectment suit before the MTC which
rendered a decision in her favor. Fred appealed
to the RTC which directed the parties to go back
to the Lupon for further proceedings and to
comply strictly with the conciliation proceedings,
and only upon failure of settlement may the records
be remanded again to the MTC for the latter to
decide the case anew. Fred appealed to the Court
of Appeals arguing that the RTC should have
dismissed the complaint for being prematurely
instituted instead of just remanding the records to
the MTC. Should the CA dismiss the complaint?

A.

No. While no Pangkat was constituted pursuant to
Sec. 410(b) of the Local Government Code, there was
substantial compliance with the law when the parties
met at the office of the Barangay Chairman for
possible settlement. Under Section 412 the confrontation
either before the Lupon Chairman or the Pangkat is
sufficient compliance with the pre-condition for filing a
case in court. Sec. 410(b) should be read in conjunction
with Sec, 412 of the LGC. (Lumbuan v. Ronquillo,
G.R. 155713,5 May 2006).

84

RULE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Q. Define the following terms:
1) Civil action.
2) Criminal action.
3) Special proceeding.
A.
1) Civil Action. An action by which a party sues
another for the enforcement or protection of a
right, or the prevention or redress of a wrong. (S3
R1). A civil action may either be ordinary or special.
Both are governed by the rules for ordinary civil
actions, subject to the specific rules prescribed
for a special civil action.
2) Criminal action. An action by which the State
prosecutes a person for an act or omission
punishable by law.
3) Special proceeding. A remedy by which a
party seeks to establish a status, right, or a
particular fact.
Q. What are the special civil actions?
A. (QC FID CREEP)
1) Certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus.
2) Review of decisions of COA and COMELEC.
3) Expropriation.
4) Ejectment (Forcible entry and unlawful detainer).
5) Partition.
6) Foreclosure.
85

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
7) Interpleader.
8) Declaratory relief and similar remedies.
9) Quo warranto.
10) Contempt.
Q.

Can a petition for judicial settlement of estate be
dismissed for failure of the petitioners to aver that
earnest efforts toward a compromise involving
members of the same family have been made
prior to the filing of the petition?

A.

No. Article 222 of the Civil Code (now Article 151,
Family Code) applies only to ordinary civil actions or
suits, that is, an action filed by a person or persons
against another person or persons. Article 222 does
not apply to special proceedings, such as a petition
for judicial settlement of estate. (Manalo v. Court of
Appeals, G. R. No. 129242, 16 January 2001).

Q.

When is an action deemed commenced? What is
the importance of knowing when an action is
deemed commenced?

A.

A civil action is deemed commenced by the filing of
the original complaint in court. If an additional defendant
is impleaded in a later pleading, the action is deemed
commenced with regard to him on the date of filing of
such later pleading, irrespective of whether the motion
for its admission, if necessary, is denied by the court.
(35 R1). Aside from the filing, it is also necessary that the
requisite filing fees should have been paid.
The importance of knowing when an action is
deemed commenced is that such commencement
interrupts or suspends the running of the prescriptive
period of actions. (Article 1155, Civil Code). If the action

86

RULE 1
General Provisions
is dismissed, then the balance of the prescriptive
period would start to run again. (Board of Liquidators
v. Zulueta, 115 SCRA 548 [1982]).
Q.

P filed an action for collection against A. A filed
his answer. P then filed a motion to admit
amended complaint including B as defendant The
court admitted the amended complaint When is
the action deemed commenced against B?

A.

From the filing of the amended complaint. (S5 R1).
In fact, even if the motion to admit was denied,
the action was deemed commenced against B and
thus the prescriptive period had already been
interrupted. (Id.). However, upon the finality of the order
denying the motion to admit amended complaint, the
prescriptive period would start to run again. P should
now file the action to collect against B, assuming there
is no res judicata, within the balance of the period.

Q.

The original complaint filed by plaintiff against the
insurer sought the recovery of "the amount due
under the insurance policy" plus P1 million as
exemplary damages and P1 million as attorney's
fees. The amended complaint changed "the amount
due under the insurance policy" to "P300 million
as insurance claim." The original complaint was
filed within one year from the denial of the insurance
claim, but the amended complaint was filed
thereafter. Has the complaint prescribed?

A.

Yes. The tolling of the prescriptive period is reckoned
from filing of the amended not original complaint
where the amended complaint introduced new demands
that were not specified and averred expressly in the
original complaint. Here, the one-year prescriptive period
under Sec. 63 of the Insurance Code had already

87

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
expired at the time of the filing of the amended
complaint. (Alpha Plus Intl Enterprises v. Phil Charter
Insurance Corp., 10 February 2021, Hernando, J.)
Q.

May a complaint be filed by registered mail? If so,
when it is deemed commenced.

A.

Yes. It is deemed filed or commenced as of the date
of mailing. (S3 R13). However if the requisite docket
fee was actually paid, either personally or by mailing,
subsequent to the mailing of the complaint, the date
of such payment or mailing thereof shall be considered
as the date of the filing of the complaint. (Ago Timber
Corp. v. Ruiz, L-23887, 26 December 1967).

Docket fees
Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for damages and specific
performance against Defendant The amount of
damages sought is not specified in the prayer
although the body of the complaint alleges the
total amount of over P78 million as damages suffered
by Plaintiff. The docket fee paid upon filing of
complaint in the amount was computed at only
P410.00, the action being considered to be merely
one for specific performance and thus incapable
of pecuniary estimation. Although the total amount
of damages sought was not stated in the prayer of
the complaint yet it is spelled out in the body of
the complaint totalling in the amount of P78 million
which should have been the basis for assessing
the filing fee. When the under-assessment of the
filing fee was brought to the attention of the court,
an amended complaint was filed seeking a reduced
amount of P10,000,000. The trial court admitted
the amended complaint upon the payment of the
docket fee based on the P10,000,000. Was the
admission of the amended complaint proper?
88

RULE 1
General Provisions
A.

No. All complaints, petitions, answers and other similar
pleadings should specify the amount of damages
being prayed for not only in the body of the pleading
but also in the prayer, and said damages shall be
considered in the assessment of the filing fees in any
case. Any pleading that fails to comply with this
requirement shall not be accepted nor admitted, or
shall otherwise be expunged from the record.
A court acquires jurisdiction over any case only
upon the payment of the prescribed docket fee. An
amendment of the complaint or similar pleading will
not thereby vest jurisdiction in the Court, much less
the payment of the docket fee based on the amounts
sought in the amended pleading. For all legal purposes
there is no such original complaint that was duly filed
which could be amended. Consequently, the order
admitting the amended complaint and all subsequent
proceedings and actions taken by the trial court are
null and void. (Manchester Dev't Corp. v. Court of
Appeals, 149 SCRA 562).

Q.

Private respondent is a holder of letters patent for
his alleged invention, coco-diesel fuel for diesel
engines and its manufacture. In 1983 private respondent
filed a complaint with the RTC for infringement of
patent with prayer for payment of reasonable
compensation and for damages against petitioner
Pilipinas Shell Petroleum Corporation. There was
no mention in the complaint of the amount of
damages being claimed but private respondent
alleged, among others, that the conservative estimate
of the combined gross sales of petitioner of private
respondent's invention is P934,213,780.00 annually
computed at the rate of 20 million barrels (volume)
being yearly sold by the marketing arm of petitioner

89

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
at the price of P2.938 per liter. Private respondent
estimated the yearly royalty due him from
defendant to be P236,572,350.00.
Petitioner discovered that private respondent
paid only as filing fee the amount of P252.00 based
on his claim for attorney's fees in the amount of
P200,000.00. Petitioner orally moved for the
dismissal of the complaint for failure of private
respondent to pay the correct filing fee.
In 1985, the RTC issued an order denying the
motion to dismiss but ordering private respondent to
pay the additional docket fee in the amount of
P945,636.90. Private respondent filed a motion for
reconsideration of the order of the trial court
requiring him to pay an additional docket fee which
the trial court granted by issuing an order allowing
private respondent to pay the required additional
docket fee after the prosecution of the case, to be
deducted from whatever judgment in damages
shall be awarded by the court. Did the trial court
act properly in allowing the docket fee to be
constituted as a first lien on the judgment award?
A.

No. The rules clearly contemplate an initial payment
of the filing fees corresponding to the estimated
amount of the claim subject to adjustment as to what
later may be proved. Conversely, nowhere can a
justification be found to convert such payment to something
akin to a contingent fee which would depend on the
result of the case. Under the circumstances, the Court
would stand to lose the filing fees should the party be
later adjudged to be not entitled to any claim at all.
Filing fees are intended to take care of court
expenses in the handling of cases in terms of cost of
supplies, use of equipments, salaries and fringe
benefits of personnel, etc., computed as to man hours
90

RULE 1
General Provisions
used in handling of each case. The payment of said
fees therefore, cannot be made dependent on the
result of the action taken, without entailing tremendous
losses to the government and to the judiciary in
particular.
In the case at bar, only the amount of P252.00
based on the claim of attorney's fees was paid but
such is but a part of his enormous claim for
royalties/reasonable compensation, which was not
estimated and the corresponding filing fees were left
unpaid. (Pilipinas Shell Corp. v. Court of Appeals, 10
April 1989). (Note: The SC remanded the case to the
trial court with the direction that the case shall resume
only after payment of the appropriate docket fee or
upon proper application to litigate as an indigent).
Q.

A complaint filed for recovery of possession of
real property also prayed for moral and exemplary
damages the amounts of which have been left to
the court's discretion, and for actual damages the
amount of which shall be proven at the trial. The
docket fees for the action involving the real
property have been paid, but not those for the
related damages, the amounts of which have not
been specified.
1) (a) Did the trial court acquire jurisdiction over
the action?
(b) May the action be dismissed?
2) Is the rule on the payment of docket fees in
ordinary civil actions the same as that for the
claim of damages which are impliedly
instituted in criminal cases? (91 Bar Q5).

91

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A. 1)
(a) Yes, the trial court acquired jurisdiction over the
action.
The Supreme Court has held that where the
docket fees for a real action have been paid but the
docket fees for related claims for damages were
not, the court nonetheless acquired jurisdiction over
the real action and may not dismiss the action for
failure to specify the amount of damages. What the
court should do is to merely expunge the claim for
damages. (Tacay v. RTC of Tagum, G.R. Nos.
88075-77, 20 December 1989).
(b) No, since the trial court acquire jurisdiction over
the real action it may not dismiss the same.
What the trial court should simply do is to
expunge the claim for moral and exemplary
damages which were not specified. (Id.).
2)

No the rule for the payment of docket fees
for damages is not the same as that for criminal
cases.

In criminal cases, docket fees for moral,
exemplary, temperate, and nominal (MENT) damages
are required to be paid only if the complaint or
information filed with the trial court alleges such
damages. (Si R111).
Q.

P was a former record owner of 100 shares of
stock in the Manila Golf Club. Upon his return
from the U.S., he discovered that the shares in his
name were cancelled and new shares issued in
favor of the National Steel Corporation. P filed an
action against NSC and MGC to compel the
assignment of shares of stock in his favor. P paid
the docket fee for actions incapable of pecuniary
92

RULE 1
General Provisions
estimation, which was only about P600. After trial
NSC filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that
P should have paid the docket fee based on the
value of the stocks sought to be recovered and
since the proper docket fees were not paid, the
trial court therefore did not acquire jurisdiction.
a) Were the proper docket fees paid?
b) Should the motion to dismiss filed by NSC
be granted?
A.
a) No. An action to compel the assignment of
shares of stock is an action for recovery of
personal property rather than one incapable of
pecuniary estimation. The docket fees should
have been assessed on the value of the stocks
sought to be assigned to P.
b)

Q.

No. The NSC was estopped from raising the
defense of non-payment of the docket fee since
it participated in the trial. The deficiency docket
fee shall be assessed as a lien on the judgment
award. (NSC v. CA, 302 SCRA 522).

Harvest All Investment Ltd., a minority stockholder
of Alliance Corporation, filed an action with the
RTC of Pasig to compel Alliance to hold the annual
stockholders meeting (ASM). The complaint alleges
that Alliance refused to hold the ASM because
Alliance wanted to hold first a P1 billion stock
rights offering (SRO). Alliance filed a motion to
dismiss alleging that the proper docket fees
corresponding to the P1 billion was not paid.
Harvest All argued that the action is incapable of
pecuniary estimation since the purpose thereof is
93

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
to compel Alliance to hold the ASM and hence the
payment of P8,860 docket fee for actions incapable
of pecuniary estimation was in order. Is Harvest
All correct?
A.

Yes. Depending on the nature of the principal action
or remedy sought, an intra-corporate controversy may
involve a subject matter which is either capable or
incapable of pecuniary estimation. Here the subject
matter, which is to compel Alliance to hold the ASM,
is one which is incapable of pecuniary estimation.
That Alliance's reason for not holding the ASM was to
hold first the P1 Billion SRO did not make the
complaint capable of pecuniary estimation. (Dee v.
Harvest All Investment Ltd., 15 Mar 2017, PerlasBernabe, J.).

Q.

Philippine Bank of Communications (PBCOM)
filed a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure of the
real estate mortgage executed in its favor by First
Sarmiento Property Holdings, Inc. (First Sarmiento).
The real estate was auctioned and sold to PBCOM
as the highest bidder. First Sarmiento filed a
complaint for annulment of the REM with the RTC.
First Sarmiento paid the docket fees for actions
incapable of pecuniary estimation. After the complaint
had been filed, the ex-officio sheriff issued the
certificate of sale in PBCOM's favor. PBCOM
asserted that the Regional Trial Court failed to
acquire jurisdiction over First Sarmiento's Complaint
because the action for annulment of mortgage
was a real action; thus, the filing fees filed should
have been based on the fair market value of the
mortgaged properties. The RTC dismissed the
complaint for lack of jurisdiction, holding that
First Sarmiento failed to pay the appropriate filing
fees. Was the dismissal of the action correct?

94

RULE 1
General Provisions
A.

No. The complaint for annulment or cancellation of a
REM is incapable of pecuniary estimation, even if the
property had already been foreclosed when the complaint
was filed, since the ownership and possession of the
property remained with petitioner. This is because at
the time the complaint was filed, the certificate of sale
was not yet registered with the Registry of Deeds.
(First Sarmiento Holdings, Inc. v. PhiL Bank of
Communications, 19 June 2018, Leonen, J.)."

Q.

May the trial court allow the payment by
installment of the docket fee where the plaintiff
pleads financial difficulty?

A.

Yes. The SC gave its imprimatur to a part-payment
scheme of the docket fee for a period of 2 years which
was well within the prescriptive period. The judge in
his discretion may allow this part-payment of the
docket fee especially where the amount of the docket
fee is large. In this case, the judge allowed an initial
payment of P25,000 and then P20,000 every month
until paid. The docket fees were in fact fully paid in
one year. (Sps. Go v. Tong, G.R. 151942, 27 Nov 03).

Q.

M et al., as human rights victims obtained a
favorable judgment against the estate of Pres.
Marcos in the amount of $1.9B. They filed a
complaint with RTC for the enforcement of such
judgment which has become final and executory.
The Marcos Estate filed a motion to dismiss for
non-payment of docket fees which it argued
should be based on the amount of the judgment
award sought to be enforced. M et al. countered
that an action to enforce a foreign judgment is

"This modifies the ruling in Chua V. Total Office Products & Services, 30
September 2005, that an action for annulment of real estate mortgage is a real
action if there has already been a foreclosure sale.

95

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
incapable of pecuniary estimation; hence the rate
of PhP 610 is sufficient. Should the docket fees be
computed based on the amount of the judgment
award sought to be enforced?
A.

No. S7(a) R141 relied upon by the RTC judge covers
only money claims against an estate not based on a
judgment. Although the complaint may have been
lodged against an estate, the schedule of fees for
cases incapable of pecuniary estimation does not
apply in the case at bar. Nonetheless, for purposes of
classification under the governing procedural rule, this
foreign judgment may be subsumed under S7(b)(3)
R141, or class of actions not involving property.
(Wares et al. vs Ranada, 12 April 05)

Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of the estate
of Alice, a contingent money claim for commission
in the event of the sale of properties of the estate
was filed by Alan with the probate court. The
executrix moved for the dismissal of the claim on
the ground that the docket fee under S7(a) R141
was not paid. The RTC dismissed the money
claim. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. The trial court has jurisdiction to act on a money
claim even without payment of separate docket fees
because the probate court had already assumed
jurisdiction over the proceeding for settlement of the
estate of the deceased. Non-payment of the docket
fee for a money claim is not a ground for its dismissal.
The probate court should just order the payment of
the docket fees within a reasonable time. (Sheker v.
Estate of Sheker, G.R. No. 157912, 13 December 2007).

Q.

Are docket fees required for a motion to enter into
the records an attorney's lien? For a motion to
enforce attorney's lien?
96

RULE 1
General Provisions
A.

No docket fees are required for a motion to enter into
the records an attorney's lien because this is merely
an initial step involving the registration of the lien.
However, a motion for the enforcement of the lien is in
the nature of an action commenced by a lawyer
against his clients for attorney's fees. As in every
action for a sum of money, the attorney-movant must
first pay the prescribed docket fees before the trial
court can acquire jurisdiction to order the payment of
attorney's fees. (Navarez v. Abrogar, 2 September
2015, Brion, J.).

Q. What are the instances when the docket fees need
not be paid at the commencement of the suit?
(Keyword: ACHITA )

1) If the damages or claims arose after the filing of
the complaint/initiatory pleading or if the court
awards damages not prayed for in the
complaint. (Original Dev't & Construction Corp.
v. Court of Appeals, 202 SCRA 753; S2 R141).
2) Indigent litigant. (519 R141).
3) Failure of the adverse party to timely raise the
issue of nonpayment of the docket fee.
(National Steel Corp. v. Court of Appeals, 302
SCRA 523).
4) Civil action instituted with the criminal action
where the moral, exemplary, nominal, and
temperate damages are not specified in the
complaint or information. (Si R111).

97

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
5) Petition for a writ of amparo shall be exempt
from the payment of docket and other lawful
fees. (S4 Rule on the Writ of Amparo).
6)

Indigent petitioner for a writ of habeas data
exempt from payment of docket or other lawful
fees. (S5 Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data).

Note: In Nos. 1 to 4, the docket fee shall be
considered as a lien on the judgment award, while
in Nos. 5 to 6, the petition is exempt from the
payment of docket fees.
Q.

Defendant obtained loans from Manila Bank
evidenced by promissory notes in the total principal
amount of P6,945,000 with interest. Defendant
failed to pay the loan and was sued by Manila
Bank before the RTC. The complaint prayed that
judgment be rendered ordering the defendant to
pay plaintiff the principal sum of P6,945,642, plus
interests, penalties, and attorney's fees computed
up to the date of actual payment pursuant to the
corresponding Promissory Notes. Manila Bank
paid the docket fee on the P6,945,642 claim but
not on the interests, penalties, and attorney's
fees. Judgment was rendered in favor of Manila
Bank. May the judgment be set aside for lack of
jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. Manila Bank argues that it could not have paid
the docket fee on the interests, penalties, and
attorney's fees since this could not have been
computed yet at the time of the filing of the complaint
as the date of actual payment could not be foreseen.
While this argument is true as for the interests, etc.
accruing after the filing of the complaint, it is not so
with those which have accrued as of the time of the
filing of the complaint. Manila Bank could have easily
98

RULE 1
General Provisions
computed the latter amounts and paid the docket fee
thereon. Hence for failure of Manila Bank to pay the
correct docket fees, the court did not acquire
jurisdiction to award Manila Bank's claims and thus
the case should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction
due to non-payment of filing fees. (Dragon v. Manila
Banking Corp., 6 March 2019, Leonen, J. ).12
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint praying for the recovery
of the sum of P450,000. Later on the Plaintiff
amended its complaint by increasing the amount
sought to be recovered to P600,000. Does the court
have jurisdiction over the amended complaint?

A.

Yes. The lower court acquired jurisdiction over the
case when the plaintiff paid the docket fee corresponding
to its claim in its original complaint. Its failure to pay
the docket fee corresponding to its increased claim for
damages under the amended complaint should not be
considered as having curtailed the lower court's
jurisdiction. Pursuant to the ruling in Sun Insurance
Office, Ltd. v. Asuncion, the unpaid docket fee should
be considered as a lien on the judgment even though
plaintiff specified the amount of P600,000.00 as its
claim for damages in its amended complaint.
(International Container Terminal Services Inc v. City
of Manila, 17 Oct 2018, Leonen, J.).

12The issue of non-payment of the correct docket fee was raised by the
defendant only after judgment, in its reply to plaintiffs opposition to defendants
motion for reconsideration. Nonetheless the Supreme Court held that lack of
jurisdiction could be raised at any stage and could not be the subject of estoppel.
Compare with National Steel Corp. v. Court of Appeals, 302 SCRA 522. It is
submitted that the National Steel Corp. doctrine, i.e., that the ground of nonpayment of docket fee is waived if not timely raised, is the controlling one since a
standing doctrine can be overturned only by the Supreme Court en liana (Sec.
4[3], Article VIII of the Constitution).

99

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME!
Q.

Should the docket fees on a supplemental
complaint be paid at the time of its filing or should
such fees be treated as a first lien on the
judgment award?

A.

The docket fees should be paid at the time of the filing
of the supplemental complaint; otherwise the
supplemental complaint should be expunged. Of
course the original complaint on which docket fees
have already been paid should still stand. (Do-All
Metal Industries, Inc. v. Security Bank Corp., 10
January 2011).

100

RULE 2. CAUSE OF ACTION
Q. What is a cause of action?
A.

It is the act or omission by which a party violates a
right of another. (S2 R2). The facts which give rise to
a right of action. STEVEN H. GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY
30 (1975). A cause of action implies that there is
some person in existence who can bring suit and also
a person who can lawfully be sued. (Douglas v. Beesly,
40 Ala. 148). Also, the formal statement in a pleading
of such act or omission. (Multi-Realty Dev't Corp. v.
Makati Tuscany Condominium Corp., G.R. No. 146726,
16 June 2006). In the latter sense, it is used
interchangeably and synonymously with "claim." (See
S1 & 3 R6, 52[b] R7, S2 R8).

Q.

What is the importance of a cause of action?

A.

Every ordinary civil action must be based on a cause
of action. Otherwise the complaint may be dismissed
for failure to state a cause of action or a judgment
may be rendered against the plaintiff for lack of cause
of action.
Also a party may not institute more than one suit
for a single cause of action. (S3 R2).

Q.

Define the following terms:
1) Right of action.
2) Relief.
3) Remedy.
4) Subject matter.

101

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.
1) Right of action. The remedial right or right to
relief granted by law to a party to institute an
action against a person who has violated his
right; the legal right to sue.
2) Relief. The redress or other measure which a
plaintiff prays the court to order or adjudicate in
his favor.
3) Remedy. The form or type of action which the
plaintiff may avail of in order to obtain relief
from the court.
4) Subject matter. The thing, act, contract, or
property which is directly involved in the action,
concerning which the wrong has been done.
Q. Illustrate the foregoing terms.
A.

Plaintiff lent P500,000 to Defendant. The loan is
secured by a real estate mortgage executed by X in
favor of the Plaintiff. The Defendant failed to pay the
loan on the due date despite demand from Plaintiff.
Cause of action: The Defendant's non-payment
of the loan on due date.
Right of action: The substantive right on the part
of the Plaintiff to sue for redress.
Remedies: Action for collection of sum of money
against the Defendant. Action for foreclosure of the
real estate mortgage against the mortgagor X.
Relief: Payment of the loan, foreclosure of the
real estate mortgage, and damages and interests
under Article 2209, Civil Code.

102

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
Subject matter. The contract of loan between the
Plaintiff and the Defendant.
Q.

Distinguish a cause of action from a right of
action.

A.

The term "right of action" is the right to commence
and maintain an action. In the law of pleadings, right
of action is distinguished from cause of action in that
the former is a remedial right belonging to some
persons while the latter is a formal statement of the
operational facts that give rise to such remedial right.
The former is a matter of right and depends on the
substantive law while the latter is a matter of statute
and is governed by the law of procedure. The right of
action springs from the cause of action but does not
accrue until all the facts which constitute the cause of
action have accrued. (Multi-Realty Dev't Corp. v.
Makati Tuscany Condominium Corp., G.R. 146726,
16 June 2006,Calleja, J.).
Right of action is the legal right to sue while
cause of action is the facts which give rise to a right of
action. STEVEN H. GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 30
(1975). Hence in reference to a prescriptive period to bring
an action, it is more precise to say that the period
starts to run from the accrual of the right of action, not
from "the accrual of the cause of action." (See for
instance, Article 1144 of the Civil Code).

Q.

May there be a cause of action without a
corresponding right of action?

A.

Yes. There may be a cause of action but with no right
of action if the latter is barred by prescription.
(1 BOUVIER'S LAW DICTIONARY 436 [1914]). For
instance the maker did not pay a promissory note,
but no action was brought within 10 years from the
time the note became due and demandable.
103

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is there a cause of action in proceedings for
declaratory relief?

A.

Strictly speaking none, because the action must be
brought before breach or violation of the instrument or
statute/rule. However, the Supreme Court has spoken
of an expanded concept of cause of action in proceedings
for declaratory relief. The concept of cause of actions
in declaratory relief is not, as in ordinary civil action,
the wrong or delict by which the Plaintiff's rights are
violated, but is extended to a mere denial, refusal or
challenge raising at least an uncertainty or insecurity
which is injurious to plaintiff's rights. (Multi-Realty
Dev't Corp. v. Makati Tuscany Condominium Corp.,
supra). It is permitted on the theory that courts should
be allowed to act, not only when harm is actually done
and rights jeopardized by physical wrongs or physical
attack upon existing legal relation, but also when
challenge, refusal, dispute, or denial thereof is made
amounting to a live controversy. (Id.). Here, there was
a refusal of a condominium corporation to recognize a
condominium unit owner's right to unassigned parking
slots because of a dispute as to the terms of the
Master Deed. This gave rise to an expanded cause of
action on the part of the unit owner to file a
declaratory relief case. (Id.)

Q.

What is meant by "splitting a cause of action"?

A.

It is when a party institutes more than one suit for a
single cause of action (33 R2).

Q.

What is the effect of splitting a cause of action?

A.

The filing of one is a ground for the dismissal of the
others (litis pendentia). A judgment upon the merits in
any one is available as a ground for the dismissal of
the others (res judicata).

104

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
Q.

D borrowed R1 million from C. The loan was
secured by a third-party real estate mortgage executed
by T. C filed a collection suit against D after the
latter defaulted in the payment of the loan.
Judgment in the collection suit was rendered in
favor of C and the judgment became final and
executory. Since the proceeds of the execution
sale were not sufficient to satisfy D's obligation, C
filed a complaint for judicial foreclosure of the
real estate mortgage executed by T. T filed a
motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground of
res judicata.
a) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
b) May C instead of judicial foreclosure resort to
extrajudicial foreclosure of the property.

A.
a) Yes, since C is splitting his cause of action. There
is only one cause of action, that is, the nonpayment of the loan obligation. Hence C was
splitting his cause of action when he brought a
second suit. The fact that the mortgage was
executed by a person other than the principal
debtor is irrelevant since being an accessory
obligation, the consideration for the mortgage is
the same as the consideration for the loan.
b)

C is barred also from resorting to extrajudicial
foreclosure. Technically, resort to extrajudicial
foreclosure is not barred by the prohibition against
splitting a cause of action since such foreclosure
is not an action. However it would still be barred
by the principle of election of remedies which
provides that a creditor who avails or chooses of
the remedy of collection of the loan is deemed to

105

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
have waived his right to foreclose on a mortgage
executed to secure the loan obligation. (Bank of
America v. American Realty Corp., 321 SCRA
659 [1999]; Bachrach Motor Co. v. Icarangal,
G.R. No. L-45350, 29 May 1939).
Q. B obtained a Discounting Line Facility (DLF)
from a bank under which the bank agreed to
discount the receivables of B. B's loan obligations
under the DLF were secured by a real estate
mortgage (REM) over B's property. B obtain six
loans under the DLF for which he executed six
promissory notes (PNs) in favor of the bank (PN 1
to PN 6). B failed to pay the six loans despite
demand. The bank first instituted an extrajudicial
foreclosure of the REM for the loans covered by
PN 1 and PN 2. Subsequently, the bank filed a suit
against B to collect on PNs 3, 4, 5, and 6. Is this
collection suit barred?
A.

Yes. A party may not institute more than one suit for
a single cause of action.
When the entire obligation of B under the DLF
became due and demandable, the bank had the
option to either foreclose the real estate mortgage
executed or to file a collection suit against B. There
is only one cause of action based on the DLF.
Since the bank opted to file a petition for extrajudicial
foreclosure of the REM but only as to PN 1 and PN 2,
the collection suit to recover the amounts covered by
the other PNs under the DLF is therefore barred. The
bank cannot split its cause of action on the DLF by
first filing a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure of the
REM on PN 1 and PN 2 and then institute a personal
action for the collection of the other four PNs without

106

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
violating the proscription against splitting a single
cause of action. (Asset Pool A v. Berris, 26 April 2021,
Hernando, J.; see also BPI Family Bank v. Coscolluela,
27 June 2006, Callejo, J.).
Q.

SRBI mortgaged several parcels of land to
Metrobank as security for its loan. Then SRBI and
Metrobank entered into a credit line agreement
with the same mortgaged properties as collateral.
SRBI defaulted and Metrobank filed a petition for
extrajudicial foreclosure of the mortgage. Subsequently,
Metrobank filed an action for collection of money
arising from the export bill purchases under the
credit line agreement Metrobank bought the
properties at the foreclosure but the bid price was
below SRBI's obligations. SRBI moved to dismiss
the action for collection on the ground that
Metrobank is splitting its cause of action. Should
the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. Under Act 3135, the mortgage creditor in case
of insufficiency of the proceeds of the foreclosure sale
is entitled to claim the deficiency from the debtor.
However the action filed by Metrobank was not an
action to recover the deficiency but an action for
collection or specific performance which was barred
by the election of the remedy of foreclosure. The
same should thus be dismissed without prejudice to
Metrobank's institution of an action for recovery of the
deficiency. (Suico Rattan and Burl v. Court of Appeals,
G.R. 138145, 15 June 2006).

Q.

P sued D for specific performance of a contract
The court decided in favor of D and dismissed P's
• complaint After the dismissal had become final,
P sued D to have the same contract reformed to
make it conform to their true intent and to recover
upon the reformed contract Is the second action
barred by res judicata?
107

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. P only had one cause of action on the contract,
whether as written or as reformed, which he could
have stated in the alternative pursuant to 32 R8. P
thus split a single cause of action. (ANTONIO R.
BAUTISTA, REMEDIAL LAW QUIZZER 123 [2004 ed.]).

Q.

Petitioner filed with the CFI a complaint against
the Private Respondent in 1969 for quieting of title
with damages, wherein the former seeks to be
declared the owner of the subject land. In 1970,
the Private Respondent dispossessed Petitioner
of the land in question and stayed there until
January 1978. The Private Respondent won in the
CFI but the CA reversed and declared the
Petitioner as the owner of the subject land and
ordered the Private Respondent to pay Petitioner
P56.40 as the latter's share in the proceeds of the
sale of the copra from the coconuts harvested in
the land.
The decision became final and executory in 2
February 1978. In 6 February 1978, Petitioner filed
a second case with the CFI against Private
Respondent seeking to recover from the latter the
incomes from the subject land from 1970 up to
January 1978 when possession of the land was
delivered to the Petitioner. Private Respondent
filed a motion to dismiss the second case on the
ground of res judicata. Should the motion to
dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. The Petitioner was splitting his cause of action
when he filed the second case for both the first and
the second cases involve the same cause of action.
The Petitioner would draw a distinction between the
land in dispute in the first case and the income from
that land being claimed in the second case. But that
is splitting hairs to split a cause of action. The subjectmatter is essentially the same in both cases as the
108

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
income is only a consequence or accessory of the
disputed property. It cannot be said that there are two
causes of action calling for two separate cases. The
claim for the income from the land was incidental to,
and should have been raised by Petitioner in his
earlier claim for ownership of the land by filing a
supplemental complaint. (Bayang v. Court of Appeals,
148 SCRA 91).
Otherwise put, such claim is but the result of the
original cause of action, viz., the continuing refusal by
the Private Respondent to recognize Petitioners
ownership over the property. (See Jalandoni v. MartinGuanzon, 102 Phil. 859). It should also be noted that
under S47(b) R39, a judgment or final order is conclusive
between the parties "with respect to the matter
directly adjudged or as to any other matter that could
have been raised in relation thereto." (Italics supplied).
Q.

Francisco Entierro died intestate. His surviving
spouse and five of his children executed a deed of
declaration of heirship and sale wherein they
stated that they are the sole heirs of Francisco
and wherein they sold the inherited land to the
Petitioners, the spouses Selga. Claiming that he
is a legitimate child of Francisco and that the
declaration of heirship and sale preterited him,
Respondent filed a complaint against the Petitioners
for annulment of sale and damages with the RTC
(Civil Case No. 276) with respect to his share in
the land sold. Respondent also prayed therein
that he be allowed to exercise the right of legal
redemption with respect to the share of the other
co-heirs sold to the Petitioners. The RTC granted
the annulment of the sale with respect to
Respondent's 1/11 share. However there was nothing
in the decision with respect to the prayer for legal
redemption. Respondent appealed the decision in
109

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
CC 276 but later on withdrew his appeal resulting
in the decision therein becoming final and
executory. Subsequently Respondent filed a
complaint for legal redemption (Civil Case No.
573) with respect to the 10/11 share of the land
sold to the Petitioners. Petitioners filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground of res judicata.
a) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
b) Would your answer be the same if Respondent
had not included a relief for legal redemption
in his complaint?
A.
a) Yes. S2 R2 defines a cause of action as "the act
or omission by which a party violates a right of
another." The cause of action in Civil Case No. 276
and Civil Case No. 573 is the sale of the entire
subject property by Basilia, et aL, to petitioners
without respondent's knowledge and consent,
hence, depriving respondent of her rights and
interests over her pro-indiviso share in the subject
property as a co-heir and co-owner. The annulment
of the sale of respondent's share in the subject
property, the legal redemption by respondent of
her co-heirs' share sold to petitioners, and the
claim for damages should not be mistaken to be
the causes of action, but they were the remedies
and reliefs prayed for by the respondent to redress
the wrong allegedly committed against her. Hence
the withdrawal by respondent of his appeal from
the RTC decision in CC 276 (which did not grant
redemption to respondent), with the result that the
judgment therein became final and executory,
precluded the respondent from filing CC 573 for
legal redemption since the latter was barred by
res judicata. (SeIga v. Brar, 21 September 2011).
110

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
b) Yes my answer would be the same. Res judicata
would apply regardless of whether or not
Respondent had prayed for legal redemption in
his complaint. Under 847(b) R39, a judgment is
conclusive between the parties with respect to the
matter directly adjudged or as to any other matter
that could have been raised in relation thereto.
The relief of legal redemption is a matter that
could have been raised in relation to the case.
Q.

Riviera Golf Club Inc. (RGC) and CCA Holdings
(CCA) entered into a 5-year Management and
Royalty Agreement whereby RGC agreed to pay
CCA monthly management and royalty fees for
operating and managing the Riviera Golf Club.
Just three years into the contract, RGC preterminated
the same on the ground of financial difficulties
and alleged violations by CCA of the agreement
CCA filed with the RTC of Makati City, a complaint
for collection of the unpaid management and
royalty fees for services rendered against RGC.
The parties entered into a compromise agreement
which became the basis of a compromise judgment
by the court The compromise agreement contained
a "non-waiver' clause wherein the compromise
agreement shall not be considered as a waiver of
and is without prejudice to CCA's cause of action
arising from the pretermination of the Management
and Royalty Agreement.
Subsequently, CCA filed a second complaint
against RGC for the expected business profits it
should have derived from the unexpired two-year
term of the agreement but did not because of the
pretermination of the agreement. RGC filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground of res judicata.
CCA opposed the motion on the grounds that: (a)
the two cases involve different causes of action,
111

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
and (b) the parties had stipulated in the "nonwaiver" clause that the compromise agreement
was without prejudice to CCA's cause of action
arising from the pretermination of the Management
and Royalty Agreement Should the motion to
dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes.
a) Both the first and the second cases involve the
same cause of action, that is, the breach by RGC
of the Management and Royalty Agreement.
CCA confuses the reliefs sought (collection of the
unpaid management and royalty fees, and the
claim for the expected profits for the unexpired
two-year term) with the cause of action. A cause
of action may give rise to several reliefs, but only
one action can be filed. A single cause of action
or entire claim or demand cannot be split up or
divided into two or more different actions. Here
the single cause of action gave rise to two reliefs
which should have been sought by CCA in the
first complaint. Hence CCA was splitting its cause
of action when it brought the second complaint.
b)

The stipulation is void for it in effect allows the
plaintiff CCA to split its cause of action. The
provisions on res judicata and against splitting of
cause of action are based on public policy.
Hence the stipulation is repugnant to public policy
and is thus void and unenforceable. (Riviera Golf
Club, Inc. v. CCA Holdings, B.V., 17 June 2015,
Brion, J.)

112

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
Q.

Nasugatan sued Sagasa for injuries he suffered
when Sagasa drove his car recklessly and bumped
into Nasugatan. Sagasa confessed judgment and
was adjudged to pay P5,000.00. Nasugatan became
blind because of the injuries he sustained in the
accident He filed another suit against Sagasa,
this time for P100,000.00. May Sagasa plead the
filing of the first complaint in abatement of the
second suit and contend that the judgment on the
merits in the first case constitutes a bar in the
second? Explain. (86 Bar Q1).

A.

Yes, Sagasa may plead that the judgment in the first
case constitutes a bar in the second.
Under S4 R2, if two suits are instituted on the
basis of the same cause of action, a judgment upon
the merits in any one is available as a ground for the
dismissal of the other.
Here the second suit involves the same cause of
action: Sagasa's reckless driving which violated the
right of Nasugatan. In other words Nasugatan's
blindness resulted from the same reckless act of
Sagasa. Hence the second suit is barred by the
judgment in the first suit.

Q.

P filed with the RTC an action reivindicatoria over
a parcel of rice land against D, alleging that the
same was sold to him by the rightful owner S and
praying that he (P) be declared the owner of the
land and that D deliver possession to him. D filed
an answer in which he also counterclaimed for
moral and exemplary damages for the unwarranted
filing of the suit by P.

113

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
During the pendency of the case, P
dispossessed D of the subject land and proceeded
to harvest the rice. Judgment was rendered by the
RTC dismissing P's suit The judgment became
final. P delivered possession back to D. D then
filed an action before the RTC against P seeking
to recover the value of the rice harvested by P. P
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of res
judicata. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

No. The claim for recovery of the harvested rice need
not be set up in the first case as such claim is not
compulsory having been acquired by D after serving
his answer. Hence the claim is not barred even if not
set up in the first case. (S8 & 9, R11; Namarco v.
Federation of United Namarco Distributors, 49 SCRA
238 [31 Jan 1973]). It could be made subject of a
separate case. (Banco de Oro Universal Bank v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 160354, 25 August 2005).

Q.

In 1992, Respondent's father, Rafael, obtained from
the Petitioner a loan of P160,000 with monthly
interest of 5% payable within 6 months and secured
by a real estate mortgage. Rafael failed to settle
his loan upon maturity despite demands and thus
Petitioner filed a complaint for judicial foreclosure
of REM with the RTC. The RTC issued a 30
January 1998 Decision reducing the interest rate
from 5% per month to 12% per annum and ordering
Rafael to pay the Petitioner P229,000. Records did
not show whether this decision attained finality.
Meanwhile prior to Rafael's notice of the above
decision, Respondent agreed to pay Rafael's obligation
to Petitioner which was pegged at P689,000. After
making a total payment of P400,000, he executed
a promissory note dated 20 February 1998,
binding himself to pay on or before 31 March 1998
the amount of P289,000.00, "representing the
114

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
balance of the agreed financial obligation of [his]
father to [Petitioner]." After learning of the 30
January 1998 Decision, Respondent refused to
pay the amount covered by the PN despite demands,
prompting Petitioner to file a complaint for sum of
money and damages before the court the RTC in
July 1998. Respondent filed a motion to dismiss
the collection case arguing that it involves the
same cause of action as the foreclosure suit.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes. The Petitioner, as creditor-mortgagee, instituted
an action for judicial foreclosure in order to recover on
Rafael's debt. The availment of such remedy bars
recourse to the subsequent filing of a personal action
for collection of the same debt, in this case, under
the principle of litis pendentia, considering that the
foreclosure case only remains pending as it was not
shown to have attained finality. While the ensuing
collection case was anchored on the promissory note
executed by Respondent who was not the original
debtor, the same does not constitute a separate and
distinct contract of loan which would have given rise
to a separate cause of action upon breach. The
reasons are that: (a) the consideration for the subject
PN was the same consideration that supported the
original loan obligation of Rafael; and (b) Respondent
merely assumed to pay Rafael's remaining unpaid
balance in the latter's behalf, La, as Rafael's agent or
representative. Hence the subject PN did not give rise
to a separate cause of action. (Marilag v. Martinez, 22
July 2015, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

P and D entered into a contract whereby D will
supply P from month to month with gas tar at the
price of P65 per ton. The contract was to run for
10 years, starting from 1919. D began delivering
but in 1920 "flatly refused to make any deliveries
115

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
under the contract." In 1923, P brought an action
for damages against D. P was awarded damages
up to 1923. The judgment became final and executory.
Later P brought an action to recover damages
from 1924 up to 1929. D filed a motion to dismiss
this suit on the ground of res judicata. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes. P in bringing the second suit had split his cause
of action. As a general rule, a contract to do several
things at several times is divisible, and a judgment for
a single breach of a continuing contract is not a bar to
a suit for subsequent breaches. Where however the
obligor manifests refusal to perform not only one
prestation but all the other prestations, the "contract is
entire and the breach total" and constitutes only one
cause of action. (Blossom & Co. v. Manila Gas Corp.,
55 Phil. 226). P in 1923 could thus bring an action for
damages up to 1929 under the principle of anticipatory
breach since D in 1920 had made a flat or outright
refusal to make any delivery under the contract.

Q.

What is the principle of anticipatory breach?

A.

It is the principle wherein in a divisible contract or one
contemplating divisible prestations over a period of
time and there is a breach of one prestation, the
obligee may bring a suit not only for the current
prestation but even for the future prestations if it/s
clear that the obligor can no longer or will no longer
perform the future prestations.

Q.

In the prior problem concerning the gas tar
contract, what if D in 1920 failed to make further
deliveries but without any flat or outright refusal
to make any delivery under the contract. Should
the motion to dismiss by D be granted?

116

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
A.

No since the principle of anticipatory breach does not
come into play. Hence each single breach of the
divisible obligation is a separate and distinct cause of
action.

Q.

Plaintiff ordered 2 units frequency converter/
inverter from Defendant to be delivered within 8 to
10 weeks from the opening of the letter of credit
or until 19 November 1997. On 9 November 1997
Defendant informed Plaintiff that it was having
problems with its supplier regarding the delivery
of the units, that it was looking for another
supplier, and that at that moment there was no
clear message when normal production would
resume. Due to this information, the Plaintiff surmised
that Defendant would not be able to deliver the
units on time and hence the Plaintiff cancelled
the order. Plaintiff filed an action for damages
against the Defendant averring the foregoing
facts. The Defendant filed an answer raising the
affirmative defense of failure to state a cause of
action. Should the affirmative be granted?

A.

Yes. When Plaintiff sued Defendant for damages, the
latter had not violated any right of Plaintiff from which
a cause of action had arisen. Plaintiff only surmised
that Defendant would not be able to deliver the units
on time and based on this apprehension, it cancelled
the order. The principle of anticipatory breach laid
down in the textbook case of Blossom & Co. v.
Manila Gas Corp., 55 Phil 226, is not applicable here
for the same only applies to a divisible contract (supply
of gas for 10 years) where the obligor had manifested
his refusal to comply with future periodic obligations.
Here the obligation was single and indivisible, to
deliver two units of frequency converter/inverter by 19
November 1997. (Danfoss, Inc. v. Continental Cement
Corp., 9 Sep 05).
117

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
voLumE I
Q.

Lajave Agricultural Management and Development
Corporation (Lajave) entered into a lease agreement
over agricultural land with the lessor Agustin for a
ten-year term from 1988 to 1998. When the lease
contract expired in 1998, Lajave continued to
occupy and use the premises without any renewal
or extension of the lease contract through the
tolerance of Agustin. Lajave paid Agustin the
annual compensation for the use and occupancy
of the said properties, but the latter alleged that
they were never apprised of how the annual rental
was determined and that the payment of lease
rentals was more often delayed.
On 1 March 2010, Agustin sent a demand
letter to Lajave to vacate the premises which the
latter did not heed. Agustin thus filed an unlawful
detainer case in the MTC against Lajave. Subsequently,
Agustin also filed with the RTC a complaint for
sum of money to recover the deficiency rentals
for the use and occupancy of the premises from
January 2003 to February 2010. Lajave filed a
motion to dismiss the RTC case on the ground of
us pendens, arguing that both cases involve the
same cause of action and hence such rentals in
arrears should be recovered in the unlawful detainer
case. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. Both cases involve a different cause of action. In
unlawful detainer, the recoverable damages are
reckoned from the time the possession of the property
becomes unlawful. Here the demand to vacate was
made only on 1 March 2010, thus, it was only after
said demand that Lajave's continued possession of
the leased properties became unlawful. Prior to the
lapse of the 15-day period to vacate the property as
stated in the demand letter, the damages sustained
from January 2003 to February 2010 do not have a
118

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
direct relation to Agustin's loss of material possession
since they do not result from Lajave's refusal to vacate
the leased premises. These damages must be claimed
in an ordinary action, as in the complaint for collection
of sum of money. (Lajave Agricultural Mgt & Dev't
Corp. v. Jayeliana, 7 November 2018, Peralta, J.).
Note: The court's ruling may be justified by the
fact that Lajave's possession after the expiration of
the lease contract was through Agustin's tolerance.
Hence, applying the case of Pro-Guard Security v.
Tormil Realty, 7 July 2014, which was also cited in
Lajave, the back rentals should start to run only from
the time of demand to vacate. In other words, the
cause of action of Agustin's unlawful detainer suit was
not the violation of any lease contract, which had
already expired at that point, but on Lajave's failure to
vacate upon demand to do so. The Lajave case
should not be read as limiting the amount of unpaid
rentals a lessor can claim in an unlawful detainer suit
to those falling due after the demand to vacate.
SEC. 5. Joinder of causes of action
Q. What are the rules governing joinder of causes of
action?
A. A party may in one pleading assert, in the
alternative or otherwise, as many causes of action
as he may have against an opposing party, subject
to the following conditions: (Keyword: JISM).
1) The party joining the causes of action must
comply with the rule on joinder of parties
under S6 R3.
2) The joinder must not include special civil actions
or actions governed by special rules.
119

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3) If the causes of action are between the same
parties but the causes of action pertain to
different venues or jurisdictions, the joinder
may be allowed in the RTC provided that one of
the causes of action falls within its jurisdiction
and the venue lies therein.
4)

If the claims in all the causes of action are
principally for recovery of money, the aggregate
amount claimed shall be the test of jurisdiction.
(S5 R2).

Q.

What is the reason for the requirement under
S5(b) R2 that the joinder of causes of action must
not include special civil actions or actions governed
by special rules?

A.

In order to avoid confusion in the conduct of the
proceedings as well as in the determination of the
presence of the requisite elements of each particular
cause of action. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
3rd
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 70 [7th rev. ed.,
printing]).

Q.

What is the totality rule?

A.

It is the rule under joinder of causes of action which
states that if the claims in all the causes of action are
principally for recovery of money, the aggregate amount
claimed shall be the test of jurisdiction. (S5[d] R2).

Q.

When may persons join as plaintiffs or be joined
as defendants in one complaint?

A.

All persons in whom or against whom any right to
relief in respect to or arising out of the same
transaction or series of transactions is alleged to
exist whether jointly, severally, or in the alternative,
may, except as otherwise provided in these Rules,
join as plaintiffs or be joined as defendants in one
120

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
complaint, where any question of law or fact common
to all such plaintiffs or to all such defendants may
arise in the action. (S6 R3). S6 R3 provides for the
rules on joinder of parties.
Q.

Is joinder of parties mandatory or permissive?

A.

It is permissive. The caption of S6 R3 is "flojermissive
joinder of parties." S6 R3 also states that the persons
may join as plaintiffs or be joined as defendants.

Q.

What is the meaning of "transaction" as used in
S6 R3?

A.

"Transaction" as used in S6 R3 means whatever may
be done by one person which affects another's rights,
and out of which a cause of action may arise, and the
term "series of transactions" is equivalent to 'transactions
connected with the same subject of the action. (1
RICARDO J. FRANCISCO, CIVIL PROCEDURE 102
[20011). Hence "transaction" is not limited to agreements
or contracts but also includes acts, omissions, or facts
out of which the cause of action arises.

Q.

Peter, the owner of a parcel of land, files a
complaint for recovery of possession against 30
persons who each occupy a separate and distinct
portion of the land. Is the joinder of defendants proper?

A.

Yes. The action arises out of the same transaction,
that is the occupancy by the defendants of Peter's
land. The Supreme Court has implicitly held that the
word "transaction" refers not only to a contract but to
an occurrence. (See Pantranco North Express v.
Standard Insurance, 16 March 2005) Evidently there
is a common question of law: whether or not the
defendants have the right to hold possession as
against Peter.

121

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P, a Manila resident, filed a complaint against D, a
resident of Iloilo City, in the RTC of Manila. The
complaint joins 2 causes of action: one for
collection of P500,000 and the other for title to
real property in Iloilo City with an assessed value
of P20,000, both causes of action being unrelated
to each other. Was there a proper joinder of
causes of action?

A.

Yes. Where the causes of action are between the
same parties but pertain to different venues or
jurisdictions, the joinder may be allowed in the RTC
provided one of the causes of action falls within the
jurisdiction of the RTC and the venue lies therein.
(S5[c] R2). Here the sum of money case falls within
the jurisdiction of the RTC of Manila and the venue
lies therein.
The fact that the causes of action are unrelated
to each other does not affect the propriety of the
joinder of causes of action. There is no need to comply
with the rule on joinder of parties since the causes of
action are between the same parties.

Q.

P filed a complaint in the RTC of Manila. The
complaint joins 2 causes of action: one for
recovery of P350,000 against D and another for
specific performance against E (D's friend) based
on E's undertaking that he will assign certain
shares of stock in favor of P if D defaults in the
payment of the loan. Assume that the joinder of D
and E as defendants complies with S6 R3. Was
there a proper joinder of causes of action?

A.

No, there was no proper joinder of causes of action.
While one of the causes of action (the one regarding
specific performance which is incapable of pecuniary
estimation) falls within the RTC's jurisdiction, the other
122

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
(involving recovery of P350,000) does not. Hence the
latter should be severed from the complaint.
The rule under S5(c) R2 applies only "where the
causes of action are between the same parties."
Here the causes of action are not between the same
parties since one cause of action is against D while
another is against E. Hence the joinder is not allowed
because one cause of action falls outside the RTC's
jurisdiction.
Q.

P seeks to recover P350,000 from D. P also entered
into a contract for services with D. However D has
breached a material provision of the contract for
services. P filed a complaint against D before the
MTC of Manila wherein he joins the causes of
action for recovery and for rescission. Should the
joinder of causes of action be allowed?

A.

No, the joinder of causes of action should not be
allowed.
While the MTC has jurisdiction over the cause of
action involving recovery, it has no jurisdiction over
the cause of action involving rescission which is
incapable of pecuniary estimation.
Hence the cause of action
rescission should be severed.

involving

the

Note that the provision allowing joinder of causes
of action which pertains to different jurisdictions under
S5(c) R2 applies only if the joinder is in the RTC.
Q.

P files a complaint against D with the RTC of
Manila wherein he joins two causes of action: one
for collection of a loan in the amount of P450,000
and another for collection of a loan in the amount
of P350,000. Was there a proper joinder of causes
of action?
123

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Under 35(c) R2, the joinder shall not include
actions governed by special rules. Here the action for
collection of P350,000 is governed by the Rules of
Procedure for Small Claims Cases (RSCC) since it
does not exceed P400,000. Hence the joinder of
causes of actions is improper.

Q.

Same facts as in the preceding question except
that the second cause of action is for recovery of
damages amounting to P350,000 arising from
quasi-delict. Was there a proper joinder of causes
of action?

A.

Yes. The second cause of action would not be
covered by the RSCC since claims for damages
arising from fault or negligence have been removed
from the coverage of the RSCC, nor is it covered by
the Rule on Summary Procedure since the amount of
the claim or demand exceeds P200,000. Hence there
was a proper joinder of causes of action.

Q.

P files a complaint against D with the RTC of
Manila where he joins two causes of action: one
for collection of a loan of P350,000 and another
for collection of another loan in the amount of
P200,000. D files a motion to dismiss on the
ground of lack of jurisdiction. Should the motion
to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. Under S5(c) R2, the joinder shall not include
actions governed by special rules. Here both causes
of action are governed by a special rule, i.e., the Rule
of Procedure for Small Claims Cases. Hence the
joinder of causes of action is not proper and consequently
the totality rule cannot come into play. The RTC
would not have jurisdiction since the claim in each
cause of action does not exceed the jurisdictional
amount of P400,000.
124

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
Q.

Perry is a resident of Manila, while Ricky and
Marvin are residents of Batangas City. They are
the co-owners of a parcel of residential land located
in Pasay City with an assessed value of P100,000.
Perry borrowed P450,000 from Ricky which he
promised to pay on or before December 1, 2020.
However, Perry failed to pay his loan. Perry also
rejected Ricky and Marvin's proposal to partition
the property.
Ricky filed a complaint against Perry and
Marvin in the Regional Trial Court of Pasay City
for the partition of the property. He also incorporated
in his complaint his action against Perry for the
collection of the latter's P450,000 loan plus
interests and attorney's fees.
State with reasons whether it was proper for
Ricky to join his causes of action in his complaint
for partition against Perry and Marvin in the
Regional Trial Court of Pasay City. (05 Bar Q3ed).

A.

It was not proper for Ricky to join his causes of action
in his complaint for the following reasons:
(1) Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, the joinder
shall not include special civil actions. (S5(b) R2).
Here one of the actions joined is for partition
which is a special civil action. Hence the joinder
was improper.
(2) Under S5(a) R2 in relation to 36 R3, the joinder of
causes of action must comply with the rule on
joinder of parties. Here the claim against Perry
and Marvin for partition and the collection claim
against Perry did not comply with the rule on
joinder of parties since the claims did not arise from

125

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the same transaction or series of transactions nor
is there any common question of law or fact.
(55[a] R2, 56 R3).
(3) Finally, the venue of one of the causes of action,
that is the one involving the collection of
P450,000, is misplaced since none of the parties
reside in Pasay City. The exceptive clause under
55(c) R2 -- which provides that the joinder of
causes of action may be allowed in the RTC even
if they pertain to different venues or jurisdictions
provided that one of the causes of actions falls
within the RTC's jurisdiction and venue lies
therein -- is not applicable because the causes of
action are not between the same parties.
Q.

Raphael, a warehouseman, filed a complaint against
V Corporation, X Corporation and Y Corporation
to compel them to interplead. He alleged therein
that the three corporations claimed title and right
of possession over the goods deposited in his
warehouse and that he was uncertain which of
them was entitled to the goods. After due
proceedings, judgment was rendered by the court
declaring that X Corporation was entitled to the
goods. The decision became final and executory.
Raphael filed a complaint against X Corporation
for the payment of P100,000 for storage charges
and other advances for the goods. X Corporation
filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the
ground of res judicata. X Corporation alleged that
Raphael should have incorporated in his complaint
for interpleader his claim for storage fees and
advances and that for his failure he was barred
from interposing his claim. Raphael replied that
he could not have claimed storage fees and other

126

RULE 2
Cause Of Action
advances in his complaint for interpleader because
he was not yet certain as to who was liable therefor.
Resolve the motion with reasons. (05 Bar Q4).
A.

I would deny the motion to dismiss on the ground of
res judicata.
An interpleader suit is not based on a cause of
action since there is no act or omission by which the
defendants violated the right of the complainant. The
complainant is simply seeking to compel the defendants
to interplead among themselves. Hence the concepts
of res judicata and splitting of cause of action would
find no application since the complaint is not based on
a cause of action.
X corporation's argument that Raphael should
have incorporated in his complaint for interpleader his
claim for storage fees and advances is incorrect since
joinder of causes of action shall not include special
civil actions like interpleader. (55 R2).

Q.

May an action for injunction be joined in one
complaint together with an action for quieting
of title?

A.

No. 55 R2 provides that the joinder of causes of
action shall not include special civil actions. The
joinder of an action for injunction with an action for
quieting of title is not allowed under 55 R2 since the
latter is a special civil action. (Salvador v. Patricia,
Inc., 9 Nov 2016, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

May interpleader be joined with declaratory relief
in one complaint?

A.

No, since both are special civil actions. Such joinder
would be violative of 55(b) R2. (Belo Medical Group
v. Santos, 30 August 2017, Leonen, J.).
127

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a court order a plaintiff to join causes of
action?

A.

No, a court may not order the joinder of causes of
action since there is nothing in 56 R2 (misjoinder of
causes of action) which empowers the court to do so.
Compare with S11 R3 (misjoinder and nonjoinder of
parties) which provides that parties may be dropped
or added by order of the court upon motion or sua
sponte. (JOSE FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE 6 [1997]).

128

RULE 3. PARTIES TO CIVIL ACTIONS
Q.

Who may be parties in a civil action?

A.

Only natural or juridical persons, or entities authorized
by law may be parties in a civil action.

Q.

Give examples of entities authorized by law to be
parties in a civil action.

A.
1)

Estate of a deceased person. (Nazareno v.
Court of Appeals, 343 SCRA 637).13

2)

A registered labor union.

3) An entity without juridical personality sued as a
defendant. (S15 R3).
Q.

The Santos Subdivision Homeowner's Association
(SSHA) filed a suit against the Petitioner seeking
to compel her to provide an open space for
Santos Subdivision. The records are bereft of any
showing that SSHA is an association duly organized
under Philippine law. The Petitioner filed a motion
to dismiss with the HLURB on the ground of lack
of legal personality of SSHA to sue. The HLRB
denied the motion to dismiss treating the action
as a suit by all the parties who signed and verified
the complaint. Should the HLRB have dismissed
the complaint?

131n Ventura v. Militante, 316 SCRA 226, and Galindo v. Roxas, 17
January 2005, the Supreme Court stated that an estate of a deceased person
cannot be a party in a court action. Perusal of these rulings reveal however that
the estate was not properly represented by its heirs or by an executor or
administrator.

129

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. Article 44 of the Civil Code enumerates the various
classes of juridical persons. Under said Article, an
association is considered a juridical person if the law
grants it a personality separate and distinct from that
of its members. SSHA was not duly organized under
Philippine law. Hence for failing to show that it is a
juridical entity, endowed by law with capacity to bring
suits in its own name, SSHA is devoid of any legal
capacity, whatsoever, to institute any action. Under
Si R3 only natural or juridical persons, or entities
authorized by law may be parties in a civil action. Nor
is it proper for the HLRB to treat the complaint as a
suit by the signing members. The members cannot
represent their association without valid legal authority.
(Duellas v. Santos Subdivision Homeowner's Association,
4.14
G.R. 149417, 4 June 2004, Carpio,

Q.

In October 2012, petitioners Association of Flood
Victims and Jaime Aguilar Hernandez (Hernandez)
filed with the Supreme Court a special civil action
for certiorari and/or mandamus under R65. Petitioners
assert that the COMELEC committed grave abuse
of discretion when it issued Minute Resolution
No. 12-0859, confirming the re-allocation of seats
in the party-list system. In their petition, it is
stated that petitioner Association of Flood Victims
"is a non-profit and non-partisan organization in
the process of formal incorporation, the primary
purpose of which is for the benefit of the common
or general interest of many flood victims who are
so numerous that it is impracticable to join all as
parties," and that petitioner Hernandez "is a Tax
Payer and the Lead Convenor of the Association
of Flood Victims. Do petitioners have the legal
capacity to sue?

'tee also Alliance of QC Homeowners Assoc. v. Q.C., 18 September
2018, e.b., Perlas-Bernabe, J., which held that an unincorporated homeowners'
association (not registered with the HLURB) has no legal standing to sue.

130

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
A.

No. Clearly, petitioner Association of Flood Victims,
which is still in the process of incorporation, cannot be
considered a juridical person or an entity authorized
bylaw, which can be a party to a civil action.
Petitioner Association of Flood Victims is an
unincorporated association not endowed with a distinct
personality of its own. An unincorporated association,
in the absence of an enabling law, has no juridical
personality and thus, cannot sue in the name of the
association. Such unincorporated association is not a
legal entity distinct from its members. If an association,
like petitioner Association of Flood Victims, has no
juridical personality, then all members of the association
must be made parties in the civil action.
In this case, other than his bare allegation that
he is the lead convenor of the Association of Flood
Victims, petitioner Hernandez showed no proof that
he was authorized by said association. Aside from
petitioner Hernandez, no other member was made signatory
to the petition. Only petitioner Hernandez signed the
Verification and Sworn Certification Against Forum
Shopping, stating that he caused the preparation of
the petition. There was no accompanying document
showing that the other members of the Association of
Flood Victims authorized petitioner Hernandez to
represent them and the association in the petition.
(Association of Flood Victims v. COMELEC, 5 August
2014, e.b., Carpio, J.).

Q.

A petition for certiorari was filed with the Supreme
Court. It was brought in the name of "Resident Marine
Mammals of the Protected Seascape Taiion Strait,
Joined in and Represented by Human Beings
Gloria Entenzo Ramos and Rose-Liza Eisma Osorio
in their capacity as Stewards of God's Creations."
The suit was brought against the DENR Secretary
and Japan Petroleum Exploration Co. Ltd. and
131

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
sought to stop petroleum exploration activities in
the Tation Strait on the ground that this would
cause environmental damage to the Talion Strait
and damage the ocean life therein. The Respondents
filed an answer raising the affirmative defense of
failure to state a cause of action. The Respondents
argue that animals cannot be real parties in
interest. May animals be real parties in interest?
A.

No. Our laws provide that only natural or juridical
persons or entities authorized by law may be parties
in a civil action. However the petition should not be
dismissed on this ground. The need to give the
Resident Marine Mammals legal standing has been
eliminated by our Rules of Procedure for Environmental
Cases, which allow any Filipino citizen, as a steward
of nature, to bring a suit to enforce our environmental
laws.
It is worth noting here that the Stewards are
joined as real parties in the Petition and not just in
representation of the mammals. The Stewards, Ramos
and Eisma-Osorio, having shown in their petition that
there may be possible violations of laws concerning
the habitat of the Resident Marine Mammals, are
therefore declared to possess the legal standing to file
this petition by virtue of our environmental laws
allowing the bringing of citizen suits. (Resident Marine
Mammals of Tanon Strait v. Reyes, 21 April 2015,
e.b., Leonardo-De Castro, J.).

Q.

If the plaintiff is not a natural or juridical person or
an entity authorized by law to be a party, what is
the ground of dismissal?

A

That the plaintiff has no legal capacity to sue. (S1[d]
R16; see Duerias v. Santos Subdivision Homeowner's
Association, supra; Association of Flood Victims v.
COMELEC, supra).
132

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q.

In whose name must an action be prosecuted or
defended?

A.

Unless otherwise authorized by law or these Rules,
every action must be prosecuted or defended in the
name of the real party in interest. (S2 R3).

Q.

What is the reason for the rule that every action
must be prosecuted or defended in the name of
the real party in interest?

A.

The reason for the rule is that if a person does not
stand to benefit or lose by the judgment, it would be a
waste of time for the court to try the case.

Q.

Does the rule require that a civil action be
prosecuted by the real party in interest?

A.

No. What S2 R3 requires is that a civil action be
prosecuted in the name of but not necessarily by the
real party in interest.
Hence an action is allowed to be prosecuted or
defended by a representative or someone acting in a
fiduciary capacity but the beneficiary shall be included
in the title of the case and shall be deemed to be the
real party in interest. (S3 R3).

Q.

Who is a real party in interest?

A.

The party who stands to be benefited or injured by the
judgment in the suit or entitled to the avails of the suit.
(S2 R3).

Q.

What is the importance of knowing the definition
of a real party in interest?

A.

It is important since the Rules of Court provide that
every action must be prosecuted or defended in the
name of the real party in interest, unless otherwise
authorized by law or the Rules of Court. (62 R3).
133

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

If an action is prosecuted or defended in the name
of someone who is not the real party in interest,
what is the remedy of the defendant?

A.

The defendant may file an answer raising the affirmative
defense of failure to state a cause of action.
(FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 76 [7th rev. ed., 3rd printing]). Note that
the ground is not lack of legal capacity to sue.
"Lack of legal personality to sue" means that the
plaintiff is not the real party in interest. The affirmative
defense of failure to state a cause of action may be
invoked by the defendant. (Ambrose v. Suque-Ambrose,
23 June 2021, Gaerlan, J.).

Q.

Isagani drove the car of his father, Pedro, and left
it in the parking area of the Fairview Motel where
he was a guest. !snarl' entrusted the key of the
car to a security guard hired by the Prime Resort
Company, the owner/operator of the motel. Emilio,
pretending to be the brother of lsagani, got the
key from the security guard and drove away with
the car. The car was never recovered. Later, Pedro
sued Prime Resorts for the value of the carnapped
vehicle plus damages. Prime Resorts sets up the
defense that Pedro has no interest in the case,
hence, has no cause of action, as he was not the
guest of the motel but his son, !snarl'. Is the
defense tenable? (89 Bar Q5.1).

A.

The defense that Pedro has no interest in the case is
not tenable.
Under S2 R3 a real party in interest is the party
who stands to be benefited by the judgment in the suit
or the party entitled to the avails of the suit.

134

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Here Pedro owns the car; thus it is clear that he
stands to be benefited by the judgment or that he is
entitled to the avails of the suit. Being the real party
in interest, the objection that he has no cause of
action will not lie. (Di!son Enterprises Inc. v. IAC,
G.R. No. 74964, 27 February 1989).
The argument that it was Isagani not Pedro who
was the guest of the motel is without merit. The right
of action of Pedro is not based on contract but on law,
specifically Article 1999 of the Civil Code which
provides that the hotel-keeper is liable for the vehicles
which have been placed in the annexes of the hotel.
Pedro's right of action could also be based on quasidelict under Article 2179 of the Civil Code.
Q.

Meralco supplied electricity to Marvex Industrial
Corporation under a service contract During an
inspection in 1985, Meralco allegedly found that
its metering devices had been tampered with.
Upon failure of Marvex to pay the differential billing,
it disconnected Marvex's electrical service. In
December 1986, Nordec, the new owner of Marvex,
sued Meralco before the RTC for damages with
prayer for preliminary mandatory injunction. After
trial, the RTC dismissed the complaint on the ground,
inter alia, that there was also no contractual
relationship between Nordec and Meralco, since
the service contract was between Meralco and
Marvex. Thus, Nordec had no cause of action
against Meralco. Is it correct to hold that Nordec
had no cause of action against Meralco?

A.

No. The beneficial users of an electric service have a
cause of action against this distribution utility. In
Manila Electric Company v. Spouses Chua, 637 Phil.
80, it was the beneficial users who were awarded

135

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
damages due to the unjust disconnection of the
electric supply, even though the service contract with
Meralco was registered in the name of another person.
Further, Meralco is deemed to have knowledge
of the fact that Nordec was the beneficial user of
Marvex's service contract with Meralco. It admits that
the inspections of the metering devices were conducted
in the presence of Nordec's maintenance personnel
and with the consent of its manager. It further admits
that it corresponded with Nordec regarding the differential
billing, and entertained Noridec's demand for an explanation
on the finding of tampering and the recomputation of
the amount to be paid by Nordec. Clearly, Meralco
knew that it was dealing with Nordec as the beneficial
user of the electricity supply. (Manila Electric Co. v.
Nordec PhiIs. 18 April 2018, Leonen, J.).
Q.

Respondents filed a complaint for nullification of
sale and damages against the Petitioner. The
Respondents alleged that they are the grandchildren
and successors-in-interest of Udiaan and that an
impostor sold Udiaan's land to the Petitioner.
The RTC rendered summary judgment dismissing
the complaint since the Respondents being the
grandchildren are not the real-parties-in-interest
as they have no successional rights. On appeal,
the CA upheld the RTC's findings that the
Respondents are not real parties-in-interest but it
also nullified the deed of sale to Petitioner on the
ground that Udiaan's signature was forged.
a) Are the Respondent's real parties-in-interest?
b) Was it proper for the CA to render judgment
nullifying the deed of sale?

136

RULES
Parties To Civil Actions
A.
a) No the Respondents are not real parties-in-interest.
As grandchildren, they have no successional
rights to the estate of Udiaan unless by virtue of
the right of representation. Since the Respondents
did not show that their mother predeceased
Udiaan, they have no successional rights.
b) No. Having established that respondents are not
the real parties in interest to the instant suit, the
proper course of action was for the CA to merely
affirm the RTC's dismissal of their complaint. It
therefore erred in proceeding to resolve the other
substantive issues of the case and granting one
of the principal reliefs sought by respondents,
which is the declaration of the nullity of the
questioned deed of absolute sale. (Ang v. Pacunio,
8 July 2015, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

May the children of a deceased father file a
petition for declaration of nullity of their fathers
marriage on the ground of non-compliance with
Articles 52 & 53 of Family Code, which requires
the recording of the judgment of annulment or nullity
and the delivery of the children's presumptive
legitimes?

A.

No, since they are not real parties in interest. Only a
spouse can a file petition for declaration of nullity of
marriage pursuant to A.M. No. 02-11-10-SC, (David v.
Calilung, 26 January 2021, e.b., Delos Santos, J.).15
A spouse in a valid marriage may however file a
petition for nullification of a subsequent bigamous
marriage. (Id.).

15The Court overlooked the rule that Articles 52 and 53 of the Family Code
apply only to marriages annulled under Article 45 or nullified under Article 40.
Articles 52 and 53 do not apply to a marriage nullified under Article 36 of the
Family Code. (See Dino it Dino, 19 January 2011! Carpio, J.).

137

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The Saludo Agpalo Fernandez and Aquino Law
Office (SAFA Law Office) entered into a lease contract
with the Philippine National Bank. Subsequently
SAFA Law Office vacated the premises but there
were disputes between it and PNB as to the
amount of rentals in arrears. PNB subsequently
sent a demand letter to SAFA Law Office demanding
payment of its rental obligations in the amount of
P25 million. In 2006, Atty. Saludo, in his capacity
as managing partner of SAFA Law Office, filed a
complaint for accounting and/or recomputation of
unpaid rentals and damages against PNB in
relation to the lease contract. May Atty. Saludo be
ordered to amend his complaint to include SAFA
Law Office as plaintiff?

A.

Yes. The lease contract was entered into between
SAFA Law Office and PNB, hence SAFA Law Office
is the real party-in-interest. A juridical entity, such as
a partnership may bring a suit. 52 R3 requires that
every action must be prosecuted or defended in the
name of the real party-in-interest. As the one primarily
affected by the outcome of the suit, SAFA Law Office
should have filed the complaint with the RTC and
should be made to respond to any counterclaims that
may be brought in the course of the proceeding.
(Saludo v. PNB, 20 August 2018, Jardeleza, J.).16

Q.

May an applicant of a homestead patent file an
action for reconveyance over the land subject of
the application?

A.

No. One who is a mere applicant of a homestead
patent and not an owner of the lot cannot be

lelt's unclear whether the complaint was in the name of Atty. Saludo alone
or in the name of Atty. Saludo as managing partner of SAFA Law Office. In the
ratter case, Atty. Saludo is merely a representative party and the real party-ininterest would be SAFA Law Office. (S3 R3).

138

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
considered as a party-in-interest with personality to file
an action for reconveyance. (Demegillo v. Lumampao, 10
February 2021, Hernando, J.).
Q.

Upon motion, the RTC dismissed the action for
reversion and cancellation of title over land in
Fort Bonifacio filed by the Republic on the ground
that the real party in interest was the Bases
Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA).
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. The Republic, not the BCDA, is the real party-ininterest in action for reversion and cancellation of title
over land in Fort Bonifacio. The BCDA is a mere
government instrumentality which holds title over the
land in trust for the Republic. (Republic v. Heirs of
Bemabe, e.b., 6 October 2020, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Distinguish between a real party in interest and
one having locus standi or legal standing.

A.

A real party in interest is the party who stands to be
benefited or injured by the judgment in the suit.
Unless otherwise authorized by the law or by the Rules of
Court, every action must be prosecuted or defended
in the name of the real party in interest. (S2 R3).
A party with locus standi or legal standing is one
with a personal and substantial interest in a case
such that the party has sustained or will sustain direct
injury as a result of the governmental act that is
being challenged. The gist of the question on standing
is whether a party alleges such personal stake in the
outcome of the controversy as to assure that concrete
adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues
as well as to foster judicial self-restraint. (Galicto v.
Aquino, 28 February 2012, e.b., Brion, J.).

139

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The question of whether one is a real party in
interest turns on the narrow question of whether or
not he will be benefited or injured by the judgment in
the suit while the question of locus standi requires an
analysis of broader policy concerns. This is why the
rule on locus standi may be relaxed where the case is
one of transcendental importance or of paramount
public interest. (Kilosbayan, Inc. v. Morato, 246 SCRA
540 [1995]).
Q.

What is the exception to the rule that every action
must be prosecuted or defended in the name of
the real party in interest?

A.

Representative parties under 63 R3. An action is
allowed to be prosecuted or defended by a representative
or someone acting in a fiduciary capacity provided
that the beneficiary shall be included in the title of
the case and shall be deemed to be the real party
in interest.

Q.

Give examples of representative parties. (GATE)

A.

1) Trustee of an express trust.
2) Guardian.
3) Executor or administrator. (See S2 R87).
4) Party authorized by law or the Rules of Court.

Q.

Give an example of a party authorized by law or
the Rules of Court to sue even if he is not the real
party in interest.

A.

In execution, the court may authorize the judgment
obligee to bring an action against a person alleged to
have property of the judgment obligor or to be
indebted to him, when such person claims an adverse
interest in the property or denies the debt. (S43 R39;
1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
140

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
COMPENDIUM 466 [7th rev. ed., 3rd printing]). In this
case the judgment obligee must include in the title the
name of the judgment obligor who is deemed to be
the real party in interest.
Q.

A complaint entitled "A as Attorney-in-Fact for X,
Plaintiff, versus B, Defendant" was filed to recover a
car in the possession of B. A's Power of Attorney
expressly authorized him (A) to sue for the
recovery of the car. B files a motion to dismiss
the complaint for lack of capacity to sue. Decide
the motion. Explain. (88 Bar Q4a).

A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied.
The ground of the motion to dismiss is erroneous.
There is nothing in the problem to indicate that A has
no legal capacity to sue. The ground that B may have
been thinking of is failure to state a cause of action on
the argument that A as attorney-in-fact is not the real
party in interest.
However, even if the ground of the motion to
dismiss is failure to state a cause of action, the motion
would still be denied. Under S3 R3 a representative
may be a party; provided that the beneficiary is included
in the title of the case. In such a case even if the suit
is brought in the name of the representative, the
beneficiary is deemed to be the real party in interest.
Here although the suit was brought in the name
of the agent, the beneficiary or principal X was
included in the title of the case. Hence X is deemed to
be the real party in interest and the objection that the
suit was not in the name of the real party in interest
will not lie?

"It may also be said that the suit is in effect brought in the name of X and
not A. This is because it is indicated that A is acting as the attorney-in-fact or

141

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
(Note: The ruling in the case of Arroyo v. Granada,
18 Phil. 484, is no longer good case law because of
53 R3 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

Plaintiff brought an action for reconveyance over
a parcel of land. He brought the action not against
the registered owner Emmanuel but against his
mother Carmencita. Plaintiff's contention was that
Carmencita was the attorney-in-fact of Emmanuel.
May the action be dismissed?

A.

Yes. The action for reconveyance should have been
brought against the registered owner Emmanuel and
not his mother Carmencita. The Plaintiff justified the
filing of the action against Carmencita on the ground
that she was the attorney-in-fact of Emmanuel. Even
assuming that Carmencita was Emmanuel's attorneyin-fact, the real party in interest was still Emmanuel
who should have been impleaded in the complaint
pursuant to 53 R3. Hence the action failed to state a
cause of action and must be dismissed. (Guizano v.
Veneracion, 12 September 2012).

Q.

A city mayor signed a contract in behalf of the city
without the prior authorization of the city council
as required by the Local Government Code. Do
the members of the city council have standing to
file a case for the nullification of the contract?

A.

Yes. The real party in interest which may file a case,
questioning the validity of a contract entered into by
the city mayor, who is alleged to have no authority to
do so, is the city itself. It is the local government unit
which stands to be injured or benefited by any
judgment that may be made in this case. The city

agent of X. It is axiomatic in the law of agency that an agent is the extension of
the principals legal personality.

142

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
councilors as representatives of the city have the
standing to file the case. (Lao v. Cagayan de Oro
City, 13 September 2017, Leonen, J.).
Q.

Give an exception to the rule requiring the joinder
of the beneficiary.

A.

An agent acting in his own name and for the benefit of
an undisclosed principal may sue or be sued without
joining the principal, except when the contract involves
things belonging to the principal. (S3 R3).
The reason for this rule is that if an agent acts in
his own name, the principal has no right of action
against the persons with whom the agent has contracted;
neither have such persons against the principal. In
such a case, the agent is the one directly bound in
favor of the person with whom he contracted, except
when the contract involves things belonging to the
principal. (Art. 1883, Civil Code).

Q.

Principo authorized Argento in writing to buy, on
Principo's behalf, the land of Seneca. Argento, in
his own name, bought the land through a deed of
absolute sale from Seneca. Argento did not disclose
to Seneca that he was buying for the benefit of
Principo. May Argento sue Seneca for the
enforcement of the sale without joining Principo?

A.

Yes. An agent acting in his own name and for the
benefit of an undisclosed principal may sue without
joining the principal. (S3 R3).

Q.

Principo authorized Argento in writing to sell, on
Principo's behalf, the land of Principo. Argento,
in his own name, sold the land through a deed of
absolute sale to Vindi. Argento did not disclose to
Vindi that he was selling for the benefit of Principo. May
Argento sue Vindi for the enforcement of the sale
without joining Principo?
143

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. An agent acting in his own name and for the
benefit of an undisclosed principal may sue without
joining the principal, except when the contract involves
things belonging to the principal. (S3 R3). Here, the
contract of sale involves a land belonging to Principo,
the principal. Hence, Argento may not sue Vindi
without joining Principo. The reason for this rule is
that the contract is deemed to be between Principo
and Vindi. (See Article 1883, Civil Code).

Q.

V-Gent Inc. bought airplane tickets from Morning
Star Travel & Tours Inc. The tickets that V-Gent bought
were in the name of the airplane passengers and
paid for with their money. V-Gent, in its own
name, filed a suit against Morning Star for the
refund of unused airplane tickets. Morning Star
filed an answer raising the affirmative defense of
failure to state a cause of action, arguing that VGent is not the real party-in-interest. V-Gent
argued that it could sue as a representative party
pursuant to 83 R3. Should the affirmative defense
be granted?

A.

Yes. Under S3 R3, the representative must indicate
the name of the beneficiary (here the airplane
passengers) who are deemed to be the real partiesin-interest. This was not done by V-Gent since it sued
under its own name. Nor may V-Gent invoke the last
sentence of S3 R3 which provides that lain agent
acting in his own name and for the benefit of an
undisclosed principal may sue ... without joining the
principal." Here V-Gent disclosed its principals; in fact,
the airplane tickets were in the name of the airplane
passengers. (V-Gent, Inc. v. Morningstar Travel &
Tours Inc., 22 July 2015, Brion, J.).

144

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
SEC. 4. Spouses as parties
Q.

What are the rules regarding spouses as parties
to a suit?

A.

S4 R3 states that husband and wife shall sue or be
sued jointly, except as provided by law. This provision
does not tell us much as it simply begs the question of
what the law provides.
If one spouse is suing as plaintiff, the other
spouse need not be joined even if the suit relates to
community or conjugal property. This is because the
spouses are joint administrators of the community or
conjugal property (Articles 96 and 124, Family Code)
and the bringing of a suit is but an act of
administration.
If a spouse is being sued, the other spouse
should be joined if the suit could result in liability
being incurred by the absolute community or the
conjugal property. If the suit would only result in the
separate liability of a spouse, the other spouse should
not be joined. The liabilities of the absolute community
and the conjugal partnership are found in Articles 94
and 121 of the Family Code.

Q.

Husband and wife lent money to defendants
spouses A and B. A and B did not pay the loan.
Husband alone filed a suit to collect the loan
against A and B. A and B filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground that the wife was not impleaded as
a co-plaintiff in violation of S4 R3. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. In an action to recover a sum of money, the
failure to join the other spouse is not a jurisdictional
defect. The non-joinder of a spouse does not warrant

145

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
dismissal as it is merely a formal requirement which
may be cured by amendment. (Carandang v. Heirs of
de Guzman, G.R. No. 160347, 29 November 2006).
Q.

D (wife) and E (husband) were married in 1990. E
works as an employee in a private company
abroad. In 1995, D (without E's knowledge)
borrowed money from C to put up a drugstore the
income of which was intended to defray the
household expenses. The drugstore however incurred
only losses and eventually went under. C sues D
and E to recover the debt. Should the absolute
community be liable for D's debt?

A.

No. Under Art. 94(3) of the Family Code, debts
contracted by either spouse without the consent of the
other shall only be a liability of the absolute community
to the extent that the family may have been benefited.
Actual benefit to the family must thus be proved. Here
since the drugstore incurred only losses, no benefit
was acquired by the absolute community. It does not
matter that the income of the drugstore was intended
to benefit the family. What matters is actual benefit.

Q.

Would your answer be the same if D was the
designated administrator-spouse?

A.

No. In that case, the absolute community would be
liable. The fact that the debt was contracted for the
benefit of the community (even if no actual benefit
resulted) would suffice to hold liable the absolute
community. (Art. 94(2), Family Code).

Q.

The Philippine Blooming Corporation obtained a
P50-million loan from Ayala Investment As security
for the loan, the Executive Vice-President of PBM,
Alfredo Ching, executed a suretyship agreement
binding himself solidarily in favor of Ayala
Investment Alfredo Ching was the designated
146

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
administrator-spouse of the absolute community.
PBM defaulted on the loan so Ayala Investment
sued PBM and Ching. A final and executory judgment
was rendered in favor of Ayala Investment and it
sought to levy on the conjugal properties of the
Spouses Ching. May the sheriff levy on the
absolute community properties?
A.

No, the sheriff may not levy on the absolute community
properties.
Under Article 94(2) of the Family Code, the
absolute community of property shall be liable for
debts contracted during the marriage by the designated
administrator-spouse for the benefit of the community.
Here when the husband entered into a suretyship
agreement to secure the debt of a third person, he
does not thereby contract a debt or obligation for the
benefit of the community since the one benefited by
the loan was PBM not the absolute community.
Hence the absolute community of the Spouses Ching
is not liable for the debt of Ching and the sheriff may
not levy upon the community properties. (See Ayala
Investment & Dev't Corp. v. CA, 286 SCRA 272).

Q.

Would your answer be the same if it was proved
by Ayala Investment that because of the grant of
the loan, the employment of Ching in PBM would
be prolonged, that the shares in PBM of the Ching
family would rise in value, and that Mr. Ching's
prestige in PBM and his career therein would be
enhanced?

A.

Yes. The benefits contemplated under Article 94(2) of
the Family Code must be one directly resulting from
the loan, not a mere by-product or spin-off of the loan
itself. (Id.).

147

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Indispensable and Necessary Parties (S7 & 8 R3)
Q.

Who is an indispensable party?

A.

An indispensable party is a party-in-interest without
whom no final determination may be had of an action.
(S7 R3).

Q.

Who is a necessary party?

A.

A necessary party is one who is not indispensable but
who ought to be joined as a party: (RDS)
-

if complete relief is to be accorded as to those
already parties, or

- for a complete determination or settlement of the
claim subject of the action. (58 R3).
party

from

a

Q.

Distinguish an indispensable
necessary party.

A.

An indispensable party may be distinguished from a
necessary party as follows:
1) AS TO NECESSITY FOR FINAL DETERMINATION.
No final determination may be had of an action if
an indispensable party is not impleaded, while a
final determination may be had of an action even
if a necessary party is not impleaded.
2) AS TO EFFECT OF NOT IMPLEADING DESPITE
•
COURT ORDER. If an indispensable party is not
impleaded by the plaintiff despite a court order,
the court may dismiss the case for failure to
prosecute. (S3 R17). On the other hand, the failure
by the plaintiff to implead a necessary party
despite court order, will not result in the dismissal
of the case but simply the waiver of the plaintiffs
claim against such necessary party. (39 R3).

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q.

What is the rule regarding an indispensable party?

A.

He shall be joined either as plaintiff or as defendant.
(S7 R3).

Q.

Who has the burden to implead or order the
impleading of an indispensable party?

A.

The burden to implead or to order the impleading of
an indispensable party rests on the plaintiff and the
trial court, respectively. (Arcelona v. Court of Appeals,
345 Phil. 250, 275 [1997]).

Q.

What is the result if an indispensable party is not
impleaded in a suit?

A.

The court cannot proceed without their presence.
However, the Supreme Court has characterized the
failure to implead an indispensable party as a curable
error Hence the court instead of dismissing the case
should order the plaintiff to amend his complaint by
impleading the indispensable party or allowing the
intervention of the indispensable party. These measures
may be taken even after rendition of judgment.
(Pacefia-Contreras v. Roy/la Water Supply, Inc., G.R.
No. 1689792, 2 December 2013). Amendment or
intervention, however, is no longer available if there
has already been entry of judgment. In such a case the
judgment would be null and void. (Metropolitan Bank
& Trust Company v. Alejo, 417 Phil. 303, 318 [2001]).

Q.

In a declaratory relief proceeding, what is the
effect of the failure to include as defendant a party
who would be adversely affected by the declaratory
judgment of the court?

A.

The non-joinder of persons who claim any interest
which may be affected by a declaratory judgment is
not a jurisdictional defect as S2 R63 provides that
said declaration shall not prejudice their interests.
149

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Since the judgment in a declaratory relief case is merely
declaratory and not executory, the rule on compulsory
joinder of indispensable parties does not apply.
Q.

What is the test for determining whether a party is
an indispensable party or not?

A

If the party's interest would be directly affected or
necessarily prejudiced by the judgment which would
be rendered in the case, then he is an indispensable
party (See China Banking Corp. v. Oliver, 390 SCRA
263, 370-371). Indispensable parties are those who
have such interest in the controversy that a final
adjudication of the case would certainly affect their
rights. (Freedom from Debt Coalition v. MWSS, G.R.
No. 173044, 10 December 2007). The rule requiring
joinder of an indispensable party is thus based on the
Constitutional right to due process.

Q.

Give examples of indispensable parties.

A
1) In a partition suit, all the co-owners are
indispensable parties. (Salvador v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 109910, 5 April 1995).
2) In an action for recovery of land against defendant,
who is a tenant of a third-party who claims ownership,
the third-party is an indispensable party.
3) In an action for rescission filed by a creditor to
annul a fraudulent sale, the vendor is an
indispensable party.
4) In an action for annulment of title over a lot, the
registered owner of the lot is an indispensable
party. (Cagatao v. Almonte, G.R. No. 174004, 9
October 2013).

150

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
5) In a petition for certiorari and prohibition filed by
the Freedom from Debt Coalition against the
MWSS seeking to nullify the rate increases granted
by the latter to concessionaires Maynilad Water
and Manila Water, the concessionaires are
indispensable parties. (Freedom from Debt Coalition
v. MWSS, G.R. No. 173044, 10 December 2007).
6) In a petition for certiorari and prohibition filed by
minors against the Secretary of Environment and
Natural Resources to set aside the issuances of
timber license agreements by the DENR, the
timber license agreement holders are indispensable
parties. (Oposa v. Factoran, 224 SCRA 972 [1993]).
7) In a petition for cancellation or correction of entries
in the civil registry, the local civil registrar is an
indispensable party. (Section 3, Rule 108).
8) In an action for cancellation of a loan contract
entered into between a municipality and the Land
Bank, filed by a taxpayer against Land Bank and
the municipal officers, the municipality itself is an
indispensable party. (Land Bank v. Cacayuran,
22 April 2015).
Q.

In an action for cancellation of deed of restrictions
(DOR) over a subdivision lot in favor of Forbes Park
Association (FPA), is FPA an indispensable party?

A.

Yes. FPA is an indispensable party even if apparently
the DOR had expired. RTC decision cancelling DOR
without FPA having been impleaded was void and
may be set aside via an action for annulment under
R47. FPA is an indispensable party since the DOR
was imposed in its favor. (RMFPU Holdings v. Forbes
Park Assoc., 14 June 2021, Caguioa, J.)

151

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

D obtained a car loan from a car dealer evidenced
by a promissory note and secured by a chattel
mortgage over the car executed by D in favor of
the car dealer. The note and the chattel mortgage
were assigned by the car dealer to BA Finance. D
defaulted in the payment of the loan. BA Finance
learned later on that the car was in the possession of
F. BA Finance filed an action for replevin against
F to recover the car. D was not impleaded. Is D
an indispensable party?

A.

Yes. In an action for replevin filed by the mortgagee
to recover the mortgaged chattel in the possession of
a third person, the mortgagor is an indispensable party
even if the chattel is in the possession of a third person.
In a chattel mortgage, since the mortgagee's
right to possession is conditioned upon the fact of
default, the inclusion of the debtor or the mortgagor is
necessary for a full and conclusive determination of
the case. (See Servicewide Specialists, Inc. v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 103301, 8 December 1995).

Q.

In the preceding problem, assume that BA
Finance filed the replevin action against D without
impleading F. Is F an indispensable party?

A.

Yes. The judgment in the replevin case would directly
affect the rights of F. An adverse possessor, who is
not the mortgagor, cannot just be deprived of his
possession, let alone be bound by the terms of the
chattel mortgage, simply because the mortgagee brings
an action for replevin. (BA Finance Corporation v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 102998, 5 July 1996).

152

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q.

Eduardo Santiago filed with the RTC an action for
reconveyance of lot against the GSIS. He died
pendente lite and was substituted by his widow
Rosario. A judgment was rendered granting the
action for reconveyance and a writ of execution
was issued as the judgment had become final and
executory.
In the RTC Vilar filed a motion for
substitution claiming that Eduardo had assigned
all his rights to him. The RTC issued an order
merely noting Vilar's motion without any action.
Vilar thus filed a R65 petition with the CA to set
aside the RTC's order which merely noted his
motion. Vilar did not implead Rosario in his R65
petition. The CA granted the petition and ordered
the impleading of Vilar in substitution of Rosario.
The GSIS's motion for reconsideration and Rosario's
motion to intervene and admit motion for
reconsideration was denied. May the CA's decision
be set aside?

A.

Yes. Verily, Rosario is an indispensable party in the
petition before the CA as she is the widow of the
original party-plaintiff Eduardo. The determination of
the propriety of the action of the trial court in merely
noting and not granting Vilar's motion would necessarily
affect her interest in the subject matter of litigation as
the party-plaintiff.
The final determination of the case would pry into
the right of Rosario as party-plaintiff before the lower
court who is entitled to the proceeds of the judgment
award. In ruling for Vilar's substitution, the right of
Rosario as to the proceeds of the judgment award
was thwarted as the CA effectively ordered that
the proceeds pertaining to Rosario be awarded
instead to Vilar. Hence, failure to implead Rosario as
153

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
an indispensable party rendered all the proceedings
before the CA null and void for want of authority to
act. (Santiago v. Viler, 6 March 2018, Tijam, J.).
Q.

Pua filed a complaint for collection of money
against Ang and her mother Deyto, the co-owners
of JD Grains Center. Summons was duly served
upon Deyto but not upon Ang who had absconded.
May the case proceed without summons being
served,upon Ang?

A.

No. Until the summons has been served on Ang, the
case cannot proceed since Ang is an indispensable
party to the case; Pua alleged in his complaint that
the respondents are co-owners of JD Grains Center.
A court must acquire jurisdiction over the person of
indispensable parties before it can validly pronounce
judgments personal to the parties. The absence of an
indispensable party renders all subsequent actions of
the court null and void for want of authority to act, not
only as to the absent parties but even as to those
present. Summons by publication must be effected against
Ang. (Pua v. Deyto, 26 November 2012, Brion, J.).

Q.

Landowner filed an action for reconveyance of
land against the developer Spring Homes, which
had transferred by way of an absolute deed of
sale the land to the spouses Lumbres. Summons
was duly served on the spouses Lumbres but not
on Spring Homes. The trial court dismissed the
action on the ground that summons was not served
on Spring Homes, which is an indispensable party.
Did the trial court correctly dismiss the case?

A.

No. In action for recovery of possession of land
against Spring Homes (transferor) & Sps. Lumbres
(transferee), the transferor is not an indispensable
party. The reason is that having transferred all its
interest in the land to the spouses Lumbres, Spring
154

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Homes did not stand to be directly affected or
necessarily prejudiced by the judgment that may be
rendered in the case. (Spring Homes v. Tablada, 23
Jan 2017, Peralta, J.)
Q.

0 sold a parcel of land to B. Subsequently 0
sold and delivered the same parcel of land to C,
who filed with the RTC an application for original
registration of the land. The application was
granted and an original certificate of title (OCT)
was issued in the name of C. B filed an action for
reconveyance against C. Judgment was rendered
in favor of B. On appeal, C argued that B should
have impleaded the seller 0 who is an indispensable
party. Is C's argument correct?

A.

No, C's argument is not correct. The property owners
against whom the action for reconveyance is filed are
indispensable parties. No relief can be had, and the
court cannot render a valid judgment, without them.
However, the seller of the property is not an
indispensable party. The reason is that when the
seller has sold and delivered the property to the buyer,
he has lost any right or interest over the property.
(Aboitiz v. Po, 5 June 2017, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action with the RTC for
cancellation of title of Pedro Santos. The
certificate of title is registered in the name of "Pedro
Santos, married to Susan Santos." Summons was
served by publication since Pedro Santos was a
non-resident. The court ruled in favor of the plaintiff.
The son of Susan Santos contends that the
judgment is null and void because an indispensable
party, Susan Santos, was not impleaded in the
action for cancellation. Is the son correct?

155

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. In an action for cancellation of title filed against
the registered owner, his wife is not an indispensable
party if land is registered as "Husband, married to
Wife." In the absence of any showing that the land
was acquired during the marriage, the presumption is
that the land is the exclusive property of the husband.
(See Onstott v. Upper-Tagpos Neighborhood Assoc.,
14 Sep 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

Q.

Medical students of St. Luke's College of
Medicine perished in a fire in a community clinic
wherein they were undergoing medical clerkship.
The parents sued St. Luke's for damages after a
showing that the fire was caused by faulty wiring
in the community clinic. The RTC dismissed the
complaint on the ground that the Municipality of
Cabiao, which owned the community clinic and
had a memorandum of intent with St Luke's for
the construction and operation of the community
clinic, was not impleaded. The RTC held that the
municipality was an indispensable party without
whom no final determination can be had of the
action. Was the dismissal correct?

A.

No. The municipality is not an indispensable party.
Under 57 R3, in order to be an indispensable party,
the party should be one without whom no final
determination can be had of an action. Here the
parents premise St. Luke's liability on its contractual
obligation to their students and, certainly, complete
relief and a final judgment can be arrived at by
weighing the claims and defenses of the parents and
St. Luke's, without need of evaluating the claims and
defenses of the Municipality of Cabiao. If at all, the
Municipality of Cabiao is a necessary party whose
non-inclusion in the case at bar shall not prevent the
court from proceeding with the action. (St. Luke's
College of Medicine v. Perez, 28 Sep 2016, Perez, J.)
156

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
entered into a
Q. Haus Talk Inc. (HTI) as seller,
in favor of
contract to sell (CTS) over a realty
d its rights
igne
ass
r
respondents spouses. HTI late
). Under
(PVB
k
Ban
under the CTS to Phil. Veterans
uired all
acq
the deed of assignment, the assignee
legal title
the rights of the assignor except for
by HTI.
over the properties which was retained
the CTS
PVB served a notarial cancellation of
pay the
to
re
failu
r
thei
upon the respondents for
filed an
then
PVB
.
consideration under the CTS
ents.
ond
resp
the
action for unlawful detainer against
t
men
judg
The MTC ruled in favor of PVB and the
the
r
eve
was affirmed on appeal by the RTC. How
and remanded
CA on appeal set aside the decision
leaded. The
the case to the MTC for HTI to be imp
y since it
part
ble
nsa
spe
CA held that HTI is an indi
deed of
the
to
t
had retained legal title pursuan
y?
part
ble
assignment Is HTI an indispensa
the subject
A. No. That HTI retained ownership over
ent did not
property pursuant to the Deed of Assignm
case. An
mean that it is an indispensable party to the
in the
est
inter
an
has
who
indispensable party is one
ble
para
inse
is
h
whic
subject matter of the controversy
a
that
and
from the interest of the other parties,
ting
affec
out
final adjudication cannot be made with
such interest.
wful
Here, the only issue in the instant unla
has
ies
part
ting
litiga
the
detainer suit is who between
ect
subj
the
the better right to possess de facto
erty,
prop
ect
property. Thus, HTI's interest in the subj
completely
as one holding legal title thereto, is
CTS, which
separable from PVB's rights under the
contract
include the cancellation or rescission of such
on of
essi
poss
al
actu
and resultantly, the recovery of
eed
proc
can
ts
the subject property. Hence, the cour
nts
onde
resp
to determine who between PVB and the
157

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
have a better right to the possession of the subject
property and complete relief can be had even without
HTI's participation. (Phil. Veterans Bank v. Sabado,
30 August 2017, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

Give examples of necessary parties.

A.
1) A joint obligor in a joint obligation.
2) A transferee pendente lite. (S19 R3). The failure
to implead or include the transferee pendente lite
would not affect the validity of the judgment.
3) In an action to foreclose a real estate mortgage,
the junior mortgagees or lienholders are necessary
parties.
4) In a case of a co-owned property and one of the
co-owners files an ejectment suit, the other coowners are necessary parties insofar as the filing
of the complaint is concerned. Thus there is no
need for the other co-owners to join the plaintiff.
(1 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE
RULES OF COURT 189 [1979 ed.]).18
Q.

A and B brought an action to annul a deed of sale
over a piece of land and to recover the land from
D, in whose favor the deed was executed by X,
father of A and B, already deceased, on the
ground that the deed of sale was forged. In his
answer, D denied that the signature of X was forged.
Finding that the signature of X was forged, the

18A rule of thumb to determine whether a person is a necessary party is to
ask the question: would not impleading the person in the case leave open the
possibility of future litigation arising out of the transaction or occurrence subject
of the case? If the answer is yes, that person is a necessary party. Thus leaving
out a joint debtor from a suit would leave open the possibility that the plaintiff
would in the future sue the joint debtor for his share of the debt.

158

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
court ordered the deed of sale annulled, and the
land returned to A and B. On appeal, D raised the
question that the decision is null and void because
the land in question is owned in common, by
succession, by A and B and Y and Z as their
brothers, who however did not join in the action
as plaintiffs; hence, the action was not brought by
all the parties in interest and there was nonjoinder of indispensable parties, for which reason
the action should have been dismissed. May the
contention of D be sustained? Reasons. (79 Bar Q1).
No, the contention of D may not be sustained. In an
action to recover co-owned property, one co-owner
alone may bring the action pursuant to Article 487 of
the Civil Code which provides that any one of the coowners may bring an action for ejectment. The Supreme
Court has held that Article 487 applies as well to an
accion publiciana and to an accion reivindicatoria.
One co-owner may suffice to file the suit since it is
presumed to have been filed for the benefit of all the
co-owners. (2 EDGARDO PARAS, CIVIL CODE
ANNO. 269 [11th ed., 1984]). Y and Z are merely
necessary parties and thus the judgment of the court
is valid. (Moran, supra). Moreover nonjoinder of party
is not a ground for dismissal.
Quirino and Milagros are co-owners of a credit
extended to the spouses Carandang. Quirino sued
the spouses Carandang. The spouses Carandang
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that an
indispensable party, Milagros, was not impleaded
as a co-plaintiff. The spouses Carandang contend
that a co-owner is an indispensable party. Should
the motion to dismiss be granted?

159

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. In an action to recover co-owned property, one
co-owner alone may bring the action pursuant to
Article 487 of the Civil Code which provides that any
one of the co-owners may bring an action for
ejectment. The Supreme Court stated that Article 487
applies to actions to recover personal property. One
co-owner may suffice to file the suit since it is
presumed to have been filed for the benefit of all the
co-owners. (Carandang v. Heirs of de Guzman, G.R.
No. 160347, 29 November 2006). Milagros is merely
a necessary party. (Moran, supra). Moreover nonjoinder
of party is not a ground for dismissal.

Q.

D, E, and F are solidarily indebted to P for
P9,000,000. P files a collection case against D
only. Are E and F indispensable parties?

A.

No. In a solidary obligation, a creditor may sue all,
several, or just one of the solidary debtors. (Cerezo v.
Tuazon, G.R. 141538, 23 Mar 2004).

Q.

In an action to foreclose a real estate mortgage, is
the junior mortgagee an indispensable party?

A.

No, he is merely a necessary party. The mortgage
may be foreclosed without impleading him and
without prejudice to his equity of redemption.

Q.

Is a solidary co-debtor a necessary party?

A.

No, because complete relief is available as to one codebtor. (Cerezo v. Tuazon, G.R. 141538, 23 March 2004).

Q.

Is a joint debtor a necessary party?

A.

Yes. A creditor may sue one joint debtor for his share
although necessarily that would not afford complete
relief to him. (1 Moran 189).

160

RULES
Parties To Civil Actions
D, E, and F are jointly indebted to C in the amount
of P9,000,000. C files a collection suit against D
for the amount of P3,000,000. The complaint
alleges that D, E, and F are jointly indebted to C
but that C is only suing D in order to avoid
additional factual issues which would just prolong
the trial. D files a motion to dismiss on the ground
that C did not implead E and F.
a) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
Assume that the motion to dismiss was not
granted. The court however ordered C to implead
E and F.
b) Is the order of the court proper?
c) Assume that C did not comply with the court
order. May the court dismiss the case?
Assume that the court continued trying the
case despite C's non-compliance with its order.
The court rendered judgment in favor of C as
against D for P3,000,000. The judgment became
final. Subsequently C filed a case against E for
collection of P3,000,000.
d) If you were E's counsel, what would you do?

a) No, the motion to dismiss should not be granted.
A joint debtor is not an indispensable party but
only a necessary party. Besides non-inclusion of
a party is not a ground for dismissal of an action.
(811 R3).
b) Yes. Under 89 R3, if the court finds the reason for
the omission of a necessary party unmeritorious,
it may order the inclusion of the omitted necessary
party if jurisdiction over his person may be obtained.
161

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
c) No, the court may not order the dismissal of the
case. Under S9 R3, it is not provided that the
failure to comply with the court's order without
justifiable cause shall be a ground for dismissal;
rather the pleader is deemed to have waived his
claim against the necessary parties not included.
d)

I would file an answer raising the affirmative
defense that C's claim has been waived. (S5[b] R6).

Q.

A passenger bus collided with a tricycle resulting
in damage to the tricycle and injuries to its driver.
The Plaintiff tricycle driver filed a case for damages
against the bus owner alone but did not implead
the bus driver as defendant. Judgment was rendered
in favor of the Plaintiff. The defendant bus owner
argues that the judgment was void for failure to
implead the bus driver as an indispensable party.
Is the judgment void?

A.

No, the judgment is not void.
The Supreme Court has held in a similar case
that the liability of the bus owner and the driver is
solidary since they are joint tort-feasors. The creditor
may proceed against all or just one of the solidary
debtors. Where the obligation of the parties is solidary,
neither of the parties is indispensable and the other is
not even a necessary party because complete relief is
available from either. (Cerezo v. Tuazon, G.R. 141538,
23 March 2004).

Q.

Filmarco mortgaged its heavy equipment to the
DBP. DBP assigned the mortgage to APT.
Subsequently P filed a suit against Filmarco for
recovery of a parcel of land in which the mortgaged
equipment was located. A final and executory
judgment was rendered in favor of P. The APT
then filed an action to annul the judgment. It
162

RULE 3
Pates To Civil Actions
argued that it was an indispensable party and
should have been impleaded in the suit filed by P
against Filmarco. Should the judgment be annulled?
. A_

No. The mere fact that the recovery of the land would
necessarily entail the removal of the equipment
mortgaged to APT does not make the latter an
indispensable party. APT's rights can easily be resolved
in a separate action it can file against Filmarco.
(Republic v. Heirs of Magdato, 340 SCRA 115 [20001).

Q. P filed an action with the RTC to nullify the TCT of
A. There was an existing registered mortgage
over the TCT in favor of Metrobank. The bank was
however not impleaded in the cancellation suit
The court rendered judgment cancelling the TCT.
The judgment became final and executory. Can
the bank file an action to annul the judgment of
the RTC? If so in what court should the bank file
the action?
Yes. In a suit to nullify an existing TCT with an
annotated REM, the mortgagee is an indispensable
party, since the mortgagee's rights over the property
would no longer be known and respected by third
parties. The non-joinder of the mortgagee deprived
the trial court of jurisdiction to pass upon the controversy.
(Metropolitan Bank & Trust Company v. Alejo, 364
SCRA 813 [20011).
The bank should file the action with the Court of
Appeals which has the original and exclusive jurisdiction
to annul judgments of the RTC.
Q. An impostor (Oliver 1) mortgaged the property of
Oliver 2 to Chinabank misrepresenting that she is
the real Oliver. Oliver 2 filed an action in the RTC
against the bank seeking to nullify the mortgage
on the ground that she's the real Oliver. Oliver 2
163

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
did not implead Oliver 1. Chinabank filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground of non-joinder of an
indispensable party. The trial court denied the
motion to dismiss. Instead of filing an answer,
Chinabank filed a special civil action with the CA
to set aside the Judge's order denying its motion
to dismiss. Meanwhile for failure of Chinabank to
answer within the reglementary period it was
declared in default by the trial court and Oliver 2
allowed to present evidence ex parte.
a) Did the trial court properly deny Chinabank's
motion to dismiss?
b) Did the trial court properly declare Chinabank
in default?
A.
a) Yes. The SC held that Oliver 1 is not an
indispensable party as the case can proceed to
judgment so long as Oliver 2 can prove that she's
the real Oliver. Further, a declaration of the
mortgage's nullity will not necessarily prejudice
Oliver 1 as the bank still needs to initiate proceedings
to go after the mortgagor, who in turn can raise
other defenses pertinent to the two of them.
Hence it is not 37 R3 requiring compulsory
joinder of parties which applies but 311 R3, which
provides that non-joinder of parties is not a
ground for dismissal.
b) Yes. The filing of a petition for certiorari under
Rule 65 does not suspend the running of the
period within which a defendant should answer
the complaint unless a temporary restraining order
or preliminary injunction was issued. (China Bank
v. Oliver, 390 SCRA 263 [2002]).

164

RULES
Parties To Civil Actions
P filed with the RTC an action to annul the
issuance of an OCT registered in the name of A
(deceased). P did not however implead the heirs
of A. A judgment in favor of P annulling the OCT
was rendered by the RTC. The heirs of A then filed
with the RTC of Lapu-Lapu City an action to annul
the judgment nullifying the OCT.
a) In an action to annul an OCT issued in the
name of the registered owners, are the heirs
of such registered owner indispensable parties?
b) Should the RTC grant the action to annul the
judgment?
A.
a) Yes. The cancellation of the OCT would certainly
strip them of their rights over the property.
b) No. The action to annul the judgment should be
filed with the CA which has jurisdiction over such
cases. (Nen,/ v. Leyson, 339 SCRA 232 [2000]).
Q. P files an action with the RTC of Las Pinas City,
Branch 170, to recover a parcel of land co-owned
by D. P however did not implead in his complaint
E and F, the co-owners of the land. The RTC
rendered a judgment in favor of P ordering the
reconveyance of the land to P. No appeal having
been filed the judgment became final and
executory on 10 January 2004 and was entered in
the book of entries of judgment on the same day.
E and F learned of the judgment on 10 March 2004
and on 15 March 2004 they filed a petition for
relief from the judgment with Branch 170 of the
Las Pinas RTC. P filed an answer seeking the
dismissal of the petition for relief.

165

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) If you were the judge, would you dismiss the
petition for relief?
b) If the dismissal of the petition for relief was
proper, what was the appropriate action that E
and F should have availed of and in what
court should they have filed the same?
A
a) Yes. The petition for relief cannot be availed of by
E and F since they were not parties to the RTC
case. (Si R38).
b)

E and F should file an action for the annulment of
the RTC decision with the Court of Appeals.
(Sec. 9(2), BP 129) A decision rendered without
an indispensable party having been impleaded is
a nullity.

Q.

Is the non-joinder of necessary or indispensable
parties a ground for a motion to dismiss?

A.

No. Non-joinder of necessary or indispensable parties
is not a ground for a motion to dismiss. Remedy of
the opposing party is to move that the Court order the
plaintiff to implead the indispensable party and if the
other side fails to comply then to move to dismiss
under Section 3 Rule 17. (Vesagas v. CA, 371 SCRA
508 [2001]). The court itself may sua sponte direct the
plaintiff to include the indispensable party. Failure to
comply is a ground for dismissal under 33 R17. (Uy v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 157065, 1 July 2006).

Q.

7J, a service contractor, provided manpower services
for Lotte Philippines Inc. Pursuant to this, the
private respondents were assigned to provide
janitorial, maintenance, and utility services to
Lotte. Lotte dispensed with the services of
private respondents. The private respondents
166

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
filed a labor case against Lotte and 7J. The labor
arbiter ruled that the private respondents' employer
was 7J not Lotte. NLRC affirmed. The private
respondents filed a petition for certiorari with the
CA against NLRC and Lotte, insisting that Lotte
is their employer but they did not implead 7J. CA
ruled that Lotte was the employer not 7J and held
Lotte solidarily liable with 7J. May the CA's
decision be set aside?
A.

•

Yes. 7J the service contractor is an indispensable
party. It is a party in interest because it will be
affected by the outcome of the case. The CA did not
acquire jurisdiction over 7J. No final ruling can be had
without impleading 7J. (Lotte Phil. Co., Inc. v. Dela
Cruz, 28 July 05).

Q. What is a nominal party?
A
•

A nominal or pro forma party is one who is joined as a
plaintiff or defendant, not because such party has any
real interest in the subject matter or because any
relief is demanded, but merely because the technical
rules of pleadings require the presence of such party
on the record. (Samaniego v. Aguila, 27 June 2000,
Mendoza, J.). An example is the judge, court, or
quasi-judicial agency or officer whose acts or omissions
are the subject of a petition for certiorari or prohibition
under S4 R65. While required to be impleaded under
S4 R65, the judge, court, or quasi-judicial agency or
officer incur no liability thereunder and cannot appear
in the R65 proceeding.

Q. In an action for cancellation of a transfer
certificate of title, is the register of deeds an
indispensable party?

167

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. The RD is merely a nominal party who does not
need to participate in the proceedings to adjudicate
the rights of the plaintiff and defendant. The failure to
implead the RD is not fatal to the case. (De Leon v.
Chu, 2 September 2015).

Q.

Who is an unwilling co-plaintiff?

A.

An unwilling co-plaintiff is any party who should be
joined as plaintiff but whose consent to such joinder
cannot be obtained.

Q.

What is the remedy if there is an unwilling coplaintiff?

A.

He may be made a defendant. The reason for making
him a defendant shall be stated in the complaint.

Q.

Give examples of an unwilling co-plaintiff.

A.

B and C are co-owners of a parcel of land the
possession of which has been seized by X. B wants
to file an action to recover possession against X but C
does not want to join B as he does not want to bother
with the expenses of litigation. B may file an action
for recovery of possession against X and implead C
as defendant for the purpose of recovering from him
his share of the costs of litigation. (J. ROBERT
HARRIS & ELLEN MACKLIN, THE INVOLUNTARY
PLAINTIFF: HANDLING THE PROBLEM OF THE
UNWILLING PLAINTIFF, 17 South Texas Law Journal
399). The reason for making C a defendant, that is,
his unwillingness to join B and in order to make him
share in the costs of litigation, should be indicated in
the complaint.
Where an executor or administrator is unwilling
or refuses to bring a suit for the recovery of the
property or rights of the deceased, the heirs may bring
the suit and implead the executor or administrator as
168

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
a co-defendant. (Borromeo v. Borromeo, 98 Phil. 432;
2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 76 [9th rev. ed.; 3 rd printing]).
Q. Whose option is it to implead the unwilling coplaintiff?
A.

The original plaintiff. He cannot be compelled on the
mere representation of the defendant to implead anyone.
(Emata v. IAC, G.R. No. L-72714, 29 June 1989).

SEC. 12. Class suit
Q. What is a class suit?
A
•

A class suit is a suit brought by or defended by a
representative member or members of a large group
of persons on behalf of all the members of the group.

Q. What are the requisites of a class suit?
A

•

The requisites of a class suit are:
1)

The subject matter of the controversy is one
of common or general interest to the members of
a group.

2)

The persons who are members of the group are
so numerous that it is impracticable to join all as
parties.

Q. What shall the court do if it finds that the requisites
of a class suit have been met?
' A.
•

The court shall appoint a number of the group which it
finds sufficiently numerous and representative as to
fully protect the interests of all concerned to sue or
defend for the benefit of the group.

169

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a group member who was not appointed as a
representative intervene in the class suit?

A.

Yes. Any party in interest shall have the right to
intervene to protect his individual interest. (S12 R3).

Q.

Newsweek magazine published an article titled,
"An island of fear," which wrote of alleged abuses
committed by sugarcane plantation owners against
their workers. The sugarcane planters filed a class
suit for libel and damages against Newsweek.
Was the filing of a class suit proper?

A.

No. Each sugarcane planter has a separate and
distinct reputation in the community; hence the subject
matter of the controversy is not of common or general
interest. Otherwise put the interest must be in the
"subject matter of the controversy" and not merely in
the legal question involved. (Newsweek Inc. v.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 142 SCRA 170 [1986]).

Q.

Various persons claiming to be landowners filed a
class suit against Araneta Incorporated claiming
that Araneta had illegally deprived them of
possession of their lands. Was the filing of a class
suit proper?

A.

No. Each landowner has a separate and distinct kind
of interest, i.e., the size of the land, how title acquired,
etc. Hence there is no common or general interest in
the subject matter of the controversy. (Subo ng Sayan,
Inc. v. Araneta, Inc., 72 SCRA 347 [1976]).

Q.

An airplane carrying 200 passengers crashed
somewhere in the jungles of Agusan. All the
passengers and crew perished. Twenty relatives
of the fatalities filed for themselves and in behalf
of the relatives of all those who perished in the
mishap a class suit for damages totaling P5 Million
170

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
against the airline. The propriety of the class suit
is questioned by the defendant. Resolve the
issue. (91 Bar Q4)
A

The class suit is not proper.
Under S12 R3, a class suit is proper when the
subject matter of the controversy is of common or
general interest.
Here the subject mailer is not of common or
general interest since each plaintiff has a separate
and distinct claim for damages. Otherwise put there
must be identity of relief/s sought.

Q. Four hundred residents of Barrio Ramos initiated
a class action suit through Albert, a former mayor
of the town, to recover damages sustained due to
their exposure to toxic waste and fumes emitted
by the cooking gas plant of Top Fuel Gas Corporation
located in the town. Is the class suit proper?
A

The class suit is not proper.
Under S12 R3, a class suit is proper when the
subject matter of the controversy is of common or
general interest.
Here the subject matter is not of common or
general interest since each plaintiff has a separate
and distinct claim for damages.

Q. In December 1987, the MV Dona Paz sank after a
collision with another vessel, MT Vector, resulting
in the loss of over 4,000 lives. In January 1988, a
class suit seeking damages of P200,000 to
P400,000 per victim or a total of P1.6 billion was
filed with the RTC against the owners of the ships
involved by 27 named plaintiffs in behalf of the
class of approximately 4,000 heirs of the passengers
who perished. Was the filing of a class suit proper?
171

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. One of the requirements of a class suit is that
"[t]he subject matter of the controversy is one of
common or general interest to the members of a
group." This means that there is only one right or
cause of action pertaining to or belonging in common to
many persons, not separately or severally to distinct
individuals. The object of the suit is to obtain relief for
or against numerous persons as a group or as an
integral entity, and not as separate, distinct individuals
whose rights or liabilities are separate from and
independent of those affecting the others.
On the other hand, if there are many persons
who have distinct, separate rights against the same
party or group of parties, but those rights arise from
the same transaction or series of transactions and
there are common questions of fact or law resulting
therefrom, the former may join as plaintiffs in one
action against the same defendant. This is authorized
by the joinder-of-parties rule in S6 R3.
Hence a class suit is improper is each member
of the group has a separate determinable interest
distinct from that of the others. The relevant rule is
S6 R3. (Re request of the Heirs of the Passengers of
Dona Paz to set aside the Order of Judge B.V.
Chingcuangco, 159 SCRA 263 [1988]).

Q.

If a class suit is not proper, what is the recourse
of the defendant?

A.

The defendant can file an answer raising the affirmative
defense that the plaintiff has no legal capacity to sue.
The reason is that a class suit not being proper, the
plaintiff or plaintiffs has or have no right to sue for the
benefit of the class. (316[d] R16; 312 R3; 1 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 89
[7th rev. ed.]).
172

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q.

Leon, in Manila, sold a quantity of rice for
P500,000 to Luis in Baguio, and shipped the rice
through Rita Transportation. Luis refused to pay
Leon, claiming that the rice was never delivered to
him. Rita Transportation, on the other hand,
claimed that it had delivered the rice to Luis.
Whom should Leon sue? (80 Bar Q1)

A.

Leon should sue both Luis and Rita Transportation.
Under S13 R3, where the plaintiff is uncertain
against who of several persons he is entitled to relief,
he may join any or all of them as defendants in the
alternative, although a right to relief against one may
be inconsistent with a right to relief against the other.
Here Leon is uncertain as to who between Luis
and Rita Transportation is liable to him. Hence he can
sue both as alternative defendants.

Q.

May a defendant whose name or identity is unknown
be sued?

A.

Yes. Whenever the identity or name of a defendant is
unknown, he may be sued as the unknown owner,
heir, devisee, or by such other designation as the
case may require. However when his identity or true
name is discovered, the pleading must be amended
accordingly. (S14 R3).

Q.

May an entity without juridical personality sue as
a plaintiff?

A.

No. Under Si R3 only natural or juridical persons or entities
authorized by law may be parties in a civil action.

Q.

May an entity without juridical personality be sued
as a defendant?

A.

Yes when it has entered into a transaction with the
plaintiff.
173

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In the complaint is it necessary to state the names
of the persons composing the entity?

A.

No. They may be sued under the name by which they are
generally or commonly known. However in the answer
of such defendant, the names and addresses of the
persons composing said entity must all be revealed.

SEC. 16. Death of party; duty of counsel
Q.

What is the duty of a party's counsel, in case of
the death of the party?

A.

If a party to a pending action dies and the claim is not
thereby extinguished, it shall be the duty of his
counsel: (1) to inform the court within 30 days after
such death of the fact thereof, and (2) to give the
name and address of his legal representative or
representatives. Failure of counsel to comply with this
duty shall be a ground for disciplinary action.

Q.

When would the death of the party in a pending
action extinguish the claim?

A.

The general rule is that a person's rights and
obligations are transmissible upon his death to his
heirs. However, where the rights and obligations of a
party are intransmissible by law or by stipulation or
are purely personal, the party's death would result in
the extinguishment of the claim. Examples are the
right to hold public office, the right to exercise a
profession or vocation, rights and obligations arising
from agency, and the right of a usufructuary.
The question as to whether an action survives or
not depends on the nature of the action and the
damage sued for. In the causes of action which
survive, the wrong complained [of] affects primarily
and principally property and property rights, the
174

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
injuries to the person being merely incidental, while in
the causes of action which do not survive, the
injury complained of is to the person the property and
rights of property affected being incidental. (Bonilla v.
Barcena, 71 SCRA 491, 495-496 [1976]).

a

Pacific Rehaus Corporation (PRC) entered into a
contract to sell over a parcel of land with Bautista
for a consideration of P7,300,000. However
despite receipt of P6,600,000 and repeated offers
to pay the balance in full, Bautista refused to
execute the deed of absolute sale in favor of PRC;
thus PRC filed with the RTC an action for specific
performance against Bautista to compel the latter
to execute the deed of absolute sale in favor of
PRC and to deliver the certificate of title to it.
Prior to the pre-trial, Bautista died. His counsel
informed the court of Bautista's death but could
not give the names of Bautista's heirs and their
addresses for lack of personal knowledge. Thus
the RTC ordered PRC to procure the appointment
of an executor or administrator for the estate of
Bautista pursuant to 516 R3.
On a special civil action for certiorari to the
Court of Appeals, the CA ordered the dismissal of
the action for specific performance. The CA held
that the complaint for specific performance was
an action in personam since its object was to
compel Bautista to perform his obligations under
the contract to sell and hence, rendered him
pecuniarily liable. As such, the obligations in the
contract attached to him alone and did not burden
the subject property. Since the action was founded
on a personal obligation, it did not survive
Bautista's death. Hence, the CA concluded that
the dismissal of the complaint by reason thereof,

175

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
and not a resort to S16 R3 was the proper course
of action. Was the dismissal the proper course
of action?
A.

No. 816 R3 allows the substitution of a party-litigant
who dies during the pendency of a case by his heirs,
provided that the claim subject of said case is not
extinguished by his death. If the claim in an action
affects property and property rights, then the action
survives the death of a party-litigant.
Here, although the CA correctly pointed out that
PRC's action is one for specific performance, a closer
perusal of PRC's complaint reveals that it actually
prays for the delivery of ownership of the subject land
through Bautista's execution of a deed of sale and the
turnover of the certificate of title in its favor. This
shows that the primary objective and nature of the
complaint is to recover the subject property itself and
thus, is deemed to be a real action, which affects
property and property rights over the subject land.
Therefore, the death of a party-litigant, i.e., Bautista,
did not render the case dismissible on such ground,
but rather, calls for the proper application of 816 R3
on substitution of party-litigants. (Pacific Rehouse
Corp. v. Ngo, 12 April 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, .1).19

Q.

Pedro filed an action against Dencio, who he
alleges to be his father, to claim the status of the
legitimate child. During the pendency of the case,
Pedro died. May the heirs of Pedro be substituted
in the action?

19 What is actually material is whether the action was purely personal or
not. Since the action involved property rights, it is one which survives, regardless
of whether it was one for specific performance or a real action. The error of the
CA was to confound the concept of action in personam with action which is
purely personal.

176

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
A.

Yes. Under Article 173 of the Family Code, the action
to claim legitimacy already commenced by the child
shall survive notwithstanding the death of either or
both of the parties. This action is among those that
survive under the Revised Rules of Court. ALICIA V.
SEMPIO-DIY, HANDBOOK ON THE FAMILY CODE
OF THE PHILIPPINES 279 (1995 ed., 1999 reprint).

Q. Does the duty under S16 R3 apply to death of a
party in cases pending appeal?
A.

Yes. (Riviera Filipinas V. CA, G.R. 117355, 5 Apr 02).

Q. What is the purpose of notifying or informing the
court of the death of a party?
A_

So that the court may forthwith order the named legal
representative(s) to appear and be substituted for the
deceased party within a period of 30 days from notice.

Q. Who is the legal representative of the deceased
party?
A.

The executor or administrator appointed by the
probate court, or if none, the heirs of the deceased.
(JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE 13 [1997], citing Lawas v. Court of
Appeals, 146 SCRA 173)

Q. What if there is no executor or administrator
appointed by the probate court?

A.

The court has two options:
One. The court may simply allow the heirs of the
deceased to be substituted for the deceased, without
requiring the appointment of an executor or
administrator, and the court may appoint a guardian
ad litem for the minor heirs.

177

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Two. The court may order the opposing party,
within a specified time, to procure the appointment of
an executor2° or administrator for the estate of the
deceased and the latter shall immediately appear for
and in behalf of the deceased as provided for in the
fourth paragraph of S16 R3.
It is submitted that the second option is only
available where there are pending probate proceedings
as it is the probate court which will issue the letters
testamentary or letters of administration. Where there
are no pending probate proceedings, the court should
simply allow the heirs to be substituted for the
deceased. To order the opposing party to initiate
probate proceedings would be unduly burdensome
upon him and would result in unnecessary delay.
Q.

What if no legal representative is named by the
counsel for the deceased party, or if the one so
named shall fail to appear within the specified
period?

A.

The court may order the opposing party to procure the
appointment of an executor or administrator for the
estate of the deceased and the latter shall immediately
appear for and on behalf of the deceased. The court
charges in procuring such appointment, if defrayed by
the opposing party, may be recovered as cost. (S16
R3, 4th paragraph).

Q.

Loreto San Juan executed a will naming Oscar
Casa as one of the devisees. Upon Loreto's death
a petition for the probate of his will was filed with
the RTC. During the pendency of the probate
proceedings, Oscar died intestate. The Aquino

20There is a defect in the phraseology of S16 R3 when it speaks of
"appointment of an executor." An executor is not appointed but is named by the
testator in his will. The more precise terminology would be "issuance of letters
testatmentary or of administration."

178

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
law firm entered its appearance as counsel of
Federico Casa Jr. who claimed to be one of the
heirs of Oscar Casa and their representative. The
probate court allowed the appearance of the
counsel and the substitution of Oscar Casa by
Federico Casa Jr., who had been designated by
the other heirs as their representative in the
probate court. Epifanio San Juan Jr. opposed the
appearance and the substitution on the ground
that under Lawas v. Court of Appeals, 146 SCRA
173 (1986), priority is given to the legal
representative of the deceased, (i.e., the executor
or administrator) and that it is only in case of
unreasonable delay in the appointment of an
executor or administrator, or in case where the
heirs resort to an extrajudicial settlement of the
estate that the court may adopt the alternative of
allowing the heirs to be substituted for the
deceased. Was the substitution of the deceased
Oscar by Federico Casa Jr. proper?
Yes. The second paragraph of 316 R3 of the 1997
Rules of Civil Procedure is quite clear that the heirs of
the deceased may be allowed to be substituted for the
deceased without requiring the appointment of an
executor or administrator. Hence the pronouncement
in Lawas that priority should be given to the
deceased's legal representative in substitution is no
longer good case law. (San Juan v. Cruz, G.R. No.
167321, 31 July 2006).
Q. Pedro filed an action to recover possession and
ownership of a parcel of land against the Petitioners.
During the pendency of the case Pedro died but
no substitution by his heirs was effected. The trial
court ruled in favor of the Plaintiff. Petitioners assert
that the RTC's decision was invalid for lack of

179

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
jurisdiction, since the heirs were not substituted
for the deceased Pedro. Was the trial court's
decision valid?
A.

Yes. Notwithstanding the general rule in S16 R3, a
formal substitution of heirs is not necessary when
they themselves voluntarily appear, participate in the
case, and present evidence in behalf of the deceased.
Strictly speaking, the rule on the substitution of heirs
is not a matter of jurisdiction but a requirement of
due process. Thus when due process is not violated,
as when the right of the representative or heir is
recognized and protected, non-compliance or belated
compliance with the Rules cannot affect the validity of
a promulgated decision. Mere failure to substitute for
a deceased plaintiff is not a sufficient ground to nullify
a trial court's decision. The alleging party must prove
that there was undeniable violation of due process.
(De la Cruz v. Joaquin, 28 July 05) Court compared
this case with Chittick v. CA, 166 SCRA 219.

Q.

Paulo filed an action to recover possession of a
parcel of land against Deng. During the pendency
of the case, Deng, who was without counsel, died.
Paulo advised the court of Deng's death and filed
a motion for his substitution but the court did not
issue an order for the substitution of Deng. The
heirs possessed the land. Judgment was rendered
in favor of Paulo. May Paulo enforce the judgment
against the heirs?

A.

No. The failure to substitute the heirs for the
deceased defendant deprived the court of jurisdiction
to enforce its decision against them. The rights of the
heirs of Deng to due process were violated when they
were not given the chance to defend their side in
court. Hence the judgment cannot be enforced against
the heirs of Deng. (See Ferreria v. Vda. de Gonzalez,
G.R. No. L-11567,17 July 1958).
180

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q. In the preceding problem, would your answer be
the same if the heirs voluntarily appeared in court
and participated in the proceedings therein?
No, my answer would not be the same. The voluntary
appearance of the heirs and their participation in the
proceedings therein cured the defect of lack of
substitution. After all the heirs were now given their
day in court.
Paulo filed an action to recover possession of a
parcel of land against Deng. During the pendency
of the case, Deng died. Deng's counsel failed to
inform the court of Deng's death. The heirs
possessed the land. Judgment was rendered in
favor of Paulo. May Paulo enforce the judgment
against the heirs?
A.

Yes. Here Deng's counsel failed to inform the court of
his client's death. Since the trial court was not
informed of petitioner's death, it may not be faulted for
proceeding to render judgment without ordering his
substitution. Its judgment is thus valid and binding
upon Deng's legal representatives or successors-ininterest, insofar as his interest in the property subject
of the action is concerned. (See Carabeo v. Dingco,
G.R. No. 190823, 4 April 2011; Saligumba v. Palanog,
G.R. No. 143365, 4 December 2008; Florendo v.
Coloma, G.R. No. L-60544, 19 May 1984). This case
should be distinguished from Ferreria where the court
was properly informed of the death of a party but
failed to issue an order of substitution.

Q. P filed an action for quieting of title with damages
against D. During the pendency of the case, a
notice of hearing sent to D was returned with the
notation "Party-Deceased." D's counsel still
continued to appear for D and did not inform the
court of D's death. Judgment was rendered in
181

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
favor of P ordering D to vacate the land and return
possession to P. The heirs of D, who are now in
possession, contend that the judgment was void
since there was no substitution. Are they correct?
A.

No. The duty of the court to order the legal
representative to appear arises only upon proper
notice. The notation "Party-Deceased" on the unserved
notices could not be the "proper notice" contemplated
by the rule. As the trial court could not be expected to
know or take judicial notice of the death of a party
without the proper manifestation from counsel, the
trial court was well within its jurisdiction to proceed as
it did with the case. Moreover, there is no showing that
the court's proceedings were tainted with irregularities.
It is the duty of counsel for the deceased to
inform the court of the death of his client. The failure
of counsel to comply with his duty under Section 16 to
inform the court of the death of his client and the nonsubstitution of such party will not invalidate the
proceedings and the judgment thereon if the action
survives the death of such party. The decision
rendered shall bind the party's successor-in-interest. The
rules operate on the presumption that the attorney for
the deceased party is in a better position than the
attorney for the adverse party to know about the
death of his client and to inform the court of the name
and address of his legal representative. (Saligumba v.
Palanog, G.R. No. 143365, 4 December 2008).

Q.

A filed a complaint for the recovery of ownership
of land against B who was represented by her
counsel X. In the course of the trial, B died.
However, X failed to notify the court of B's death.
The court proceeded to hear the case and rendered
judgment against B. After the judgment became
final, a writ of execution was issued against C,
who being B's sole heir, acquired the property.
182

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
1) If you were counsel of C, what course of action
would you take?
2)

Did the failure of counsel X to inform the
court of B's death constitute direct contempt?
(98 Bar Q6)

1) If I were the counsel of C, I would file a motion to
set aside the writ of execution.
The Supreme Court has held that the failure to
substitute the heirs for the deceased defendant
deprived the court of jurisdiction to enforce its
decision against them as their rights to due process
were violated. (Ferreria v. Vda. de Gonzalez,
G.R. No. L-11567,17 July 1958).21
2) No. Direct contempt is misbehavior in the presence
of or so near a court as to obstruct or interrupt the
proceedings before the same. (S1 R71).
Here the failure to notify the court was not a
misbehavior in the presence of or so near the
court as to obstruct or interrupt the proceedings.
The misbehavior would however amount to
indirect contempt as it was a misbehavior of an
officer of the court in the performance of his
official duties. (53[a] R71).

21The problem asked only what course of action should be taken by C's
onset. The course of action taken is a plausible ground to oppose the
enforcement of the writ of execution. However since X failed to notify the court
.',ad in the light of Florendo V. Coloma and other cases, C's attempt to nullify the
-art should be unsuccessful.

183

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Q

P filed an action for recovery of parcel of land
against D. The trial court dismissed the case
prompting P to appeal to the Court of Appeals.
Pending appeal, P died. The lawyer of P gave
notice to the CA of P's death and moved for the
suspension of the period to file appellant's brief
pending the appointment of an administrator of
P's estate in the probate proceedings. The CA
denied the motion for suspension and dismissed
P's appeal for failure to file the appellant's brief.
Was the CA correct?

A.

No. The death of P extinguished the lawyer-client
relationship and hence the lawyer had no more
authority to act in the case save to notify the court and
give the names and addresses of the legal
representative. The CA should thus have suspended the
period to file the appellant's brief until a legal representative
was appointed and the order of substitution made.
(Vda. de Haberer v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. L42699, 26 May 1981).

Q.

The Court of Appeals dismissed a petition under
R42 on the ground that the notice of death was
belatedly filed by counsel. Was the dismissal
called for?

A.

No. Dismissal of a petition under R42 on the ground
that the notice of death was belatedly filed by counsel
was uncalled for. The same is a ground not for the
dismissal of the case but for disciplinary proceedings
against the counsel. The CA should have ordered the
representatives to appear and be substituted pursuant
to S16 R3 instead of perfunctorily dismissing the
case. (Regalado v. Regalado, 6 June 2011).

184

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
Q. Is S16 R3 applicable to a criminal case?
A

S16 R3 would not apply in case of the death of the
accused during the pendency of the case. Under S4
R111, the death of the accused during the pendency
of the criminal action shall extinguish the civil liability
arising from the crime.
However S16 R3 would be applicable if the civil
action for the recovery of the civil liability arising from
the offense charged was deemed instituted with the
criminal action and it was the offended party who
died, in which case he would be substituted by his
legal representative/s.

Q.

Give the rule regarding death or separation of a
public officer who is a party.

A.

When a public officer is a party in an action in his
official capacity and during its pendency dies, resigns,
or otherwise ceases to hold office, the action may be
continued and maintained by or against his successor
if, within 30 days after the successor takes office or
such time as may be granted by the court, it is
satisfactorily shown to the court by any party that
there is a substantial need for continuing or maintaining
it and that the successor adopts or continues or
threatens to adopt or continue the action of his
predecessor.
Before a substitution is made, the party or officer
to be affected, unless expressly assenting thereto,
shall be given reasonable notice of the application
therefor and accorded an opportunity to be heard.
(817R3).

185

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Shaik filed a petition for mandamus against the
vice-mayor of her town to compel the payment of
her salaries as ex-officio member of the
Sangguniang Bayan. During the pendency of the
mandamus case, Vice-Mayor Teopengco was not
re-elected as vice-mayor. However, Teopengco's
successor as vice-mayor was not substituted in
his place pursuant to S17 R3. May the petition for
mandamus prosper?

A.

No. The judgment in the mandamus case cannot be
enforced against Teopengco for he was no longer the
incumbent vice-mayor nor against his successor who
was not substituted in the case. To enforce the
judgment against the successor would violate his right
to due process. (Del Rosario v. Shaikh, 10 December
2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

What is the effect of a transfer of interest during
the pendency of the litigation?

A.

The action may be continued by or against the
original party, unless the court upon motion directs
the transferee to be substituted in the action or joined
with the original party. (S19 R3).

Q.

Does 519 R3 require the counsel of parties to
report any transfer of interest?

A.

No. While it may be prudent for counsel to report any
transfer of interest, S19 R3 does not require counsel
to do so. (Siguion Reyna Montecillo Ongsiako it
Chionglo-Sia, 3 February 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

Q.

In case of any transfer of interest pendente lite, is
substitution mandatory?

A.

No. Unless the court upon motion directs the
transferee pendente lite to be substituted, the action
is simply continued in the name of the original party.
186

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
The Rules already consider the transferee joined or
substituted in the proceeding a quo, commencing at
the exact moment when the transfer of interest was
perfected between original party-transferor and the
transferee pendente lite. (Siguion Reyna Montecillo
Ongsiako v. Chionglo-Sia, 3 February 2016, Jardeleza,
J.). The transferee is joined or substituted by operation
of law from the exact moment when the transfer of
interest is perfected between the original party and
the transferee. (Natalia Realty, Inc. v. Court of
Appeals, 440 Phil. 1 [2002]). A transferee stands exactly
in the shoes of his predecessor-in-interest, bound by
the proceedings and judgment in the case before the
rights were assigned to him. It is not legally tenable for
a transferee pendente life to still intervene. (Sunfire
Trading Inc. v. Guy, 2 March 2020, Delos Santos, J.).
Sec. 20. Action on contractual money claims
P filed with the RTC an action to collect a loan of
P500,000 from D. P was able to obtain a writ of
attachment and attach a property of D. During the
pendency of the case, D died.
a) Should the case be dismissed?

No, the case should be allowed to continue until
final judgment.
S20 R3 provides that when the action is for
recovery of money arising from contract, express or
implied, and the defendant dies before entry of final
judgment, the action shall not be dismissed but shall
instead be allowed to continue until entry of final
judgment. D should be substituted by his legal
representative or heir. (S16 R3).
187

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
D was substituted by his heir X. P won the case
and no appeal was made by X.
b) May P move for the execution of the judgment
against X?
A.
No. 520 R3 provides that the judgment should
be enforced in the manner especially provided in the
Rules for prosecuting claims against the estate of a
deceased person. P should file the judgment award in
the proceedings for the settlement of the estate of D
as a money claim pursuant to R86.
c) P filed the judgment as a money claim with the
probate court. Does the writ of attachment
entitle P to preference over the other creditors
in respect of the property attached?
A.
Yes. The writ of attachment was not dissolved
since the main action was not dismissed but continues
until final judgment. Hence P is a preferred creditor
over the property attached. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997
RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 15 [1997]; Art.
2242[7], Civil Code).
Q.

P filed with the RTC an action for recovery of
possession of a parcel of land against D. D died
while the case was pending and was substituted
by his heir X who had succeeded D in the possession
of the land. P won the case and no appeal was
made by X. May P move for the execution of the
judgment against X?

188

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions
A

Yes, since this is not among the cases provided for in
S5 R86 which have to be filed with the probate court
as a money claim. The judgment may be enforced
against X since he had been validly substituted for D.

Q. P filed an action for tort against D who had
negligently inflicted injuries upon P. D died during
the pendency of the case and was substituted by
his heir X. Judgment was rendered in favor of P for
P500,000. No appeal was filed by X. May P move
for the execution of the judgment against X?
A.

No. This is a judgment for money against the
decedent and hence has to be filed with the probate
court pursuant to S5 R86.

Q. Pambusco filed a complaint for sum of money
against D. During the pendency of the case, D
died. Intestate proceedings for the settlement of
D's estate commenced and notice to the estate's
creditors was given for them to file their claim
within 6 months from the first publication of the
notice. A month thereafter, on Pambusco's motion,
the administrator of D's estate was substituted for
D in the civil case for collection. The court
rendered judgment in favor of Pambusco and D
appealed. Pambusco filed a contingent claim
covering the judgment award with the probate
court. At the time of the filing of the contingent claim,
the 6-month period for creditors to file their claim
had expired. In due course the judgment in favor
of Pambusco was affirmed on appeal and became
final and thus Pambusco moved that the estate be
ordered to pay Pambusco. The administrator
opposed the motion on the ground that the claim
is time-barred since the contingent claim was filed
beyond the statute of non-claims. Is the claim of
Pambusco time-barred?
189

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Where the deceased was substituted by the
administrator in the civil action involving a money
claim, the estate is deemed to have notice of such
claim. The substitution of the deceased in the civil action
by the administrator or the decedent's representative
is generally considered as equivalent to the presentation
of the claim with the probate court. Under the
circumstances, the filing of the contingent claim ad
abundantiorem cautelam by Pambusco was a mere
formality. (Ignacio v. Pampanga Bus Co., G.R. No. L18936,23 May 1967).

Q.

(a) Plaintiff sued to recover an unpaid loan and
was awarded P333,000 by the Regional Trial Court
of Manila. Defendant did not appeal within the
period allowed by law. He died six days after the
lapse of the period to appeal. Forthwith, a petition
for the settlement of his estate was properly filed
with the Regional Trial Court of Pampanga where
an inventory of his assets was filed and
correspondingly approved. Thereafter, plaintiff
filed a motion for execution with the Manila court,
contending therein that the motion was legally
justified because the defendant died after the
judgment in the Manila court had become final.
Resolve the motion and state your reasons.
(b) Under the same facts as (a), a writ of execution
as issued by the Manila court upon proper
motion three days after the lapse of the period
to appeal. The corresponding levy on execution
was duly effected on defendant's parcel of
land worth P666,000 a day before the defendant
died. Would it be proper, on motion, to lift the
levy on defendant's property? State the reasons
for your answer. (92 Bar Q5).

190

RULE 3
Parties To Civil Actions

(a) I would deny the motion for execution.
Under the Rules on Special Proceedings, a
judgment for money against the decedent must
be filed with the probate court as a money claim
to be enforced in the manner provided for in R86.
(S5 R86). Hence the judgment cannot be enforced
by execution.
(b) No, it would not be proper to lift the levy on
defendant's property.
Under the Rules on Civil Procedure, in case of
the death of the judgment obligor after execution
is actually levied upon any of his property, the
same may be sold for the satisfaction of the
judgment obligation. (57[c] R39).
, SEC. 21. Indigent party
O. Spouses B & C were the owners of a residential
and boarding house with a market value of more
than P300,000. Their total earnings were more
than double the minimum wage of an employee.
When the city demolished their residence and
boarding house, B and C filed an action for damages
with the RTC against the city. They applied for
exemption from the docket and legal fees as
indigents. The RTC denied their application on the
ground that they are disqualified to litigate as
indigents since they do not meet the salary and
property requirements under S19 R141. May B and
C still be exempted from paying the docket and
legal fees as pauper litigants even though they do
not meet the requirements under S19 R141?

191

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. B and C may still be exempted if they can prove
that they have "no money or property sufficient and
available for food, shelter and basic necessities for
themselves and their family" as provided in Section 21
of Rule 3. If the applicant for exemption meets the
salary and property requirements under S19 R14122
then the grant of exemption is mandatory. On the
other hand where the applicant does not satisfy one
or both requirements, then the applicant should not be
denied outright; instead the court should apply the
"indigency test" under S21 R3 and use its sound
discretion in determining the merits of the application
for exemption. (Spouses Algura v. City of Naga, G.R.
150135, 30 Oct 06).

22Indigent litigants (a) whose gross income and that of their immediate
family do not exceed an amount double the monthly minimum wage of an
employee and (b) who do not own real property with a fair market value as stated
in the current tax declaration of more than P300,000 shall be exempt from the
payment of legal fees. (519 R141).

192

RULE 4. VENUE
Q.

Define venue.
Venue refers to the possible or proper place or places
for the trial of a suit, as among several places where
jurisdiction could be established. (STEVEN H. GIFIS,
LAW DICTIONARY [1975]).

0._

What is the difference between jurisdiction and
venue?

;:A

Jurisdiction deals with the authority of a court to
exercise judicial power, while venue deals with the
place where that power should be exercised.
(GREENLEAF'S REPORTS, CIVIL PROCEDURE 51
[1972]).

„ Q. Is venue jurisdictional?
A.

In civil cases venue is not jurisdictional. However in
criminal cases, it is.

Q. What is a real action and what is a personal action?
A.

A real action is an action affecting title to or possession
of real property or interest therein. Any other action is
a personal action. (S1 R4).
What is the venue of real actions?

A.

Real actions shall be commenced and tried in the
proper court which has jurisdiction over the area
wherein the real property involved, or a portion thereof,
is situated. Forcible entry and unlawful detainer
actions shall be commenced and tried in the municipal
trial court of the municipality or city wherein the real
property involved, or a portion thereof, is situated.
(Si R4).
193

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the venue of personal actions?

A.

Personal actions may be commenced and tried where
the plaintiff or any of the principal plaintiffs resides, or
where the defendant or any of the principal defendants
resides at the election of the plaintiff.
In the case of a non-resident defendant found in
the Philippines, the action may be commenced and
tried where the plaintiff resides or where the nonresident defendant may be found, at the election of
the plaintiff. (S2 R4).

Q.

What is the venue of an action against a nonresident defendant not found in the Philippines?

A.

If any of the defendants does not reside and is not
found in the Philippines and the action affects the
personal status of the plaintiff, or any property of said
defendant located in the Philippines, the action may
be commenced and tried in the court of the place
where the plaintiff resides (if action involves the plaintiffs
status), or where the property or any portion thereof
is situated or found (if the action affects defendant's
property). (33 R4).
Note that S3 R4 applies to both personal and
real actions.

Q.

Outline the venue rules in actions against a nonresident defendant

194

RULE 4
Venue
A

VENUE RULES RE NON-RESIDENT DEFENDANT
(NRD)
TYPE OF
ACTION

NRD FOUND IN
PH

1_ Personal action.
•

Pitt s residence or
where deft found
(S2 R4).

2. Real action.

Where property
situated.

3. Action affecting
• personal status of
plaintiff or property
of deft in Ph.

See columns
above,

NRD NOT FOUND
IN PH
If action #3, see
below.
If action #3, see
below.
Plft's residence or
where property is
situated or found.
(53R4)

fr C. P, a resident of Manila, will file an action to
recover title over land registered in the name of D,
a non-resident defendant and who is not found in
the Philippines. The land is located in Davao City.
May P file the action in Manila?
A

Yes. Under 53 R4, if any of the defendants does not
reside and is not found in the Philippines and the
action affects any property of said defendant located
in the Philippines, the action may be commenced and
tried in the court of the place where the plaintiff
resides or where the property is situated. Hence the
action may be filed in both Manila and Davao City.
P, a resident of Manila, will file an action to
recover title over land registered in the name of D,
a non-resident defendant but who is found in the
Philippines. The land is located in Davao City.
May P file the action in Manila?

195

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
A.

No. S3 R4 does not apply if the non-resident defendant
is found in the Philippines. In such a case, the general
venue rule for real actions will apply and hence the
action for recovery of title over land should be filed in
Davao City.

Q.

P, a resident of Manila, will file an action to claim
ownership over a bank account in the name of D,
a non-resident defendant and who is not found in
the Philippines. The bank is located in Davao City.
Where is the venue or where are the venues of
the action?

A.

The venues are in Manila, where P the plaintiff
resides, or in Davao City, where the subject property
of Defendant D is found.
Under S3 R4, if the non-resident defendant is not
found in the Philippines and the action affects any
property of said defendant located in the Philippines,
the action may be commenced and tried in the court
of the place where the plaintiff resides or where the
property is situated or found.

Q.

P, a resident of Manila, will file an action to claim
ownership over a bank account in the name of D,
a non-resident defendant but who is presently
staying in a hotel in Cebu City while on vacation.
The bank is located in Davao City. Where is the
venue of the action?

A.

The venue may either be in Manila, where the plaintiff
P resides, or in Cebu City, where the defendant D is
found, at the election of P.
Under 62 R4, in a personal action against a nonresident defendant found in the Philippines, the action
may be commenced and tried where the plaintiff or

196

RULE 4
Venue
any of the principal plaintiffs resides, or where the
non-resident defendant may be found, at the plaintiff's
election.
D, an American citizen, borrowed P500,000 from
P, a Filipino citizen while vacationing in the
Philippines. D failed to pay. D went back to the
United States. May P file a suit in the Philippines
against D?
No. D is a non-resident and he is not found in the
Philippines. Nor does the action affect P's personal
status or any property of D located in the Philippines.
A Philippine court cannot acquire jurisdiction over a
non-resident defendant in an action in personam.
For purposes of the rule on venue, what is the
residence of a corporation?
A

The residence of a corporation is its principal place of
business, not its branch office. (1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 112
17th rev. ed., 3 rd printing]).
D, a resident of Cebu City, borrowed P1 million
from C, a resident of Los Angeles, California,
U.S.A. D did not pay C despite demands. C engaged
Atty. B, whose office and residence is in Quezon
City, to file a collection case against D. C executed
an SPA authorizing Atty. B to prosecute the case
in his behalf. C filed the collection case before the
Regional Trial Court of Quezon City. D filed an
answer raising the affirmative defense of improper
venue, arguing that none of the parties reside in
Quezon City. Was venue improperly laid?
Yes. In a collection suit brought by a non-resident
plaintiff as represented by his attorney-in-fact, the real
party-in-interest is the plaintiff pursuant to Section 3 of
197

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Rule 3. Hence the venue should have been laid in the
place where the defendant resides and not where the
attorney-in-fact resides. (Mg v. Ang, 22 August 2012).
Q.

Plaintiff Lawrence Heller, a U.S. Air Force member,
filed with the CFI of Pampanga an action for
damages against Dangwa Transportation Co. and
its driver. The complaint averred that plaintiff was
then stationed at Clark Air Base, Angeles, Pampanga.
The defendants filed an answer raising the affirmative
defense of improper venue. The defendants argued
that plaintiff's assignment in the Philippines is
temporary since members of the United States Air
Force may be assigned any time to any station
under the exclusive control and decision of the
Commanding Officer; and that, the venue of the
action should not be Pampanga but the City of
Baguio or Benguet, Mountain Province, where the
defendants reside. Was venue improperly laid?

A.

No. Residence for purposes of determining venue
under S2 R4 simply means a place of abode, whether
permanent or temporary. What is of paramount
importance is where plaintiff actually resided or where
he may be found at the time he brought the action.
Here plaintiff had his actual residence at Clark Air
Base, Angeles, Pampanga, at the time he filed his
action. Hence venue was properly laid. (Dangwa
Transportation Co. v. Sarmiento, 31 January 1977).

Q.

Plaintiff Claridades filed an action with the CFI of
Bulacan, where he resides, against Mercader and
Fernandez for the dissolution of their partnership.
The main asset of the partnership was a fishpond
located in Marinduque. Defendants filed an
answer in which they alleged that the partnership
had so far been unproductive and that this was
the result of Plaintiff's failure to contribute his
share. Defendants counterclaimed for damages.
198

RULE 4
Venue
Subsequently the court granted leave to intervene
to Zulueta and his wife who alleged that they had
bought the fishpond and were now its owners.
Zulueta and his wife were given 10 days to file
such pleading as they may deem necessary for
the protection of their rights. The Zuluetas then
filed an answer raising the affirmative defense of
improper venue.
a) May the case be dismissed on the ground of
improper venue?
b)

If the action filed by Plaintiff against Defendants
were a real action affecting title over the fishpond,
would your answer still be the same?

a) No. An action for the dissolution of a partnership is a
personal and not a real action, notwithstanding
the fact that the main asset of the partnership
was a real property. The sale of the fishpond
would merely be a necessary incident to the
liquidation of the partnership. Hence the venue
was properly laid.
b) Yes my answer would still be the same.
The defendants had already waived the objection
against improper venue when they did not raise
the same in the answer.
The court having legally acquired authority to
hear and decide the case, it cannot be divested of
that authority by the intervenors. An intervention
cannot alter the nature of the action and the issues
joined by the original parties thereto. (Claridades
v. Mercader, 17 SCRA 1 [1966]). Intervention is
not an independent proceeding but one which is
merely ancillary to the existing action.
199

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioner filed with the RTC of Davao City a
complaint for nullification of deed of sale of land
against the respondent The petitioner alleged
that he never signed the questioned deed of sale.
The subject land is located in Carmen, Davao del
Norte. The respondent filed an answer raising the
affirmative defense of improper venue stating that
the complaint should have been filed with the RTC
of Davao del Norte which has jurisdiction over
Carmen, the place where the subject land is
located. May the case be dismissed on the ground
of improper venue?

A.

No, the complaint for nullification of the Deed of Sale
of land is a personal action since there was no
allegation that the possession and title to the property
have been transferred to respondent; nowhere in the
complaint did petitioner allege or pray for the recovery
or reconveyance of the real property. Hence venue
was properly laid in Davao City where the parties
reside. (Racpan v. Barroga-Haigh, 6 June 2018,
Velasco, J.).

Q.

P filed a complaint against the surety with the
RTC of Manila. The surety then filed a third-party
complaint against X, who had executed an
indemnity agreement undertaking to indemnify the
surety in case it becomes liable under the surety
bond. X filed an answer to the third-party complaint
raising the affirmative defense of improper venue.
X pointed out that the indemnity agreement
between the surety and X contains a provision
that any suit arising from the agreement shall be
solely and exclusively filed in Quezon City. Should
the court dismiss the third-party complaint?

200

RULE 4
Venue
A.

No. A third-party complaint is ancillary to the main
case. Thus a third-party complaint has to yield to the
jurisdiction and venue of the main action. (Eastern
Assurance & Surety Corp. v. Cui, G.R. L-54452, 20
July 1981).

Q.

P, a corporation, filed a complaint for annulment
of contracts of loan with cancellation of real
estate mortgage against D in Pasig, the place
where P had its office. P alleged that the contract
of loan was without the knowledge of the
corporation. P, the mortgagor, is still in possession
of the real property mortgaged. D raised the
affirmative defense of improper venue in his
answer, contending that the annulment of the real
estate mortgage is a real action, since P sought to
compel D to accept its payment and thus affecting
title over the property and free it from the
encumbrance. Thus it should have been filed in
Quezon City, where the encumbered properties
are located. Is the complaint for cancellation of
real estate mortgage a real action?

A.

No. The instant action to annul a contract and its
accessory REM is a personal action. An action for
cancellation of REM is a personal action if the mortgagee
has not foreclosed the mortgage and the mortgagor is
still in possession of the premises as his title to or
possession of the property is not in dispute. Here there
was no foreclosure yet and the mortgagor was still in
possession of the realty mortgaged. (Chua vs. Total
Office Products and Services, 30 September 2005)

Q.

Eduardo, a resident of the City of Manila, filed
before the Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Manila a
complaint for the annulment of a Deed of Real
Estate Mortgage he signed in favor of Galaxy
Bank (Galaxy), and the consequent foreclosure and
auction sale of his mortgaged Makati property.
201

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Galaxy filed a Motion to Dismiss on the ground of
improper venue alleging that the complaint should
be filed with the RTC of Makati since the
complaint involves the ownership and possession
of Eduardo's lot. Resolve the motion with reasons.
(16 Bar Q4).
A.

The motion to dismiss on the ground of improper
venue should be granted. Under the Rules of Civil
Procedure, the venue of real actions shall be with the
proper court having jurisdiction over the area where
the real property involved is situated. An action for
annulment of mortgage is a real action if there has
already been a foreclosure sale. (See Chua v. Total
Office Products and Services, 30 September 2005).
Here there was already a foreclosure sale.
Hence the action for annulment of mortgage is a real
action which should have been filed in Makati where
the real property is situated.23

Q.

A brings an action in the Metropolitan Trial Court
of Manila against B for the annulment of an
extrajudicial foreclosure sale of real property with
an assessed value of P50,000 located in Laguna.
The complaint alleged prematurity of the sale for
the reason that the mortgage was not yet due. B
timely moved to dismiss the case on the ground
that the action should have been brought in the
Regional Trial Court of Laguna. Decide with
reasons. (00 Bar Q 18a).

231n First Sarmiento Holdings Inc. v. Phil. Bank of Communications, 19
June 2018, e.b., Leonen, J., it was held that the action for annulment of real
estate mortgage was one incapable of pecuniary estimation (and thus a personal
action) and not a real action because although there had been a foreclosure
sale, the certificate of sale had not yet been registered with the register of deeds.
In the light of this case and since there was no showing in the problem that the
foreclosure sale was registered, the answer would now be that the motion to
dismiss should be denied.

202

RULE 4
Venue
A.

Insofar as the motion to dismiss is based on improper
venue - since it argued that the action should have
been brought in Laguna - the same should be granted.
The action for annulment of the extrajudicial
foreclosure sale of real property is a real action since
there has been a foreclosure sale and thus the action
affects title to the real property mortgaged. (See Chua
v. Total Office Products & Services, 30 September
2005). Hence the venue lies in Laguna, the place
where the real property is situated.24
BPI Family Bank filed with the RTC of Makati an
action to recover deficiency against the real estate
mortgagors after the extrajudicial foreclosure sale
had resulted in a deficiency. The realty mortgaged
was located in Manila while BPI FB has its main
office in Makati. The mortgagors filed an answer
raising the affirmative defenses of failure to state
a cause of action, res judicata, and waiver. The
RTC denied the affirmative defenses. The mortgagors
filed a motion for reconsideration wherein they
reiterated the previous grounds and added the
ground of improper venue, contending that the
action for deficiency was a real action which
should have been brought in Manila. The motion
for reconsideration was denied. The mortgagors
went up to the Court of Appeals on a petition for
certiorari. The CA granted the petition and ordered
the dismissal of the action on the ground of
improper venue, holding that it was a real action
which should have been filed in Manila. Was the
CA's decision correct?

24It should be filed with the RTC of Laguna, since the assessed value
exceeds P20,000.

203

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No, the CA's decision was not correct.
First, an action to recover the deficiency after
extrajudicial foreclosure of a real estate mortgage is a
personal action since it does not affect title to or
possession of real property or any interest therein.
Hence the action was properly brought in Makati
where the mortgagee has its main office.
Second, even assuming that there was improper
venue, the ground was waived by the mortgagors
since they did not timely raise it in their answer. Here
the ground of improper venue was raised belatedly in
the motion for reconsideration, not in the answer. Hence
the objection was waived pursuant to Si R9. (BPI
Family Bank v. Yujuico, 22 July 2015, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

A and B, both residents of Batangas, entered into
a contract of lease over a parcel of land belonging
to B, located in Calapan, Mindoro. A filed a complaint
before the RTC of Batangas City for the rescission
of the lease contract of the land in Mindoro.
B filed a motion to dismiss on the ground
that the Batangas court did not have jurisdiction
over the subject matter, the land being located in
Mindoro. B however did not allege improper venue
in his motion. Decide with reasons. (88 Bar Q4b).

A.

Motion to dismiss denied. The ground that the
Batangas court did not have jurisdiction over the
subject matter is without merit as the Regional Trial
Court has jurisdiction over actions incapable of
pecuniary estimation under B.P. Blg. 129. An action
for rescission of contract is one which is incapable of
pecuniary estimation.

204

RULE 4
Venue
The more pertinent ground for the motion to
dismiss was improper venue. However under S2 R9,
defenses and objections not raised in the motion to
dismiss are deemed waived. Here the defense of
improper venue was not alleged in the motion to dismiss.
Hence B is deemed to have waived the same.
Even if the motion to dismiss were to be
considered as substantially raising the defense of
improper venue, the motion would still be denied. The
action for rescission of the lease contract is a personal
action since the complaint filed by the lessee did not
pray for the recovery of possession of the land.25
Hence the motion to dismiss would still be denied.
Q.

When is Rule 4 on venue of actions not applicable?

A.
1) In those cases where a specific rule or law provides
otherwise.
2) Where the parties have validly agreed in writing
before the filing of the action on the exclusive
venue thereof. (34 R4).
Q.

Give examples of cases where a specific rule or
law provides otherwise.

1) Civil and criminal actions for libel shall be filed with
the Regional Trial Court having jurisdiction over
the place where the libelous article is printed and
first published or where any of the offended parties
actually resides at the time of the commission of
the offense. (Article 360, Revised Penal Code).

25That possession was not put in issue in the complaint is highlighted by
the fact that it was the lessee who filed the complaint for rescission.

205

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Article 360 also provides for special venue
provisions if one of the offended parties is a
public officer whose office is in Manila.
2)

Petitions for declaration of nullity and annulment
of marriage shall be filed in the Family Court of
the province or city where the petitioner or respondent
has been residing for at least 6 months prior to
the date of filing, or in case of a non-resident
respondent, where he may be found in the
Philippines, at the election of the petitioner. (Sec.
4, SC Rule on Declaration of Absolute Nullity of
Void Marriages and Annulment of Voidable
Marriages). Same venue for filing petitions for legal
separation. (Sec. 2[c], SC Rule on Legal Separation).

3) Petitions for rehabilitation shall be filed in the RTC
having jurisdiction over the territory where the
debtor's principal office is located. (S2 R3, SC Interim
Rules of Procedure on Corporate Rehabilitation).
4) Cases governed by Section 1(a) of the SC Interim
Rules of Procedure Governing Intra-Corporate
Controversies shall be filed in the RTC having
jurisdiction over the principal office of the
corporation, partnership, or association concerned.
5) A petition for deposition before action shall be filed
in the court of the place of the residence of any
expected adverse party. (Si R24).
6) In a small claims case, if the plaintiff is engaged in
the business of lending, banking, and similar
activities, and has a branch within the municipality or
city where the defendant resides, the Statement
of Claim/s shall be filed where that branch
is located. (S7 Rules of Procedure for Small
Claims Cases).

206

RULE 4
Venue
a

The deed of real estate mortgage between the
mortgagors and the mortgagee provided that any
and all actions arising therefrom shall be in
Makati City. The mortgaged land is situated in
Parariaque City. Upon default, the mortgagee filed
a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure with the
clerk of court of Paraiiaque City. The mortgagors
moved to dismiss the case on the ground of
improper venue. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?

A.

No. Exclusive venue stipulation cannot apply in a
petition for extrajudicial foreclosure. Under Act 3135
the sale can be made only in the place where the
realty is located. S4 R4 does not apply since an
extrajudicial foreclosure is not an action. (Ochoa v.
China Bank, 23 March 2011, Nachura, J.).
P applied for 6 cellular phone subscriptions with
Pi!tel. P later filed with the RTC of lligan City a
complaint for sum of money and damages against
Piltel. The latter raised the affirmative defense of
improper venue, citing the common provision in
the subscription agreements which provide that:
"Venue of all suits arising from this
Agreement shall be in the proper courts of Makati
City. Subscriber expressly waives any other venue."
Should the affirmative defense of improper
venue be granted?
Yes. The exclusive venue provision was held to be valid
by the Supreme Court. The SC distinguished this
case from Sweet Lines v. Teves, 83 SCRA 361, in
which the plaintiffs were virtually compelled to buy tickets
from Sweet Lines otherwise they would be stranded in
Bohol. Here the Plaintiff had unfettered freedom to
sign or not sign the subscription agreement. (Piltel v.
Tecson, GR 156966, 7 May 2004).
207

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME!
Q.

Petitioner Paglaum Management and Development
Corporation (PAGLAUM) is the registered owner
of three parcels of land located in the Province of
Cebu. In 1994, Union Bank extended HealthTech a
credit line in the amount of P10,000,000. To
secure this obligation, PAGLAUM executed three
Real Estate Mortgages in favor of Union Bank.
Section 9 of the Real Estate Mortgage Deeds
provides as follows:
Section 9. Venue. — The venue of all suits and
actions arising out of or in connection with this
Mortgage shall be in Makati, Metro Manila, the
parties hereto waiving any other venue.
May PAGLAUM file an action for annulment
of the mortgages with the RTC of Cebu City?

A.

No. The phrase, "waiving any other venue" means
that the parties have agreed that the venue of all
actions arising from the mortgage shall be in Makati
City. (Paglaum Management Corp. v. Union Bank, 18
June 2012).

Q.

Lessor filed a complaint against lessee with the
RTC of Valenzuela City for collection of unpaid
rentals amounting to P8 million. The lease contract
provided that "all actions filed in connection with
this lease shall be filed with the RTC of Pasay
City, exclusive of all others." Lessee filed several
motions for extension of time to file a responsive
pleading and when he eventually filed his answer,
it contained a counterclaim and third-party
complaint In his answer, the lessee raised the
affirmative defense of improper venue. May the
case be dismissed on the ground of improper venue?

208

RULE 4
Venue
A.

Yes. The venue stipulation is a restrictive or exclusive
one; hence any action arising from the lease contract
shall be filed only in the RTC of Pasay City. That
respondent had filed several motions for extension of
time to file a responsive pleading, or that he
interposed a counterclaim or third-party complaint in
his answer does not necessarily mean that he waived
the affirmative defense of improper venue. There is
no inconsistency in seeking dismissal of the main
complaint while pursuing one's counterclaim or thirdparty complaint in the same case. (Ley Construction
Corp. v. Sedano, 23 August 2017, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
PB Corn filed a collection case against D before
the RTC of Manila, PB Corn's place of business,
based on the Surety Agreement (SA) executed by
D in relation to a credit line PB Corn extended to
International Trading Company. However, in the
promissory note executed by ITC, it was expressly
stipulated that the "venue for any legal action that
may arise out of said Promissory Note shall be
Makati to the exclusion of all other courts." D
raised the affirmative improper venue. Should the
affirmative defense be granted?
Yes. Under the "complementary-contracts-construedtogether" doctrine, an accessory contract must be
read in its entirety and together with the principal
agreement. The SA can be enforced only in conjunction
with the promissory note (PN). The venue stipulation
in the promissory note thus also applies to the SA as
an ancillary contract of the promissory note. The
venue should be laid in Makati. (PhiL Bank of
Communications v. Lim, G.R. 158138, 12 April 2005).26

,

261he ruling is arguable. To extend the venue provision in the promissory
Dote to the SA would run afoul of the principle of relativity in contract law which
pcovides that contracts are binding only between or among the parties thereto.

209

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Q.

Respondent entered into a payroll agreement with
the bank. The agreement contained a venue
stipulation which reads thus: "In case of litigation,
venue shall be in the proper trial courts of Manila
for determination of any and all questions arising
hereunder." A dispute arising from the payroll
agreement between Respondent and the bank
ensued. Respondent filed an action for damages
with the RTC of Quezon City where he resides.
The bank raised the affirmative defense of improper
venue. Should the affirmative defense be granted?

A.

No. The venue stipulation here is not exclusive but
merely permissive for it does not contain the words
expressing the intent that Manila is an exclusive
venue, like "exclusively" or "solely." Hence the filing of
the case in Quezon City where the plaintiff resides is
proper. (Philippine Bank of Communications v. Trazo,
30 August 2006).

Q.

Guina is the president and general manager of AirSwift International, a single registered proprietorship
engaged in the freight-forwarding business. Mangila
engaged the services of Guina to transport goods
but she did not pay Guina. Guina thus filed a
collection suit against Mangila before the RTC of
Pasay City, where Air-Swift holds office. Guina
resides in Parariaque City while Mangila resides in
San Fernando, Pampanga. Mangila raised the
affirmative defense of improper venue. She points
to a provision in Guina's invoice which contains
the following venue provision:
3) If court litigation becomes necessary to
enforce collection, the agreed venue for such
action is Makati, Metro Manila, Philippines.

Resort to a doctrine of construction or interpretation was unnecessary since there
was no ambiguity or vagueness in the venue provision.

210

RULE 4
Venue
Should the affirmative defense be granted?
Explain.
Yes, the affirmative defense of improper venue should
be granted, although for a reason different from that
invoked by Mangila.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, the venue of
a personal action is in the residence of either the
plaintiff or the defendant.
Here what is involved is a collection suit which is
a personal action. However, neither the Plaintiff Guina
nor the Defendant Mangila resides in Pasay City.
The fact that Air-Swift International holds office in
Pasay City is irrelevant since a single proprietorship
does not possess juridical personality and thus cannot
be a party to a suit.
Hence Pasay City is not the proper venue for the
action.
The venue stipulation is not the proper basis for
dismissing the case on the ground of improper venue.
The Supreme Court has held that a venue stipulation
which does not contain words of exclusivity is merely
a permissive venue stipulation which simply provides
for an additional venue.
Hence the case may not be dismissed for
improper venue on the basis of the venue provision
since it is not exclusive. The case however may be
dismissed on the ground of improper venue because
it was not filed in the residence of either the Plaintiff or
the Defendant. (Mangila v. Guina, 12 August 2002,
Carpio, J.).

211

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

How may the ground of improper venue be raised
by the defendant?

A.

As an affirmative defense in the answer. (512[a] R8,
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure). It may no longer be
raised in a motion to dismiss. (512[a] R15, 2020 Rules
of Civil Procedure).

Q.

May the trial court dismiss a complaint moth
proprio on the ground of improper venue?

A.

No, since if the defendant does not raise the objection
of improper venue in the answer, he is deemed to
have waived it. However in cases governed by the
Rule on Summary Procedure and in ejectment cases,
the trial court instead of issuing the summons may
from an examination of the allegations in the complaint
and such evidence as may be attached thereto
dismiss the case outright on any of the grounds for
dismissal of a civil action which are apparent therein,
including improper venue. (Section 4, Revised Rules
on Summary Procedure; S5 R70).
Under the Revised Rules of Procedure for Small
Claims Cases, after the court determines that the
case falls under such rules, it may from an examination
of the allegations of the Statement of Claim/s and
such evidence attached thereto, by itself, dismiss the
case outright on any of the grounds for the dismissal
of the case, including improper venue.
If during the hearing the court is able to
determine that there exists a ground for the dismissal
of the Statement of Claim/s, the court may by itself
dismiss the case even if such ground is not pleaded in
the defendant's Response. (Sec. 11, Revised Rules
of Procedure for Small Claims Cases).

212

RULE 4
Venue
• Q. Petitioner was born in 1989 in Sabah, Malaysia. It
was only in 2008 that her mother reported her
birth to the Philippine Statistics Authority in Quezon
City. However her birth year was erroneously
recorded as 1980 instead of 1989. She filed a
petition under R108 with the RTC of Davao City,
where she resides, to correct her year of birth in
her report of birth. The RTC motu proprio
dismissed the petition on the ground of improper
venue stating that under S1 R108 the petition
should have been filed with the RTC of Quezon
City. Was the dismissal correct?
No. Venue is procedural, not jurisdictional, and hence,
may be waived. It was erroneous for the RTC to motu
proprio dismiss the petition before it on the ground of
improper venue. Since convenience is the raison
d'etre of the rules on venue, and as it was established
that Davao City is the residence of petitioner, and as
further pointed out by the OSG, PSA has a field office
located in Davao City, it is the most convenient for
the parties.
Moreover, it is well-settled that courts may not
motu proprio dismiss the case on the ground of
improper venue. Without any objection at the earliest
opportunity, as in a motion to dismiss or in the
answer, it is deemed waived. The OSG did not
register any objection to the venue of the petition.
(Cabrera v. Philippine Statistics Authority, 3 June
2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

213

RULE 5. UNIFORM PROCEDURE
IN TRIAL COURTS
Rule on Summary Procedure
Q.

What civil cases are governed by the Rule on
Summary Procedure?

A.
1) Ejectment cases.
2)

Cases where the total amount of the plaintiff's
claim does not exceed P100,000 or P200,000 in
Metro Manila, exclusive of interests and cost.
Note however that if the claim falls under the
coverage of the Rules of Procedure for Small
Claims Cases, as in those arising from the contracts
of lease, mortgage, loan, services, or sale, it is
that rule which governs. Note also that probate
proceedings are not governed by the Rule on
Summary Procedure.

Q.

What are the pleadings allowed under the Rule on
Summary Procedure?

A.

The only pleadings allowed under the Rule on
Summary Procedure are the complaint, compulsory
counterclaim, cross-claim, and the answers thereto.
(3CA). All pleadings must be verified.

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings, motions, and
petitions under the Rule on Summary Procedure?

A.

(6M [dbp red] TM PIRC)
1)

Motion to dismiss or quash except where the
ground is non-referral to barangay conciliation
and lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
214

RULES
Uniform Procedure In Trial Courts
2) Motion for bill of particulars.
3) Motion for postponements which are dilatory.
4) Motion for reconsideration of a judgment, re-opening,
and new trial.
5) Motion for extension of time to file pleadings Or
papers.
6) Motion to declare defendant in default.
7) Third-party complaint.
8) Memoranda.
9) Petition for relief from judgment.
10) Intervention.
11) Reply.
12) Certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus against
interlocutory orders.
In an ejectment case, the court dismissed the
complaint for failure of the plaintiff to appear
during the preliminary conference. The Plaintiff
filed a motion for reconsideration of the dismissal
order. The Defendant contends that the dismissal
had become final and executory since the motion
for reconsideration is a prohibited pleading and
hence does not suspend the reglementary period
to appeal. Is the Defendant's contention correct?
I. A.

No. The motion for reconsideration prohibited under
Sec. 19(c) of the Rule on Summary Procedure is that
which seeks reconsideration of a judgment rendered
by the court after trial on the merits. The dismissal
order is not a judgment on the merits after trial of the
case. (Lucas v. Fabros, 324 SCRA 1).
215

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed with the MeTC of Las Pinas City a suit
against ID to collect the sum of P100,000. The
MeTC rendered judgment in favor of P. D appealed
to the RTC which affirmed the challenged decision.
D filed with the Court of Appeals a motion for
extension of 15 days to file a petition for review.
May P in the meantime move for the execution of
the judgment as a matter of right?

A.

Yes. The decision of the RTC in civil cases covered
by the Rule on Summary Procedure shall be immediately
executory, without prejudice to a further appeal that
may be taken therefrom. (Sec. 21, Rule on Summary
Procedure).

Revised Rules ofProcedure for Small Claims Cases
Q.

What cases are governed by the Revised Rules of
Procedure for Small Claims Cases?

A.

These Rules shall govern the procedure before the
MTC in actions for payment of money where the value
of the claim does not exceed P300,000, or P400,000
in Metropolitan Trial Courts, exclusive of interests
and costs.

Q.

When shall the MTC apply the Revised Rules of
Procedure for Small Claims Cases?

A.

The MTC shall apply the Rules in all actions which
are purely civil in nature, where the claim or relief
prayed for by the Plaintiff is solely for payment or
reimbursement of sum of money. The claim or demand
may be for: (MLB)
(a) For money owed under a contract of lease, loan,
services, sale, or mortgage;
(b) For liquidated damages arising from contracts;
216

RULE 5
Uniform Procedure In Trial Courts
(c) The enforcement of a baranqav amicable settlement
or an arbitration award involving a money claim
covered by this Rule pursuant to Sec. 417 of the
Local Government Code.
Q.

Are the Rules of Civil Procedure applicable to
small claims cases?

A.

Yes, but only suppletorily insofar as they are not
inconsistent with the Rules.

Q.

How is a small claims action commenced?

A.

A small claims action is commenced by filing with the
court an accomplished and verified Statement of
Claim/s.

Q. What are the venue rules for small claims cases?
A.

The regular rules on venue shall apply. However if the
plaintiff is engaged in the business of banking, lending,
and similar activities, and has a branch in the
municipality or city where the defendant resides, the
Statement of Claims shall be filed where that branch
is located.

O. What are the prohibited pleadings and motions in
small claims cases?
A

The prohibited pleadings and motions are essentially
the same as those prohibited under the Rule on
Summary Procedure. The only difference is that
motions to dismiss on whatever ground are prohibited
in small claims cases. (See S16).

Q.

May the defendant file a permissive counterclaim?

A.

Yes the defendant may also elect to file a counterclaim
against the plaintiff that does not arise out of the
same transaction or occurrence, provided that the

217

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
amount and nature thereof are within the coverage of
the Rule and the prescribed docket and other legal
fees are paid. (S15).27
Q.

Are decisions in small claims cases appealable?

A.

No, decisions in small claims cases are final, executory,
and unappealable. (S24). An aggrieved party may
however resort in appropriate cases to a special civil
action for certiorari in case of grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction. (A.L.
Ang Network Inc. v. Mondejar, 22 January 2014).
The petition for certiorari shall be filed with the RTC.
Since a motion for reconsideration is a prohibited
pleading, a party must file the petition for certiorari without
filing a motion for reconsideration of the judgment.

Q.

Do the rules on mediation/judicial dispute resolution
apply to small claims cases?

A.

No, inasmuch as the parties may enter into compromise
at any stage of the proceedings.

27 The portion referring to the payment of the prescribed docket and other
legal fees is inconsistent with S8 R141 which does not impose docket fees on
counterclaims filed before the first-level courts.

218

RULE 6. KINDS OF PLEADINGS
• Q. Define pleadings.
A.

Pleadings are the written statements of the respective
claims and defenses of the parties submitted to the
court for appropriate judgment. (Si R6).

Q.

What are the pleadings allowed by the Rules of
Court?

A_

The pleadings allowed by the Rules of Court are the
complaint, counterdaim, cross-claim, third-party complaint,
complaint-in-intervention, answer, and reply. (KEYWORD:
SCAR). Note that under the Rule on Summary Procedure,
the only pleadings allowed are the complaint, the
compulsory counterclaim, the cross-claim, and the
answers thereto. (3CA).

I.

An answer may be responded to by a reply only if
the defending party attaches an actionable document
to the answer.28
O. What is a complaint?
A.

A complaint is the pleading alleging the plaintiff's or
claiming party's cause or causes of action. (S3 R6).
The names and residences of the plaintiff and defendant
must be stated in the complaint. (Id.).

0. Define answer.
A.

An answer is a pleading in which a defending party
sets forth his defenses. (S4 R6).

28This paragraph was added in the 2020 Rules on Civil Procedure.

219

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the kind of defenses?

A.

Defenses may either be negative or affirmative. A
negative defense is the specific denial of the material
fact or facts alleged in the pleading of the claimant
essential to his cause or causes of action. An affirmative
defense is an allegation of a new matter which, while
hypothetically admitting the material allegations in the
claimant's pleading, would nevertheless prevent or
bar recovery by him. (55 R6).

Q.

Give examples of affirmative defenses.

A.

Fraud, prescription, release, payment, illegality, statute
of frauds, estoppel, former recovery, discharge in
bankruptcy, and any other matter by way of confession
and avoidance. (55[b] R6).
Affirmative defenses may also include grounds
for the dismissal of a complaint, specifically, that the
court has no jurisdiction over the subject matter, that
there is another action pending between the same
parties for the same cause, or that the action is barred
by a prior judgment.29 (Second paragraph of S5 R6).

Q.

Plaintiff files a complaint against B and C who are
made co-defendants. C files an answer serving a
copy thereof upon P. Does C also need to serve a
copy upon B?

A.

No. A co-defendant does not need to serve a copy of
the answer against a co-defendant, except where
there is a cross-claim in the answer or in case of S5
R62 in interpleader where the conflicting claimants
should serve a copy of the answer on their codefendants.

29

See also 512(a) R8 which provides for other affirmative defenses.

220

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Counterclaim
Q. What is a counterclaim?
[A

A counterclaim is any claim which a defending party
may have against an opposing party. (86 R6).
How is a counterclaim set up or pleaded? May a
counterclaim be set up in a motion to dismiss?
While technically a separate and independent pleading,
a counterclaim by common practice is pleaded or set
up in an answer. (See S8 R11). Thus the practice of
denominating such an answer as "Answer with
Compulsory/Permissive Counterclaim/s."
A counterclaim cannot however be set up in a
motion to dismiss. The reason is that unlike in the
case of an answer (S8 R11), there are no provisions
in the Rules which provide that counterclaims may be
set up in a motion to dismiss.
P files a case against D. D files a counterclaim
against P. May P file a counterclaim against D's
counterclaim?

A

Yes. A counterclaim may be asserted against an
original counterclaimant.

Q.

The Republic, through the PCGG and with the
assistance of the Office of the Solicitor General,
filed with the Sandiganbayan a complaint against
Cojuangco and Enrile for reconveyance and
damages. Subsequently Enrile was granted leave of
court to implead Solicitor General Chavez as a
defendant in a counterclaim for filing a harassment
suit. Was the filing of a counterclaim against
Solicitor General Chavez proper?

221

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. A counterclaim is any claim which a defending
party may have against an opposing party. Chavez
was not the opposing party but merely the counsel of
the opposing party. Enrile has to file a separate suit if
he wants to claim damages against Chavez. (Chavez
v. Sandiganbayan, 193 SCRA 282 [1991]).

Q.

PX filed a suit for damages against DY. In his
answer, DY incorporated a counterclaim for
damages against PX and AC, counsel for plaintiff
in said suit, alleging in said counterclaim, inter
aHa, that AC, as such counsel, maliciously induced
PX to bring the suit against DY despite AC's
knowledge of its utter lack of factual and legal
basis. In due time, AC filed a motion to dismiss
the counterclaim as against him on the ground
that he is not a proper party to the case, he being
merely plaintiff's counsel. moc Should AC's motion
to dismiss the counterclaim be granted or not?
Reason. (04 Bar Q9).

A.

Yes, AC's motion to dismiss the counterclaim should
be granted. As held in Chavez v. Sandiganbayan,
193 SCRA 282 (1991), the lawyer of the opposing
party is himself not a party to the case and thus a
counterclaim is not proper against him. DY should file
a separate suit against AC.

Q.

Is there an instance wherein a counterclaim may
be asserted by the defending party against one
who is not an opposing party?

A.

Yes. Under S13 R6, a third-party defendant may in
proper cases assert a counterclaim against the original
plaintiff in respect of the latter's claim against the
third-party plaintiff. (See illustration under S13 R6).

222

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
May a counterclaimant implead third persons
aside from the opposing party?
Yes, provided the court can obtain jurisdiction over
them. (See S7 & 12 R6). For example, P sued D to
annul a deed of sale of a lot and for P to be declared
the owner thereof. Prior to filing the case, P had
transferred possession of a house in the lot to X. D
can file a compulsory counterclaim against P and X
for damages arising from their use and occupancy of
the house and lot. (See Carpena v. Manalo, 1 SCRA
1060 [1961], cited in ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, REMEDIAL
LAW QUIZZER 100-101 [2004 ed.]).
Q. What are the kinds of counterclaims?
A.

A counterclaim may either be compulsory or
permissive.

Q. Define a compulsory counterclaim and a permissive
counterclaim.
A_

A compulsory counterclaim is one which arises out of
or is connected with the transaction or occurrence
constituting the subject matter of the opposing party's
claim and complies with the other requirements set
forth in S7 R6. A permissive counterclaim is one
which is not a compulsory counterclaim.

Q.

Distinguish a compulsory counterclaim from a
permissive counterclaim. (SC PAD)

A
1) AS TO PRECLUSION IF NOT RAISED. A compulsory
counterclaim not set up in an action shall be
deemed barred, while a permissive counterclaim
is not barred even if not set up in the action.

223

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) AS TO PAYMENT OF FILING FEES. Payment of
filing fees on compulsory counterclaims has been
suspended, while filing fees need to be paid on
permissive counterclaims filed with the RTC.
3)

AS FOR NEED TO ANSWER. A compulsory
counterclaim as a rule need not be answered
while a permissive counterclaim should be answered
otherwise the plaintiff could be declared in default
in respect thereof.

4) AS FOR PROHIBITION UNDER THE RULE ON
SUMMARY PROCEDURE. A compulsory counterclaim
is allowed under the Rule on Summary Procedure
unlike a permissive counterclaim which may not
be availed of therein.
5)

AS FOR REQUIREMENT OF CERTIFICATION
AGAINST FORUM SHOPPING. A compulsory
counterclaim need not be accompanied by a
certification against forum shopping while a permissive
counterclaim must be so accompanied. (Spouses
Ponciano v. Parente/a, G.R. No. 133284, 9 May 2000;
Alba v. Malapajo, 13 January 2016, Peralta, J.).

Section 7. Compulsory Counterclaim
Q.

Why is a compulsory counterclaim termed as
such?

A.

A compulsory counterclaim is termed compulsory
because there is an element of compulsion to set it
up. S7 R6 provides that a compulsory counterclaim not
raised in the same action is barred, unless otherwise
allowed by the Rules of Court. Under S2 R9, a
compulsory counterclaim not set up shall be barred.

224

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Q. What is the reason behind S2 R9?
A

The rule is designed to achieve resolution of the
whole controversy at one time and in one action and
to avoid multiplicity of suits. (Baclayon v. Court of
Appeals, 182 SCRA 761; Ledesma v. Morales, 87
Phil. 199).

Q

How should a compulsory counterclaim or crossclaim be set up?

' A

A compulsory counterclaim or a cross-claim that a
defending party has at the time he files his answer
shall be contained therein. (S8 R11).

Q. Should a defendant who has a compulsory
counterclaim file a motion to dismiss?
A.

No. The Supreme Court has stated that if the
defendant has a compulsory counterclaim, he should
not file a motion to dismiss but an answer with a
counterclaim, with the ground for the motion to dismiss
being asserted as an affirmative defense pursuant to S6
R16. (Financial Building Corp. v. Forbes Park
Association, G.R. No. 133119, 17 August 2000).

Q

What are the requirements in order that a
counterclaim may be considered compulsory?
(KEYWORD: JARET)

1) It must be cognizable by a regular court of justice.
2) It arises out of or is connected with the transaction
or occurrence constituting the subject matter of
the opposing party's claim.
3) It does not require for its adjudication the presence
of third parties over whom the court cannot
acquire jurisdiction.
225

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
4) It must be within the lurisdiction of the court both
as to the amount and the nature thereof. Exception:
In an original action before the RTC, the
counterclaim may be considered compulsory
regardless of the amount.
5) It must be existing at the time the defendant files
his answer. (S7 R6, 58 R11, Banco de Oro
Universal Bank v. Court of Appeals, infra).
Q.

What is the meaning of "transaction or occurrence"
under 57 R6?

A.

The words "transaction or occurrence" as used in 57
R6 include the facts out of which a cause of action
may arise. (1 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON
THE RULES OF COURT 350-351 [1979 ed.]).

Q.

What are the tests devised by the Supreme Court
to determine whether a counterclaim is compulsory
or not?

A.

To determine whether a counterclaim is compulsory
or not, the Supreme Court has devised the following
tests: (LIRE)
(a) Are the issues of fact and law raised by the claim
and by the counterclaim largely the same?
(b) Would res iudicata bar a subsequent suit on
defendant's claims, absent the compulsory
counterclaim rule?
(c) Will substantially the same evidence support or
refute plaintiffs claim as well as the defendant's
counterclaim? and
(d) Is there any logical relation between the claim and
the counterclaim?

226

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
A positive answer to all four questions would
indicate that the counterclaim is compulsory. (GSIS v.
Caballero, G.R. No. 158090, 4 October 2010).
Q. What is the "compelling test of compulsoriness" to
determine whether a claim is compulsory?
The test involves asking the question whether there is
a "logical relationship between the claim and the
counterclaim, that is, where conducting separate trials
would entail a substantial duplication of effort and time
by the parties and the court." If there is such a logical
relationship, then the claim is compulsory. (Tan v.
Kaakbay Finance Corp., G.R. 146595, 20 June 2003).
Note: From an analysis of Supreme Court decisions,
a rule of thumb that may be used is the test of
opposition or inconsistency: would the grant of the
complaint necessarily defeat or negate the counterclaim?
Alternatively, would the grant of the counterclaim
necessarily defeat or negate the complaint? If the
answer is yes, then the counterclaim is compulsory; if no,
then the counterclaim is permissive.
Plaintiff filed suit for nullification of a promissory
note against the Defendant on the ground of
usurious and unconscionable interest rates. The
Defendant counterclaimed for the payment of the
P1,000,000 loan with interest. He however did not
pay the docket fees. Should the counterclaim be
dismissed for failure to pay docket fees?
No. The counterclaim for the payment of the loan with
interest is compulsory since it arises out of or is
connected to the loan transaction subject of the
complaint. The grant of the counterclaim would
necessarily negate or defeat the suit for nullification.

227

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Being compulsory, there is no need to pay the filing
fees thereon. (Tan v. Kaakbay Finance Corp., G.R.
146595, 20 June 2003; Alba v. Malapajo, 13 January
2016, Peralta, J.).
be

paid

on

compulsory

Q.

Should filing fees
counterclaims?

A.

No. While compulsory counterclaims are subject to
filing fees, the payment thereof has been suspended
by the Supreme Court.
The old rule was that filing fees were required of
permissive but not compulsory counterclaims. (57[a]
R141). S7(a) was later amended on 16 August 2004 so
as to impose filing fees also on compulsory counterclaims
filed before the RTC. Payment however of such filing
fees was suspended by the SC Resolution dated 21
September 2004 [AM. No. 04-2-04-SC]).
Confusion later arose from the obiter dictum in
Korea Technologies Co., Ltd. v. Lerma, 542 SCRA 1,
16-17 (2008), which stated that "effective August 16,
2004 under Sec. 7 Rule 141, as amended by A.M.
No. 04-2-04-SC, docket fees are now required to be
paid in compulsory counterclaim or cross-claim." As
a result some courts were collecting filing fees on
compulsory counterclaims citing Korea Technologies
Co., Ltd.
The obiter clearly overlooked the SC Resolution
of 21 September 2004. Thus the Supreme Court's
Office of the Court Administrator issued a clarificatory
circular stating that the obiter dictum "has been deleted in
a revised issuance" and that "the Resolution of this
Court in A.M. No. 04-2-04-SC dated September 21,
2004 suspending payment of filing fees for compulsory
counterclaims remains in effect." (OCA Circular No.
96-2009, dated 13 August 2009).
228

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Note however that the payment of filing fees on
cross-claims was not suspended.
Q. Fernando mortgaged his land and building to the
GSIS to secure a loan he obtained from the latter.
Fernando defaulted on his loan so the GSIS
foreclosed on the loan and later acquired it at the
foreclosure sale. GSIS consolidated its title over
the realty after the lapse of the redemption period.
Subsequently GSIS awarded the realty to CMTC
after public bidding in which Fernando also
participated.
Fernando then filed a suit with the Regional
Trial Court against GSIS and CMTC for nullification
of the bid award to CMTC and for the declaration
of his own bid as the winning one. GSIS filed an
answer with counterclaim for the recovery of
rentals from the realty which Fernando had been
collecting from CMTC despite the consolidation of
title by the GSIS. GSIS did not pay any filing fee
on the counterclaim. After trial, the RTC dismissed
Femando's complaint and granted GSIS's counterclaim
for rentals. On appeal, the Court of Appeals
affirmed the dismissal but deleted the award of
rentals in favor of the GSIS.
a) Is the counterclaim of GSIS for rentals a
compulsory or a permissive counterclaim?
b) Did the CA rule correctly in deleting the award
of rentals to GSIS?
a) The counterclaim of GSIS for rentals is a
permissive counterclaim.
One of the tests devised by the Supreme Court
is to ask whether substantially the same evidence will
support or refute plaintiff's claim as well as the
defendant's counterclaim. A negative answer as in
229

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
this case means that the counterclaim is permissive.
The evidence needed by Fernando to cause the
annulment of the bid award and the sale to CMTC is
different from that needed by GSIS to establish its
claim for the recovery of rentals. A favorable judgment
on Fernando's complaint to nullify the GSIS's bid
award to CMTC would not preclude a favorable
judgment for GSIS on its counterclaim to recover the
rentals which Fernando had been collecting from CMTC
after GSIS had become the owner of the property.
b) Yes the CA acted correctly in deleting the award of
rentals to GSIS.
The rule in permissive counterclaims is that
for the trial court to acquire jurisdiction, the
counterclaimant is bound to pay the prescribed filing
fees. Since the GSIS failed to pay the filing fees, the
RTC did not acquire jurisdiction over its permissive
counterclaim. The judgment rendered by the RTC,
insofar as it ordered Fernando to pay GSIS the
rentals which he collected from CMTC, is considered
null and void. Any decision rendered without
jurisdiction is a total nullity and may be struck down at
any time, even on appeal. (GSIS v. Caballero, G.R.
No. 158090,4 October 2010).
Q.

Aya sues Lea for recovery of a tract of land. Lea
seeks in turn to be reimbursed of the value of
improvements she had introduced on the same
land and the payment of damages she had sustained.
Should Lea file a separate action against Aya for
that purpose? (94 Bar 016)

A.

No, Lea should not file a separate action against Aya
for that purpose.

230

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Under S2 R9, a compulsory counterclaim not set
up shall be barred.
Here the claim of Lea for reimbursement of the
value of the improvements she had introduced on the
same land and the payment of damages she had
sustained is a compulsory counterclaim since it arises
out of or is connected to the suit of Aya for recovery of
land. A favorable judgment on Lea's counterclaim
would negate Aya's suit for recovery since Lea would
have the right of retention under Article 546 of the
Civil Code. Hence Lea should set up her claim for
reimbursement and damages as a compulsory
counterclaim against Aya. (See Camara v. Aguilar,
94 Phil. 527).
Calibre Traders entered into a distributorship
agreement with Bayer PhiIs. for the distribution of.
Bayer chemical products in Pangasinan and Tarlac.
Under the agreement Calibre was entitled to rebates
and discounts. The parties later on had a
disagreement as to the amount of the rebates and
discounts. Alleging abuse of right, Calibre Traders
filed an action for damages with the Regional Trial
Court against Bayer for breaching its obligations
under the distributorship agreement by refusing
to reconcile accounts and by appointing other
distributors in Pangasinan and Tarlac. Bayer filed
an answer with counterclaim for unpaid accounts
under the distributorship agreement. Calibre filed
a motion to dismiss the counterclaim on the
ground that it was permissive and Bayer had not
paid the docket fees thereon. Bayer opposed the
motion arguing that its counterclaim was compulsory.
The trial court denied the motion to dismiss,
stating that the counterclaim was compulsory.
After trial, the court rendered judgment in favor of
Calibre. In its judgment, the trial court also
231

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
dismissed Bayer's counterclaim stating that since
it was permissive, the trial court did not acquire
jurisdiction over the same for non-payment of the
docket fees thereon.
a) Was Bayer's
compulsory?

counterclaim permissive or

b) Did the trial court rule properly in dismissing
Bayer's counterclaim?
A

a) Bayer's counterclaim was permissive.
Although the rights and obligations of the parties
are anchored on the same contract, the causes of
action they filed against each other are distinct and do
not involve the same factual issues. There is no
logical relationship between the two actions in a way
that the recovery or dismissal of plaintiff's suit will
establish a foundation for the other's claim. The
counterclaim for collection of money is not intertwined
with or contingent on Calibre's own claim for damages,
which was based on the principle of abuse of
rights. Both actions involve the presentation of
different pieces of evidence. Calibre's suit had to
present evidence of malicious intent, while Bayer's
objective was to prove nonpayment of purchases.
(Calibre Traders, Inc. v. Bayer PhiIs. Inc., G.R. No.
161431, 13 October 2010). The grant of Bayer's
counterclaim for unpaid accounts would not necessarily
defeat or negate Calibre's suit for damages based on
abuse of rights.
b) No, the trial court did not act properly in dismissing
the counterclaim of Bayer.
Bayer here was in good faith in not paying the
docket fee since it relied upon the trial court's earlier
order denying the motion to strike out the counterclaim
and stating that the counterclaim was compulsory.
232

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
What the trial court should have done was to require
Bayer to pay the docket fee within a reasonable time
but not beyond the prescriptive period. Furthermore,
Bayer should not suffer for the mistake of the trial
court. (Id.).
Q.

In a suit by lessor against lessee for unpaid
rentals, is the counterclaim by lessee for damages
against the lessor for the latter's taking over the
leased premises and harvesting crops permissive?

A

Yes. The complaint and the counterclaim are not
repugnant or inconsistent with each other. The fact
that the lessor is entitled to unpaid rentals would not
authorize him to unilaterally take over the premises
and harvest the crops planted by the lessee. (SyVargas v Estate of Ogsos, 5 Oct 2016, PerlasBernabe, J.)

a

Metrobank foreclosed extrajudicially on the real
estate mortgage executed in its favor by the
spouses Reynoso to secure the loan of CPR
Promotions. Metrobank bought the realty mortgaged
at the auction sale. Subsequently Metrobank filed
an action against the Reynosos with the regional
trial court to collect on the deficiency of P2.6
million. The Reynosos filed an answer where they
raised the defense that the bid price exceeded the
amount of the mortgage obligation. They filed
counterclaims for moral and exemplary damages
and attorney's fees, alleging that the suit was
unfounded. The RTC rendered judgment in favor
of Metrobank.
The Reynosos appealed to the Court of Appeals.
In their appeal brief, the Reynosos prayed for the
return of the excess of the bid price over the
amount due under the mortgage. The CA reversed
the RTC and ordered Metrobank to refund to CPR
233

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
P722,000, representing the excess of the bid price
over the amount due under the mortgage.
Assuming that the bid price did indeed exceed the
Reynosos' mortgage obligation, was it proper for
the Court of Appeals to order the refund of the
excess?
A.

No. Under 32 R9, a compulsory counterclaim not set
up is barred.
Here the claim of the Reynosos for the refund of
the excess over the bid price was a compulsory
counterclaim since it is inconsistent with or in direct
opposition to the claim for deficiency of Metrobank.
Hence it should have been set up as a compulsory
counterclaim in the action for deficiency filed by
Metrobank. Since it was not, the claim for refund was
barred. (Metrobank v. CPR Promotions, 22 June 2015,
Velasco, J.). The last opportunity for the Spouses
Reynoso to set up their claim for refund was by
amendment before judgment pursuant to 310 R11.
They could no longer set up the claim for refund on
appeal. The fact that in their answer with the RTC the
Reynosos raised as a defense the excess of the bid
price over the obligation will not benefit them since a
defense is not a counterclaim.

Q.

D borrowed P1,000,000 from P secured by a real
estate mortgage executed by D in P's favor. The
mortgage contained a special power of attorney
authorizing P to sell the real estate at the
foreclosure sale. D defaulted in the payment of
the loan. D filed an action against P to nullify the
real estate mortgage on the ground that his wife
did not give her consent thereto. Judgment was
rendered in favor of P dismissing D's complaint.

234

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
a) P filed an action to collect on the loan against
D. Is the action barred?
b) Instead of an action to collect on the loan, P
filed an action for judicial foreclosure against
D. Is the action barred?
c) Instead of an action to collect or for judicial
foreclosure, P filed a petition for extrajudicial
foreclosure against D. Is the action barred?

a) No. Applying the opposition test, we find that the
action to collect on the loan is not a compulsory
counterclaim which should have been set up by P
in the action for nullification of the real estate
mortgage. A judgment nullifying the real estate
mortgage would not preclude P from collecting on
the principal loan since the mortgage is only an
accessory obligation.
b) Yes. Applying the opposition test, it can be seen
that a judgment nullifying the mortgage would
necessarily preclude an action to foreclose upon
it. Hence the action for judicial foreclosure is a
compulsory counterclaim which is barred since it
was not set up in the nullification suit.
c)

No. The right to foreclose extrajudicially is a
substantive right under Act No. 3135 which
cannot be repealed or abrogated by a procedural
rule. (See Papa v. Banaag, 17 SCRA 1083, 1086
[1966]). Besides a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure,
being precisely extrajudicial, cannot be set up as
a counterclaim before a regular court.

235

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P files a suit against D before the RTC of Makati
City. Assuming that D's counterclaim arises out
of or is connected to the transaction or occurrence
constituting the subject matter of P's claim, can D
file a counterclaim:
a) For ejectment?
b) For sum of money (P350,000)?
c) For support?
d) For infringement of D's patent?
e) For delivery of title over a subdivision lot which
P, as a subdivision developer, sold to D?

A.
a) No. A counterclaim must be within the jurisdiction of
the court as to its nature. (S7 R6)
b) Yes. In the RTC, a counterclaim may be considered
as compulsory regardless of the amount thereof
The counterclaim would be governed by the
regular procedure, not the rules of procedure for
small claims cases for the latter rules apply only
to cases filed before the MTC.
c) No. The counterclaim must be cognizable by the
regular courts of justice. (Id.) An action for
support is cognizable by a special court, that is,
the family court.
d) It depends. If the RTC is also a special commercial
court, then the counterclaim may be filed before
it. If the RTC is a non-SCC, then the counterclaim
cannot be filed before it since cases involving
violations of intellectual property rights should be
filed with and tried by the SCCs.
236

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
e) No. The counterclaim is within the jurisdiction of
the HLURB.
CI.

Fe filed a collection suit for P387,000 against
Ramon in the RTC of Davao City. Aside from alleging
payment as a defense, Ramon in his answer set
up counterclaims for P100,000 as damages and
P30,000 as attorney's fees as a result of the
baseless filing of the complaint, as well as for
P250,000 as the balance of the purchase price of
30 units of airconditioners he sold to Fe.
a)

Does the RTC have jurisdiction over Ramon's
counterclaims and if so does he have to pay
docket fees therefor? (08 Bar Q2a)

XXX
A.
a)

The RTC has jurisdiction over Ramon's
counterclaim for P130,000 as damages and
attorney's fees but it does not have jurisdiction
over the counterclaim for P250,000.

A counterclaim must be within the jurisdiction of
the court both as to the nature and amount. However,
in an original action before the RTC the counterclaim
may be considered as compulsory regardless of its
amount.
Hence, the RTC has jurisdiction over the claim
for P130,000 which is a compulsory counterclaim
even though the amount thereof does not exceed
P300,000. The RTC however does not have jurisdiction
over the permissive counterclaim for P250,000 since
the same does not exceed the jurisdictional amount of
P300,000.

237

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Ramon does not have to pay docket fees on the
P130,000 counterclaim. While 57(a) R141 as amended
on 16 August 2004 imposes docket fees on compulsory
counterclaims filed before the RTC, the payment of
such docket fees has been suspended by the
Supreme Court in its en banc resolution dated 21
September 2004 [A.M. No. 04-2-04-SC]).
Suggested Answer of UP Law Center & Philippine
Association Of Law Schools:
A.

Yes, the RTC has jurisdiction over Ramon's
counterclaims because they are all money claims in
which the totality rule applies in determining jurisdiction.
(Sec. 5[d], Rule 2, Rules of Court).
(Note: It is submitted that the totality rule cannot
be applied. This is because in the case of a compulsory
counterclaim the RTC would have jurisdiction over it
regardless of its amount. [S7 R6]. Otherwise put, in a
compulsory counterclaim, the amount thereof does
not serve as a test of jurisdiction. Hence the amount
of the compulsory counterclaim should not be added
to the amount of the permissive counterclaim to
determine jurisdiction. It would be however different
in the case of two or more permissive counterclaims
that are principally for recovery of money in which
case the aggregate amount would be the test of
jurisdiction.)
Ramon has to pay docket fees for his
counterclaim whether the counterclaim is compulsory
or permissive in nature. Rule 141 of the Rules of
Court has been amended to require payment of
docket fees for counterclaims and cross-claims whether
compulsory or permissive.

238

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
(Note: This suggested answer overlooks the SC
en banc Resolution dated 21 September 2004 which
suspends the payment of docket fees on compulsory
counterclaims).
Pilipinas Shell Petroleum Corporation (Shell) filed
a petition for extrajudicial foreclosure against the
Petitioners who are the mortgagors. After the
foreclosure sale, Shell filed an action for the
deficiency against the Petitioners with the RTC of
Manila. Petitioners in the meantime commenced
an action to annul the extrajudicial foreclosure
sale with the RTC of Makati City. The Manila RTC
ruled in favor of Shell. This judgment became final
and executory. Subsequently the Makati RTC
ruled in favor of the Petitioners and annulled the
extrajudicial foreclosure sale. The Makati RTC
ruled that no auction sale was actually conducted.
Pilipinas Shell filed a motion for reconsideration
arguing that the Makati case should have been
dismissed on the ground of res judicata. The
motion was denied and Shell appealed to the CA.
Should the Makati case have been dismissed?
Yes. The Makati case should have been earlier
disallowed to proceed on the ground of litis pendentia,
or, once the decision in the Manila case became final,
should have been dismissed on the ground of being
barred by res judicata. Petitioner's claim for annulment
of the extrajudicial foreclosure case should have been
set up as a compulsory counterclaim in the Manila
case. (See Mendiola v. Pilipinas Shell Petroleum
Corp., 18 July 2012, Bersamin, J.).
D and P entered into a lease contract whereby D
leased Room 401 to P. P was of the impression
that the lease also covered the rooftop of Room
442. However D padlocked the way to the rooftop.
D insisted that the lease only covered Room 401
239

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
and that P's use of the rooftop was merely
tolerated. P tendered the lease payment to D who
refused to accept the same. P then filed an action
for consignation with the MTC against D. D then
filed an answer with counterclaim for unlawful
detainer against P. The Court of Appeals ruled
that the raising of the counterclaim for ejectment
was improper since such could only be initiated
by a verified complaint pursuant to 54 R70. Was
the filing of the counterclaim improper?
A.

No. There is no rule that an ejectment suit cannot be
raised in a counterclaim. In fact the counterclaim for
ejectment was compulsory since it was connected
with the transaction or occurrence constituting the
subject matter of the opposing claim, i.e., the lease
contract between D and P. (Chan v. Court of Appeals,
230 SCRA 685 [1994]).

Q.

P filed with the Metropolitan Trial Court of Las
Pifias City a complaint against D to recover
possession of a parcel of land with an assessed
value of P60,000. D filed an answer. The MeTC
tried the case on the merits and rendered a
decision in favor of P. D appealed to the RTC.
Assume the RTC does not dismiss the appeal and
proceeds to take cognizance thereof pursuant to
S8 R40. D filed a motion to admit amended answer
in which he raises a counterclaim for P250,000
against P which arose out of the same transaction
subject matter of the complaint. May the court
admit the amended answer?

A.

No the court may not admit the amended answer with
counterclaim.
Under S7 R6, a counterclaim which arises out of
or is connected with the transaction or occurrence
constituting the subject matter of the opposing party's
240

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
claim must be within the jurisdiction of the court both
as to the amount and the nature thereof, except that
in an original action before the RTC, the counterclaim
may be considered compulsory regardless of the amount.
Here the RTC was deciding an appealed case
and not an original action. Hence the exceptive clause
of S7 R6 does not apply and the counterclaim may
not be admitted since it falls below the jurisdictional
amount of the RTC.
Q.

Petitioners filed with the CFI of Cebu an action for
recovery of land against the Private Respondents.
The Private Respondents filed an answer raising
the defense of their ownership. The CFI decided in
favor of the Private Respondents but on appeal
the Court of Appeals reversed and decided in
favor of the Petitioners declaring them as the owners
of the land and ordering the Private Respondents
to vacate the premises. In the body of its decision,
the Court of Appeals stated that there was no
fraud or bad faith on the part of the Private
Respondents. The Court of Appeal's judgment
became final and executory. The Petitioners moved
for the execution of the judgment before the CFI.
This was opposed by the Private Respondents on
the ground that a hearing supplementary to
execution should be conducted to allow them to
present evidence to prove that they are builders
in good faith and to prove the value of the
improvements.
a) Should the CFI grant the opposition of the
Private Respondents?
b) May the Private Respondents file a separate
action to recover the value of the improvements
introduced by them?
241

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.
a) No. Once a decision has become final and
executory, the only jurisdiction left with the court
is to order its execution. To allow the
supplemental hearing would be to amend or alter
a final and executory judgment.
b) No. Under S2 R9, a compulsory counterclaim not
set up is deemed barred. The claim for
reimbursement of the value of the improvements
is in the nature of a compulsory counterclaim
since it is connected with the transaction or
occurrence constituting the subject matter of the
Petitioners' claim. Hence it should have been set
up as a compulsory counterclaim in the action
filed by Petitioners against the Private Respondents.
The Private Respondents' argument that they
could not have raised the counterclaim for
reimbursement of the value of the improvements
as it would run counter to their defense of
ownership is without merit. Under S2 R8 a party
may set forth two or more statements of a defense
alternatively or hypothetically. Inconsistent defenses
may be pleaded alternatively or hypothetically
provided that each defense is consistent with
itself. (Baclayon v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
89132, 26 February 1990).
Q.

Would the dismissal of the main complaint also
result in the dismissal of the counterclaim
pleaded therein?

A.

No. Unlike the 1964 Rules of Civil Procedure, the rule
under the 1997 Rules is that the dismissal of the main
complaint will not correspondingly result in the
dismissal of the counterclaim where the defendant
242

RULES
Kinds Of Pleadings
had already filed and served his counterclaim upon
the plaintiff. The defendant has the option of
prosecuting the counterclaim in the same or in a
separate action. (36 R16 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure, 32 & 3, R17). The exception would be
under 32 R17 where the defendant pleaded his
counterclaim after the service upon him of the
plaintiff's motion for dismissal. In such a case, the
dismissal of the complaint will also result in the
dismissal of the counterclaim. The reason is quite
obvious: the defendant already has notice of the
plaintiff's motion for dismissal at the time he pleads
his counterclaim and is therefore presumed to have
borne the risk of dismissal.
PNB filed with the Pasay City Regional Trial Court
an action for recovery of money with application
for preliminary attachment against Globe Asiatique
Realty Corp and De[fin Lee. (Case 1). The case
was raffled to Branch 119 and the court issued the
writ of preliminary attachment against defendants.
Subsequently Globe Asiatique filed a complaint
for tort against Aida Padilla (PNB officer) and
Judge Gutierrez (who had issued the writ of
preliminary attachment) before Pasay City RTC,
Branch 155. (Case 2). Defendants filed an answer
with affirmative defense of lis pendens. The
defendant Padilla also raised in her answer a
counterclaim for damages against Globe Asiatique
for filing a malicious and harassment suit against
her. The judge in Case 2 dismissed the complaint
for lack of jurisdiction stating that it cannot
interfere with the orders of the coordinate court in
Case 1. It also dismissed the counterclaim of
Padilla on the ground that the dismissal of the main
complaint necessarily carried with it the dismissal
of the compulsory counterclaim. Was the dismissal
of the compulsory counterclaim correct?
243

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

No. Under the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure, it is now
explicitly provided that the dismissal of the complaint
due to failure of the plaintiff to prosecute his case is
"without prejudice to the right of the defendant to
prosecute his counterclaim in the same or in a
separate action." (33 R17). The effect of this amendment
is to abandon previous rulings that the dismissal of a
complaint carries with it the dismissal of the
counterclaims. While 33 R17 refers to dismissal of
complaints due to the fault of plaintiff, it does not
preclude the application of the same rule when dismissal
is at defendant's instance. The court's jurisdiction
over respondent's complaint is not to be confused with
jurisdiction over petitioner's counterclaim. (Padilla v.
Globe Asiatique Realty Corp., 6 August 2014).3°

Q.

Financial Building Corporation (FBC) was engaged
by the U.S.S.R government to construct a multilevel apartment building in Forbes Park. Forbes
Park Association (FPA) suspended all entry permits
of the construction after discovering that the
same would violate the subdivision's deed of
restrictions. FBC filed an action for injunction and
damages against FPA anchored on the contention
that FPA's prohibition on the construction work
was improper (first case). FPA filed a motion to
dismiss on the ground that the complaint fails to
state a cause of action since it is the USSR, not
FBC, which was the real party-in-interest. The
motion to dismiss was granted. The order of

30 The Court need not have relied by analogy upon S3 R17. The more
precise provision is 56 R16 which provides that the dismissal of the complaint
pursuant to said provision shall be without prejudice to the prosecution in the
same or separate action of a counterclaim pleaded in the answer. The rule in
S16 R16 was not carried over to the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure (apparently
inadvertently) but it is submitted that it is still applicable.

244

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
dismissal became final. Later on FPA filed an
action against FBC to remove the structures it
had built and for damages (second case).
a) If you were the counsel for FBC, what would
you do?
b) If you were the counsel for FPA, instead of
filing a motion to dismiss, what would you
have done?
c) Assume that no motion to dismiss was filed by
FBC in the second case and the RTC rendered
a decision in favor of FPA. On appeal may the
judgment of the RTC in the second case be
set aside? If so, on what ground?

a) I would file a motion to dismiss the suit of FPA on
the ground of res judicata, specifically, that the
second case should have been raised as a
compulsory counterclaim in the first case. (S2
R9). The claim to demolish the structures was a
compulsory counterclaim which should have been
set up in the injunction case. Such a counterclaim
would defeat or negate FBC's complaint for
injunction which alleged that the prohibition on
construction was improper.
b) I would not file a motion to dismiss but an answer
and raise the ground for the motion to dismiss
(i.e., failure to state a cause of action) as an
affirmative defense in the answer. (S6 R16, 1997
Rules of Civil Procedure). I would plead in my
answer the claim for damages and removal as a
compulsory counterclaim. In such a case, the
dismissal of the complaint would have been without

245

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
prejudice to the prosecution in the same or
separate action of a counterclaim pleaded in the
answer, pursuant to 56 R16.
c) Yes the judgment of the RTC may be set aside on
the ground of res judicata. Note that the defense
of res judicata may be raised for the first time
even on appeal. (Financial Building Corp. v. Forbes
Park Association, Inc., 338 SCRA 346 [2000]).31
Q.

P sues D who moves to dismiss on the ground of
prescription. The motion is granted and the case
dismissed. The dismissal order became final.
Then, D sues P on a claim arising out of the same
transaction or occurrence as P's earlier attempted
claim. P defends on the ground that D's claim is
precluded by his failure to raise it as a
counterclaim in the first action. Is P's defense
meritorious?

A.

Yes. D should not have filed a motion to dismiss but
an answer interposing his counterclaim and raising
the ground of prescription as an affirmative defense.
(S6 R16, 1997 Rules of Procedure; Financial Building
Corp. v. Forbes Park Association, supra). Since he
failed to set up his compulsory counterclaim in the
first action, the same is deemed barred. (S2 R9).

Q.

Fe filed a collection suit for P387,000 against
Ramon in the RTC of Davao City. Aside from alleging
payment as a defense, Ramon in his answer set
up counterclaims for P100,000 as damages and
P30,000 as attorney's fees as a result of the
baseless filing of the complaint, as well as for
P250,000 as the balance of the purchase price of
30 units of airconditioners he sold to Fe.

31Under the aegis of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure, a motion to
dismiss on the ground of failure to state a cause of action was still allowed.

246

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
a) xxx
b) Suppose Ramon's counterclaim for the unpaid
balance is P310,000, what will happen to his
counterclaims if the court dismisses the
complaint after holding a preliminary hearing
on Ramon's affirmative defenses?
c) Under the same premise as paragraph (b)
above, suppose that instead of alleging payment
as a defense in his answer, Ramon filed a
motion to dismiss on that ground, at the same
time setting up his counterclaims, and the
court grants his motion. What will happen to
his counterclaims? (08 Bar Q2)

b) Ramon's counterclaim may be prosecuted in the
same or in a separate action pursuant to S6 R16
which provides that the dismissal of the action
shall be without prejudice to the defendant
prosecuting his counterclaims in the same or in a
separate action.

•

c) Ramon's counterclaim for P130,000 will be barred
since it is a compulsory counterclaim which was
not set up in the answer pursuant to S2 R9. A
counterclaim cannot be set up in a motion to
dismiss. (Financial Building Corp. v. Forbes Park
Association, Inc., 338 SCRA 346). His counterclaim
for P310,000 may still be prosecuted in a separate
action since it is a permissive counterclaim.

Q. Petitioner filed a complaint for consolidation of
title over land sold to him by Respondent under a
pacto de retro sale. Respondent filed an answer
with counterclaim asking that Petitioner receive
P810 and that the pacto de retro sale be declared
as an equitable mortgage. Petitioner did not file
247

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
an answer to the Respondent's counterclaim.
Upon motion, the trial court declared Petitioner in
default as to Respondent's counterclaim and
rendered judgment in favor of Respondent. Did
the trial court properly declare Petitioner in default
in respect of Respondent's counterclaim?
A.

No. The counterclaim of Respondent is compulsory
since it is connected with the subject matter of
Petitioner's complaint for consolidation. A party cannot
be declared in default for failing to answer a
compulsory counterclaim because the issues raised in
the compulsory counterclaim are deemed automatically
joined by the allegations of the complaint. (Gojo v.
Goyala, 35 SCRA 557 [1970]).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant for
recovery of possession of real property with the
Regional Trial Court of Manila. Defendant filed an
answer with affirmative defenses and interposed a
counterclaim for damages and attorney's fees
arising from the filing of the complaint. When
plaintiff failed to file an answer on the
counterclaim, defendant moved to declare him in
default. Notwithstanding notice of the motion,
plaintiff did not file an opposition.
As judge, how would you resolve the motion
to declare plaintiff in default? (96 Bar 06[3]).

A.

As judge, I would deny the motion to declare plaintiff
in default.
The Supreme Court has held that a party cannot
be declared in default for failing to answer a
compulsory counterclaim, since the issues in such
counterclaim are automatically traversed by the complaint.

248

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Here the counterclaim for damages and
attorney's fees arising from the filing of the complaint
is a compulsory counterclaim since it arises from the
filing of the complaint by the plaintiff. Hence plaintiff
cannot be declared in default.

fl

L obtained a series of loans from Banco de Oro
for which he executed three real estate mortgages. L
defaulted on the 3 rd loan and the bank extrajudicially
foreclosed the mortgage on the 1" and 3 rd loans.
Before the scheduled public auction, L filed with
the RTC of Quezon City a complaint for specific
performance, torts, and damages against the bank
for including the 1" real estate mortgage in the
foreclosure. The bank filed an answer in which it
raised the defense that there is a cross-default
provision in the loan contracts that justifies the
inclusion of properties in the 1 real estate
mortgage in the foreclosure. The auction sale then
proceeded but the proceeds realized therefrom were
not sufficient to answer for L's loan obligation.
The bank sent a demand letter to L to pay the
deficiency but this was not heeded by L.
Subsequently, during the pendency of the Quezon
City case, the bank filed with the RTC of
Mandaluyong against L an action for collection of
the deficiency. L filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that the action for the deficiency was a
compulsory counterclaim that should have been
set up in the Quezon City case since it arose from
the same loan transaction. Should L's motion to
dismiss the action for the deficiency be granted?

A.

No. The action for the deficiency does not involve a
compulsory counterclaim. A compulsory counterclaim
is one which must be existing at the time of filing the
answer. (S8 R11). An after-acquired counterclaim is
merely permissive. Thus, a party who fails to file a
249

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
counterclaim arising out of or connected with the
transaction subject of the plaintiff's suit but which did
not exist at the time said party files his answer is not
barred from filing such claims. He can do so by
supplemental pleading or by a separate action. Here
BDO's right of action accrued only after L's refusal to
pay after receiving demand letters for the deficiency
from BDO. (Banco de Oro vs. Locsin, 25 August
2005, Carpio-Morales, J.).
SEC, 8. Cross-claim
Q.

What is a cross-claim?

A.

A cross-claim is any claim by one party against a coparty arising out of the transaction or occurrence that
is the subject matter either of the original action or of
a counterclaim therein. Such a cross-claim may cover
all or part of the original claim. (38 R6).
A cross-claim may include a claim that the party
against whom it is asserted is or may be liable to the
cross-claimant for all or part of a claim asserted in the
action against the cross-claimant.
A cross-claim, like a counterclaim, is set up in
the answer.
In an action for tort filed by the plaintiff against
the registered owner and the actual owner of a motor
vehicle, the registered owner may file a cross-claim
against the actual owner. (Mangaron v. Carpe, 23
September 2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

D and E are solidarily indebted to P for P5 million.
P filed a collection case against D and E for P5
million. D filed his answer in which he alleged that
he had already paid P5 million to X, the agent of P,
prior to the filing of the complaint. Judgment
250

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
rendered in favor of D and E dismissing P's
complaint, the court finding that D's payment to X,
the agent of P, had extinguished the obligation.
The judgment became final and executory. D then
files an action to collect P2,500,000 from E as
reimbursement. E files a motion to dismiss on the
ground that D should have filed his claim as a
cross-claim in the collection case filed by P.
Should the court grant the motion to dismiss?
A.

Yes. A cross-claim not set up is deemed barred. (32
R9). D should have set up his claim for reimbursement
in the first case as a cross-claim against E.

Q.

Is there such a thing as a permissive cross-claim?

A.

In a sense, yes. A cross-claim which either matured
or was acquired by a party after serving his pleading
is not compulsory. (39 R11, Namarco v. Federation of
Namarco Distributors, Inc., 49 SCRA 238).

Q.

D and E are jointly and severally indebted to P
under a promissory note for P500,000. P sues D
and E before the RTC. D filed a cross-claim against
E to recover P450,000 arising from the nonpayment of the price of a car sold and delivered
by D to E. Is the filing of the cross-claim proper?

A.

No. A cross-claim is any claim by one party against a
co-party arising out of the transaction or occurrence
that is the subject matter either of the original action
or of a counterclaim therein (38 R6). Here, the crossclaim is not proper since the claim by D against E did
not arise out of the loan transaction subject of the
complaint. Hence the court cannot take cognizance of
the cross-claim.

251

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
Q.

P filed a case against D and E. D filed a crossclaim against E. E did not answer the crossclaim. May D move to declare E in default of the
cross-claim?

A.

Yes. E should answer the cross-claim otherwise he
may be declared in default of the same. Under 53 R9
the claiming party may move for default in case of
failure to answer of the defending party. The crossclaimant is a claiming party while the cross-defendant
is a defending party within the purview of the Rules of
Court. (Si R3). Compare with the rule that the opposing
party cannot be declared in default for failure to
answer a compulsory counterclaim.

Q.

P filed a case against D and E. D filed a crossclaim against E. May E in his answer to the crossclaim, assert a counterclaim against D's cross-claim?

A.

Yes. The cross-defendant can file an answer to the
cross-claim and he may plead in the answer a
counterclaim or a cross-claim. (See old 510 R6).

Q.

D and E are solidarily indebted to P for P500,000.
P filed a collection case against D and E for
P500,000. D and E filed their answer alleging the
defense of prescription. Judgment rendered in
favor of P and the same became final and executory.
D pays the P500,000 to the sheriff. D then files an
action to collect P250,000 from E. E files a motion
to dismiss on the ground that D should have filed
his claim as a cross-claim in the collection case
filed by P. Should the court grant the motion
to dismiss?

A.

No. The cross-claim is not compulsory but permissive
since D's right to reimbursement arose only after he
had served his answer. Prior to paying P, D did not
yet have the right of reimbursement as against E.
252

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Q.

D borrowed P500,000 from P with X acting as the
surety. D did not pay on maturity so P sued D and
X. Judgment rendered in favor of P as against D
and X for P500,000. The bank account of X was
garnished in the amount of P500,000. X demanded
indemnification from D but the latter did not pay
X. X sued D for indemnification. D argued that X's
claim for indemnification was waived since he did
not raise it as a cross-claim pursuant to S2 R9. Is
D's argument meritorious?

A.

No. The cross-claim was merely permissive since X's
right to indemnification only arose after he had paid D.
Also under 535 R39, when a judgment is upon an
obligation of one of the parties as security for another,
and the surety pays the amount or any part thereof,
either by sale of his property or before sale, he may
compel repayment from the principal.
S unlawfully ousted 0 from his parcel of land. S
then sold and delivered the land to B. 0 files an
action for reconveyance against S and B. Judgment
was rendered in favor of 0. The judgment became
final and executory. Later on B filed an action for
breach of warranty against eviction against S. S
moved to dismiss on the ground that the action
was barred since B should have raised the same
as a cross-claim against S in the reconveyance
suit. Should S's motion to dismiss be granted?
No. A cross-claim which matured or arose after the
defendant has served his answer is permissive and
not mandatory. (59 R11).
Here B's cross-claim for breach of warranty
against eviction arose only after a final judgment had
been rendered in the reconveyance suit. Under the
Law on Sales, the warranty against eviction cannot be
enforced until a final judgment has been rendered
253

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
whereby the vendee loses the thing acquired or a part
thereof. (Articles 1548 and 1557, Civil Code). Hence
the cross-claim is not barred.
Q.

Is a cross-claim subject to the payment of a
docket fee?

A.

A cross-claim filed before the MTC is not subject to a
docket fee but one filed with the RTC is. (57[a] R141).

Q.

P filed a complaint for collection of a P1,000,000
loan against D and E before the RTC of Manila. D
filed a counterclaim against P for P500,000 for
moral and exemplary damages claiming that the
filing of the suit was malicious and baseless. D
also filed a counterclaim against P for P450,000
arising from the unpaid price of a car sold by D to
P. In the meantime D also filed a cross-claim
against E for indemnification contending that the
loan was really incurred for the benefit of E only.
No docket fees were paid on the counterclaims
and cross-claim.
a) Is D liable to pay docket fees on his counterclaims?
b) Is D liable to pay docket fees on his cross-claim?

A.
a) D is not liable to pay docket fees on his
counterclaim for P500,000 since the counterclaim
is compulsory. Collection of docket fees on
compulsory counterclaims has been suspended
by the Supreme Court in its 21 September 2004
Resolution. D is liable for the payment of docket
fees on his counterclaim for P450,000 since the
same is a permissive counterclaim.

254

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
b) D is liable to pay docket fees on his cross-claim
which was filed before the RTC, pursuant to S7(a)
R141. The SC did not suspend the collection of
docket fees on cross-claims filed with the RTC.
Q.

Distinguish a counterclaim from a cross-claim.

A.
1)

AS TO WHOM DIRECTED. A counterclaim is
directed against the opposing party while a crossclaim is directed against a co-party.

2) AS TO CONNECTION WITH THE MAIN ACTION.
A counterclaim may or may not arise out of the
transaction constituting the subject matter of the
opposing party's claim while a cross-claim always
arises out of the transaction or occurrence that is
the subject matter of the original action or of a
counterclaim therein.
3)

AS TO COMPULSORINESS. A counterclaim may
or may not be compulsory while a cross-claim is
always compulsory.

4)

AS FOR NEED TO ANSWER. A counterclaim
need not be answered if the counterclaim is
compulsory, while a cross-claim must be
answered, otherwise the party against whom it is
pleaded may be declared in default upon motion.

SEC. 10. Reply
Q.

Define a reply.

A.

A reply is a pleading, the function of which is to deny,
or allege facts in denial or avoidance of new matters
alleged in or relating to an actionable document
attached to the answer. (310 R6).
255

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When a plaintiff file a reply?

A.

A plaintiff may file a reply only if the defending party
attaches an actionable document to his answer. (Id.)

Q.

Is there a need for the Plaintiff to file a reply?

A.

No. The reason is that even if a plaintiff does not file
such reply, all the new matters alleged in the answer,
including those alleged in or relating to an actionable
document attached to the answer, are deemed
controverted. If the plaintiff wishes to interpose any
claims arising out of the new matters so alleged, he shall
set forth such claims in an amended or supplemental
complaint. (610 R6).

Q.

When is there a need for the Plaintiff to file a reply?

A.

If the defending party attaches an actionable
document to his answer and the plaintiff wishes to
contest the genuineness and due execution of the
actionable document, he should file a reply thereto.
(610 R6). Such a reply must be verified in accordance
with S8 R8. Otherwise the genuineness and due
execution of the actionable document are deemed
admitted by the plaintiff.

Q.

When may the defendant file a rejoinder?

A.

If an actionable document is attached to the reply, the
defendant may file a rejoinder if the same is based
solely on an actionable document. (S10 R6, 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).

256

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
SEC. 11. Third-party complaint
Q.

What is a third-party complaint?

A.

A third-party complaint is a claim that the defendant
may file against a person not a party to the action for
contribution, indemnification, subrogation or any other
relief, in respect of his opponent's claim. (CISO). The
defendant should obtain leave of court in order to file
a third-party complaint.

Q.

What is a fourth-party complaint?

A.

A fourth-party complaint is a claim that the third-party
defendant may file against a person not a party to the
action for contribution, indemnification, subrogation or
any other relief, in respect of his opponent's claim.
The third-party defendant should obtain leave of court
in order to file a fourth-party complaint.

Q.

Distinguish a third-party complaint from a thirdparty claim.

A.

AS TO ITS NATURE. A third-party complaint is a
pleading while a third-party claim is not a pleading but
an affidavit or paper.
AS TO WHO FILES. A third-party complaint is
filed by a party to a case while a third-party claim is
filed by a stranger to the case.
AS TO PURPOSE. The purpose of a third-party
complaint is for the defendant to bring in a stranger as
a party to the case while the purpose of the third-party
claim is for the third-party to notify the sheriff of his
right or claim over the property attached, levied, or
seized by the sheriff.

257

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Illustrate each of the grounds for a third-party
complaint.

A.

CONTRIBUTION. If D and X are liable for tort against
P and the latter sues D only, D may file a third-party
complaint against X for contribution, since joint tortfeasors are solidarily liable under Article 2194 of the
Civil Code.
INDEMNIFICATION. P sues the surety to
recover the loan the latter had guaranteed. The surety
may file a third-party complaint against the principal
debtor for indemnification. At any rate, a judgment
against the surety is also binding upon the principal
debtor who had notice of the action or proceeding and
an opportunity at the surety's request to join in the
defense. (S46 R39; 2 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS
ON THE RULES OF COURT 346 [1979 ed.]).
SUBROGATION. X recklessly drives his car and
collides with P's car destroying it. P sues the insurer
to recover damages on his car insurance policy. The
insurer can file a third-party complaint against X since
it would be subrogated to the rights of the insured
upon payment to the latter.
OTHER RELIEF IN RESPECT OF HIS OPPONENT'S
CLAIM. P sues D to recover real property. D may file
a third-party complaint against X, who sold the real
property to him, for breach of warranty against eviction.
(Art. 1548, Civil Code). Insured sues insurer to recover
on the policy issued by the latter. The insurer may file
a third-party complaint against the re-insurer.

258

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Q.

When may the third (fourth, etc.)-party complaint
be denied admission?

A.

The third (fourth, etc.)-party complaint shall be denied
admission, and the court shall require32 the defendant
to institute a separate action, where: (a) the third
(fourth, etc.)-party defendant cannot be located within
30 days from the grant of such leave; (b) matters
extraneous to the issue in the principal case are
raised; or (c) the effect would be to introduce a new
and separate controversy into the action.33

Q.

What is the test to determine the propriety of a
third-party complaint?

A.

The test to determine the propriety of a third-party
complaint is to ask the following questions:
1) Is the third-party defendant's liability to the thirdparty plaintiff premised on the latter's liability to
the plaintiff?
2) May the plaintiff directly assert a claim against
the third-party defendant?
An affirmative answer to any of these questions
means that the third-party complaint is proper.34

32Why should the court require the defendant to institute a separate
action? This matter should be left to the defendant's discretion. The defendant
may not want to pursue his claim in a separate action.
33 It is submitted that grounds (b) and (c) are too broadly stated and would
defeat the purpose of providing for third (fourth, etc.)-party complaints, that is, to
avoid multiplicity of suits. They also go against the principle that a third-party
complaint is independent of and distinct from the complaint. It should suffice that
the third-party complaint is "in respect off the claim of the third-party plaintiffs
opponent. It is suggested that the test of propriety discussed in the next question
should be the test of whether to admit or not the third-party complaint.
341 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF COURT 282283 (1979 ed.).

259

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

A bank lent money to a company. The money lent
was misappropriated by certain officers of the
company. In the collection suit filed by the bank
against the company, may the latter file a thirdparty complaint against the erring officers?

A.

No. A third-party complaint is, under the Rules,
available only if the defendant has a right to demand
contribution, indemnity, subrogation or any other relief
from the supposed third-party defendants in respect to
the plaintiffs claim. (Sec. 1, Rule 12, Rules of Court).
Here the officers of the defendant corporation
had nothing to do with the loan of defendant
corporation with the bank. Consequently, they cannot
be made parties defendants in a third-party complaint.
(Commercial Bank & Trust Co. v. Republic Armored
Car Service Corp., 8 SCRA 425 [1963]).

Q.

Rufino is indebted to Simplicio in the amount of
P400,000 payable on 31 December 2007. To meet
the obligation, Rufino had saved P200,000 by
January 2007. During that month, Rosendo was
able to borrow the P200,000 from Rufino after
having been warned that Rosendo should return
the P200,000 to Rufino before 31 December 2007.
In February 2008, Simplicio sued Rufino for
the collection of his credit Rufino pleaded in his
Answer that he was ready to pay P200,000 to
Simplicio and, reciting his transaction with Rosendo,
he filed a third-party complaint against Rosendo
for the recovery of the P200,000. Is the third-party
complaint admissible? (80 Bar Q2 ed).

A.

No the third-party complaint is not admissible.

260

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
Under S11 R6, a third-party complaint is available
only if the defendant has a right to demand
contribution, indemnity, subrogation or any other
relief, in respect of his opponent's claim.
Here the right to demand relief by Rufino against
Rosendo was not in respect of Simplicio's claim
against Rufino. Hence the third-party complaint is not
admissible. (See Commercial Bank & Trust Co. v.
Republic Armored Car Service Corp., 8 SCRA 425;
DEAN MARIANO MAGSALIN, ANSWERS TO BAR
QUESTIONS FROM 1980 TO 1989, pp. 1-2 [1990]).
Q.

B and C borrowed P900,000 from A. The promissory
note was executed by B and C in a joint and
several capacity. B, who received the money from
A, gave C P450,000. C in turn loaned P225,000 out
of the P450,000 he received to D.
***

b) In an action filed by A against B and C with the
Regional Trial Court of Quezon City, can C file
a third-party complaint against D for the
amount of P225,000? (97 Bar Q2b ed).

b) No, C cannot file a third-party complaint against D
for the amount of P225,000. C's claim against D
is not in the way of a claim for contribution,
indemnity, subrogation, or other relief, in respect
of A's claim. The loan by C to D is separate and
distinct from the loan by A to B and C. Nor may A
directly assert a claim against D.

261

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Plaintiff lent money to D with S acting as surety.
S acted as surety upon a counterbond given by X
which counterbond would answer to S in case he
is held liable upon the loan. D was unable to pay
Plaintiff who sued D and S. May S file a third-party
complaint against X?

A.

Yes. The third-party complaint by S against X is in
respect of P's claim against S. X's liability to S is
premised upon S's liability to the Plaintiff.35

Q.

D borrowed P500,000 from P with X acting as the
surety. D did not pay on maturity so P sued X.
Judgment rendered in favor of P as against X for
P500,000. The bank account of X was garnished in
the amount of P500,000. X demanded indemnification
from D but the latter did not pay so X filed a suit
seeking indemnification from D. D filed a motion
to dismiss arguing that X should have filed a
third-party complaint against D and not having
done so, the action for indemnification is barred
by res judicata or waiver. Should the motion to
dismiss be granted?

A.

No. Unlike a compulsory counterclaim or a crossclaim, the filing of a third-party complaint is not
compulsory and has no preclusive effect. Hence X's
claim for indemnification against D is not barred by
res judicata or waiver.

Q.

Paras was a passenger of a bus operated by
Inland. The Inland bus was bumped by a Philtranco
bus negligently driven by its driver. Paras suffered
injuries and incurred substantial hospitalization
and medical expenses. Paras filed with the RTC a
complaint against Inland based on contract of

351 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF COURT 281
(1979 ed.).

262

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
carriage. Inland, with leave of court, filed a thirdparty complaint against Philtranco based on
quasi-delict. The RTC rendered a judgment absolving
Inland from liability and finding that the collision
was due to the negligence of the Philtranco driver.
The RTC ordered Philtranco to pay damages to
Paras. On appeal, Philtranco challenges the
decision contending that it cannot be held liable
directly to Paras since Paras' suit is against Inland
and is based on culpa contractual while Inland's
third-party complaint against it is based on quasidelict. Philtranco argues that since it was merely
subrogated to Inland, there should first be a
finding of Inland's liability to Paras before Philtranco
can be held liable. Is Philtranco's argument correct?
A.

No. Under S11 R3, a third-party complaint is a claim
that a defending party may, with leave of court, file
against a person not a party to the action for
contribution, indemnity, subrogation or any other relief, in
respect of his opponent's claim.
Under this Rule, a person not a party to an action
may be impleaded by the defendant either (a) on an
allegation of liability to the latter; (b) on the ground of
direct liability to the plaintiff; or, (c) both (a) and (b).
The situation in (a) is covered by the phrase "for
contribution, indemnity or subrogation;" while (b) and
(c) are subsumed under the catch all "or any other
relief, in respect of his opponent's claim." It is worth
adding that allowing the recovery of damages by
Paras based on quasi-delict, despite his complaint
being upon contractual breach, served the judicial
policy of avoiding multiplicity of suits and circuity of
actions by disposing of the entire subject matter in a
single litigation. (Philtranco Service Enterprises v.
Paras, 25 April 2012, Bersamin, J.).

263

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUMEI
Ancillary jurisdiction over third-party complaint
Q.

D and E are solidarity indebted to P for P500,000.
The debt is due and outstanding. P sues D for
P500,000 before the regional trial court. D filed a
motion for leave to file a third-party complaint
against E seeking contribution of P250,000. Should
the court grant the motion even though the amount
of the claim does not exceed P300,000?

A.

Yes. Where the regional trial court has jurisdiction
over the main case, it also has ancillary jurisdiction
over the third-party complaint even though the
amount claimed falls below the jurisdictional amount.
A third-party complaint is merely auxiliary to and is a
continuation of the main action. (Republic v. Central
Surety & Ins. Co., 25 SCRA 641 [1968]; ANTONIO R.
BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE 25 [2003]; 1
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
137 [7th rev. ed., 3rd printing, 1999]; 1 MANUEL V.
MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF COURT
280-281 [1979 ed.]).
(Note: It is believed that the doctrine of ancillary
jurisdiction should also be applicable mutatis mutandis
to cross-claims).

Q.

In an action brought by PCIB against RM and XY
before the Metropolitan Trial Court of Manila, XY
interposed a counterclaim of P450,000; a crossclaim against RM for P500,000; and a third-party
complaint against DE for 425,000, all of which
were dismissed , upon proper motions, for lack of
jurisdiction. Discuss the merits of the said order
of dismissal. (85 Bar (Wed).

264

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
A.

The order of dismissal with respect to the
counterclaim is proper because a counterclaim must
be within the jurisdiction of the court, both as to its
nature and amount. (37 R6).
It is submitted that the dismissal with respect to
the cross-claim and third-party complaint is also
proper. It is believed that the doctrine of ancillary
jurisdiction is not applicable if what is involved is a
main action filed with a metropolitan trial court rather
than a regional trial court since the amounts of the
cross-claim and third-party complaint would be above
rather than below the jurisdictional amount. It is also
difficult to conceive how a third-party complaint, which
is for contribution, indemnity, subrogation or other
relief, could exceed the amount of the plaintiffs claim.
Dean Mariano Magsalin is of the opinion that the
MTC has jurisdiction over the third party complaint
invoking the doctrine of ancillary jurisdiction as set
forth in Republic v. Central Surety & Insurance Co.,
25 SCRA 641. (MARIANO MAGSALIN, ANSWERS
TO BAR QUESTIONS FROM 1980 TO 1989, p. 71
[1st ed.]). In Republic v. Central Surety & Insurance
Co., however, the main complaint was filed with the
Court of First Instance and the third-party complaint
was for an amount falling below the then jurisdictional
amount of P10,000. In the given bar problem, the
amount of the third-party complaint falls above the
jurisdictional amount of P400,000.

Q.

P filed a complaint against the surety with the
RTC of Manila. The surety then filed a third-party
complaint against X, who had executed an indemnity
agreement undertaking to indemnify the surety in
case it becomes liable under the surety bond. X
filed a motion to dismiss the third-party complaint
on the ground of improper venue. X pointed out
265

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
that the indemnity agreement between the surety
and X contains a provision that any suit arising
from the agreement shall be solely and exclusively
filed in Quezon City. Should the court dismiss the
third-party complaint?
A.

No. A third-party complaint is ancillary to the main
case. Thus a third-party complaint has to yield to the
jurisdiction and venue of the main action. (Eastern
Assurance & Surety Corp. v. Cui, G.R. L-54452, 20
July 1981).

Q.

CCC Insurance Corp. issued a surety bond in
favor of Kawasaki Steel Corp. to guarantee the
repayment of the advance made by Kawasaki to
FFM Construction. Upon failure of FFM Construction
to repay Kawasaki, Kawasaki demanded payment
on the surety bond against CCC Insurance. CCC
Insurance denied liability and refused to pay,
raising the defense of novation of the principal
obligation. Kawasaki sued CCC Insurance which
filed a third-party complaint against FFM Construction
for indemnification. FFM corporation was declared
in default with respect to the third-party complaint.
Judgment was rendered in favor of Kawasaki
against CCC Insurance on the main complaint and
in favor of CCC Insurance against FFM Construction
on the third-party complaint On appeal, may the
third-party complaint against FFM Corporation be
dismissed for lack of cause of action?

A.

Yes. The rights to indemnification and subrogation of
a surety arise only upon its payment of the obligation
to the obligee. In the case at bar, since CCC
Insurance has refused to acknowledge and pay its
obligation to Kawasaki under the Surety Bond, it has
not yet acquired the rights to seek indemnification
from FFM Construction and subrogation to Kawasaki
as against FFM Construction. In the same vein, the
266

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
corresponding obligation of FFM Construction to
indemnify CCC Insurance has yet to accrue. Thus far,
there is no act or omission on the part of FFM
Construction which violated the right of CCC
Insurance and for which the latter may seek relief
from the courts. In the absence of these elements,
CCC Insurance has no cause of action against FFM
Construction. Resultantly, the third-party complaint of
CCC Insurance should be dismissed. (CCC Insurance
Corp. v. Kawasaki Steel Corp., 22 June 2015).
Note: The ruling is arguable. In effect it holds
that the surety may sue the principal only after it had
made payment to the obligee, either voluntarily or
through execution, thereby depriving the surety of the
right to resort to a third-party complaint against the
principal and negating S11 R6's purpose of avoiding
multiplicity and circuitry of suits. In fact under 846
R39, the surety need not even file a third-party
complaint against the principal but can simply give
him notice of the action or proceeding, in which case
the principal is also bound by any judgment rendered
against the surety. Under FRCP 14(a) a defending
party may, as third-party plaintiff, serve a summons
and complaint on a nonparty who is or may be liable
to it for all or part of the claim against it. Similarly S8
R6 provides that a cross-claim "may include a claim
that the party against whom it is asserted is or may be
liable to the cross-claimant for all or part of a claim
asserted in the action against the cross-claimant."
This proviso that a cross-claim may be filed against a
party who may be liable to the cross-claimant is
applicable mutatis mutandis to a third-party complaint.

267

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Third-party complaint independent and distinct from
main complaint
Q.

P filed an action to recover on his insurance claim
against insurer D. D filed a third-party complaint
against the re-insurer E which was allowed by the
trial court. Judgment was rendered in favor of P
in respect of his complaint against D, and in favor
of D on its third-party complaint against E. Only D
appealed from the judgment against it. May D
move for the execution of the judgment on the
third-party complaint against E?

A.

Yes. A third-party complaint is independent of and
distinct from the complaint. Hence the judgment on
the third-party complaint may become final and
executory without waiting for the final determination of
the main case. (See Pascual v. Bautista, 33 SCRA
301 [1970]; Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., v. Tempongko,
27 SCRA 418 [1969]). E should have appealed the
judgment against it if it still wanted to contest the same.

Q.

P filed a case against D. D filed a motion for leave
of court to file a third-party complaint against E.
The court issued an order disallowing the thirdparty complaint May D appeal from the order?

A.

Yes. Such an order would finally dispose of D's right
to implead E. (Vda. de Dios v. Balagot, 20 SCRA 950
[1967]).

SEC. 12. Bringing new patties.
Q.

A sues X for nullification of a promissory note.
The note was signed by A and B, binding
themselves jointly to pay X. May X file a
counterclaim not only against A but also against
B to collect on the note?
268

RULE 6
Kinds Of Pleadings
A.

Yes. When the presence of parties other than those to
the original action is required for the granting of
complete relief in the determination of the counterclaim
• or cross-claim, the court shall order them to be
brought in as defendants, if jurisdiction over them can
be obtained. (S12 R6).
Here, the inclusion of B is required for the
granting of complete relief since X cannot obtain
complete relief from A alone. The court shall order
that summons and a copy of the counterclaim be served
on B. (See 1 DEAN MARIA CONCEPCION NOCHE,
CIVIL PROCEDURE EXPLAINED 337-38 [2021]).
However, if B is a non-resident defendant, X may
not include B as a defendant in his counterclaim since
jurisdiction over B's person cannot be obtained.

SEC. 13. Answer to third (fourth, etc.) party complaint
Q.

X's car collides with P's car destroying the latter's
car. P sues the insurer to recover damages on his
car insurance policy. The insurer files a thirdparty complaint against X. May X in his answer to
the third-party complaint raise the defense that
P's car was at the time of the collision being
driven by P's friend who did not have a valid
driver's license, thus violating the authorizeddriver clause of the car policy and barring P from
recovering thereon?

A.

Yes. Under S13 R6, a third-party defendant may
allege in his answer defenses that the third-party
plaintiff may have against the original plaintiffs claim.
The violation of the authorized-driver clause is a
defense that the insurer may have against the claim
of the insured P, yet this may be invoked by X in order
to defeat or negate the insurer's claim pursuant to
S13 R6.
269

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a collection case against D who had acted
as a surety in a loan extended by P to X. D in
turn filed a third-party complaint against X for
indemnification. It turned out that X had already
paid his loan to P even before P had brought his
suit May X file a counterclaim against P for moral
and exemplary damages for bringing a malicious
and unfounded suit and causing X to be dragged
into court?

A.

Yes. Ordinarily a third-party defendant may not file a
counterclaim against the original plaintiff, since the
original plaintiff is not an opposing party as to him.
However under S13 R6, the third-party defendant, in
proper cases, may assert a counterclaim against the
original plaintiff in respect of the latter's claim against
the third-party plaintiff. Here X's counterclaim is
connected to the loan transaction subject of the suit
filed by P against D. (S13 R6).

270

RULE 7. PARTS OF A PLEADING
Q

What are the parts of a pleading? (SBCA)

A.

The parts of a pleading are the following:
1) Caption. This sets forth the name of the court, the
title of the action, and the docket number if
assigned.
2) Body. The body of a pleading sets forth its
designation, the allegations of the party's claim or
defenses, the relief prayed for, and the date of
the pleading.
3) Signature and address. Must include also the
matters stated in answer to the next question.

Q.

What matters or information should be stated by
counsel below his signature? (PIRMA)

A.
1) His address which should not be a post-office box.
2) His PTR official receipt number for the current year.
3) His !BP official receipt number for the current year.
4) His roll number.
5) Number and date of issue of his MCLE Certificate of
Compliance or Certificate of Exemption for the
current or immediately preceding compliance
period. (SC Resolution dated 17 February 2015).
6) In papers and pleadings filed with the SC,
the counsel should indicate his contact details:
e.g., phone number, fax number, cell phone
number, or email address. (A.M. No. 07-6-5-SC,
10 July 2007).
271

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect if the counsel fails to state
below his signature Nos. Ito 4 above?

A.

The pleading is considered as not having been signed.

Q.

What is the effect if the counsel fails to indicate in
his pleading the number and date of issue of his
MCLE Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of
Exemption for the current or immediately preceding
compliance period?

A.

Failure to disclose the required MCLE information
pursuant to SC Resolution dated 17 February 2015
would subject the counsel to appropriate penalty and
disciplinary action but would no longer cause the
dismissal of the case and the expunction of the
pleadings from the records. The non-compliant lawyer
shall be discharged from the case and the client shall
be allowed to secure the services of a new counsel
with the concomitant right to demand the return of
fees already paid to the non-compliant lawyer.

Q.

Is a prosecutor required to indicate in the
information the number and date of issue of his
MCLE Compliance Certificate? May the court dismiss
the information in case of failure to do so?

A.

Yes the prosecutor is required to do so since an
information is a pleading. Nonetheless the court should
not dismiss the information but simply require the
investigating prosecutor to indicate the required
information. (People v. Arrojado, 9 November 2015,
Peralta, J.).

Q.

Give the rules regarding the inclusion of the
parties' names in the pleadings.

272

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
A.
1) The names of all the parties should be included in
the original complaint. In subsequent pleadings, it
is sufficient if the name of the first party on each
side be stated with an appropriate indication when
there are other parties, such as by using the
word, "et al." (Si R7). The names of all the parties
in an appeal shall also be indicated in the notice
of appeal and record on appeal. (S5 &6 R41).
2) In a class suit, it is sufficient if the names of those
appearing in the complaint as plaintiffs or in the
answer as defendants be sufficiently numerous
and representative as to fully protect the interests
of all concerned. (S12 R3).
3) Whenever the identity or name of a defendant is
unknown, he may be sued as the unknown
owner, heir, devisee, or by such other designation
as the case may require. When his identity or true
name is discovered, the pleading must be
amended accordingly. (S14 R3).
4) When two or more persons not organized as an
entity with juridical personality enter into a
transaction, they may be sued under the name by
which they are generally or commonly known. In
the answer of such defendant, the names and
addresses of the persons composing said entity
must all be revealed. (S15 R3).
Q.

May a court adjudge a defendant liable for
P1,000,000 where the specific amount prayed for
in the complaint is only P800,000 and there is no
general prayer for such further or other relief as
may be deemed just or equitable?

273

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes, provided the evidence so warrants and the
defendant fails to object to the introduction of
evidence on the additional P200,000. In such a case
the plaintiff shall pay the additional filing fee on the
P200,000 which shall constitute a lien on the judgment
award. (S5 R10, S2 R141).
Note however that a judgment rendered against
a party in default cannot exceed the amount nor be
different in kind than that prayed for. (S3[d] R9).

Q.

May the court in its final judgment award a claim
not alleged, or a relief different from, or more that
that claimed in the pleading?

A.

Yes. (S2 R141). Of course, the evidence on record
should so warrant and the provisions of S5 R10
should be taken into account. The docket fees on
such award shall constitute a lien on the judgment.
(S2 R141).

Q.

What is the rule regarding the signing of pleadings?

A.

Every pleading and other written submission to the
court must be signed by the party or counsel
representing him. (S3 R7).

Q.

The OSG in behalf of the Republic filed a
complaint in the RTC for the revocation of titles
registered in the name of Kenrick Development
Corporation (KDC). KDC filed an answer which
was purportedly signed by its counsel, Atty. G.
The trial of the case was held up by various pretrial and discovery issues. Two years later, Atty.
G, who by then was no longer KDC's counsel, was
summoned in a congressional hearing on fake
land titles. He testified that he prepared KDC's
answer and sent an unsigned draft to KDC's
president. He testified that the signature appearing
above his name in the answer was not his, that he
274

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
did not authorize any one to sign in his behalf,
and he did not know who signed above his name.
The Republic filed a motion to declare KDC in
default for failure to file a valid answer. The RTC
granted the motion, declared KDC in default, and
allowed the Republic to present its evidence ex
parte. On appeal, the CA reversed the RTC, saying
that Atty. G assented to the filing of the answer in
his behalf as he never disowned the answer and
resumed acting as counsel for KDC after its filing.
Did the CA err?
A.

Yes. S3 R7 is quite clear when it requires that a
pleading must be signed by the party or counsel
representing him. Hence only the signature of either
the party himself or his counsel operates to validly
convert a pleading from one that is unsigned to one
that is signed.
Counsel's authority to sign a pleading is personal
to him and may be delegated only to another lawyer
pursuant to Rule 9.01 of the Code of Professional
Responsibility. Hence Atty. G's blanket authority,
whether express or implied, for just anyone to sign
was void.
The answer being unsigned, it produced no legal
effect and thus KDC was properly declared in default.
(Republic v. Kenrick Development Corporation, G.R.
149576, 8 August 2006, Corona, J.).
(Note: The court in its discretion may allow the
defect of an unsigned pleading to be remedied if the
failure to sign was inadvertent and not intended to
delay. Here it appears that the filing of the spuriously
signed answer was not inadvertent.)

275

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the significance of counsel's signature on
a pleading?

A.

The signature of counsel constitutes a certificate by
him that he has read the pleading and document; that
to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief,
formed after an inquiry reasonable under the
circumstances:
1) It is not being presented for any improper purpose,
such as to harass, cause unnecessary delay, or
needlessly increase the cost of litigation;
2) The claims, defenses, and other legal contentions
are warranted by existing law or jurisprudence, or
by a non-frivolous argument for extending,
modifying, or reversing existing jurisprudence;
3) The factual contentions have evidentiary support
or, if specifically so identified, will likely have
evidentiary support after availment of the modes
of discovery under these rules; and
4)

The denials of factual contentions are warranted
on the evidence or, if specifically so identified, are
reasonably based on belief or a lack of
information. (S3[b] R7 as amended by the 2020
Rules on Civil Procedure).

Q.

What is the consequence if there is a violation of
S3(b) R7?

A.

If the court determines, on motion or motu proprio and
after notice and hearing, that this rule has been
violated, it may impose an appropriate sanction or
refer such violation to the proper office for disciplinary
action, on any attorney, law firm, or party that violated
the rule, or is responsible for the violation. Absent
exceptional circumstances, a law firm shall be held
jointly and severally liable for a violation committed by
276

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
its partner, associate, or employee. The sanction may
include, but not limited to, non-monetary directives or
sanctions; an order to pay a penalty in court; or, if
imposed on motion and warranted for effective
deterrence, an order directing payment to the movant
of part or all of the reasonable attorney's fees and
other expenses directly resulting from the violation,
including attorney's fees for the filing of motion for
sanction. The lawyer or law firm cannot pass on the
monetary penalty to the client. (83[c] R7, 2020 Rules
on Civil Procedure).
Q.

Is it required that a pleading be under oath, verified
or accompanied by affidavit?

A.

Except when otherwise specifically required by law or
rule, pleadings need not be under oath, verified or
accompanied by affidavit. (S4 R7).

Q.

How is a pleading verified?

A.

A pleading is verified by an affidavit of an affiant duly
authorized to sign said verification. The authorization
of the affiant to act on behalf of a party, whether in the
form of a secretary's certificate or a special power of
attorney, should be attached to the pleading, and
shall allege the following attestations:
(a) The allegations in the pleading are true and correct
based on his personal knowledge, or based on
authentic documents;
(b) The pleading is not filed to harass, cause
unnecessary delay, or needlessly increase the
cost of litigation; and
(c) The factual allegations therein have evidentiary
support or, if specifically so identified, will likewise
have evidentiary support after a reasonable
opportunity for discovery.
277

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The signature of the affiant shall further serve as
a certification of the truthfulness of the allegations in
the pleading. (S4 R7, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).36
Q.

Who may make a verification?

A.

A verification may be made by the party, his lawyer or
his representative, or any person who personally
knows the truth of the facts alleged in the pleading.
(Tanjuatco v. Judge Gako, A.M. No. RTJ-06-2016, 23
March 2009). If made by a person other than the
party, such person's authority to sign the verification,
whether in the form of a secretary's certificate or
special power of attorney, should be attached to the
pleading. (S4 R7).

Q.

What would be the effect if a pleading required
to be verified is not verified or lacks a proper
verification?

A.

A pleading required to be verified which is not verified
or lacks a proper verification, as in those containing a
verification based on "information and belief," or upon
"knowledge, information and belief," shall be treated
as an unsigned pleading. (34 R7). An unsigned
pleading produces no legal effect. However the court
may, in its discretion, allow such deficiency to be
remedied if it shall appear that the same was due to
mere inadvertence and not intended for delay. In
practice the Supreme Court has been strict with the
requirement for verification in petitions filed before it.

36The wordings of the amendments to S4 R7 seem to indicate that
attestations (a), (b), and (c) should be alleged in the authorization, i.e., the
secretary's certificate or the special power of attorney. It is submitted that 54 R7
should be read as requiring the attestations to be made in the verification itself,
not in the authorization of the affiant to act on behalf of a party.

278

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Q.

What pleadings or papers are required to be verified?

A.

The following pleadings or papers are required to be
verified:
1) Petition for relief from judgment (33 R38).
2) Petition for review on certiorari (Si R45).
3) Petition for review from the Regional Trial Court to
the Court of Appeals. (S1 R42).
4) Appeal from quasi-judicial bodies to the Court of
Appeals. (35 R43).
5) Petition for annulment of judgment of the Regional
Trial Court. (S4 R47).
6) Petition for review of judgment of the Commission
on Audit and the Commission on Elections.
(S5 R64).
7) Complaint with application for preliminary injunction
or temporary restraining order. (S4 R58).
8) Complaint with application for appointment of
receiver. (Si R59).
9) Complaint with application for support pendente lite.
(Si R61).
10) Petition for certiorari, prohibition, or mandamus.
(R65).
11) Petition for quo warranto. (Si R66).
12) Complaint for expropriation. (S1 R67).
13) Complaint for forcible
detainer. (S1 R70).

279

entry

and

unlawful

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
voLumE I
14) Complaint, compulsory counterclaim, crossclaim, and the answers thereto under the Rule
on Summary Procedure. (Sec. 3[6], Rule on
Summary Procedure).
15) Petition for appointment of a general guardian.
(S2 R93).
16) Petition for leave to sell or encumber property of
an estate by an guardian. (S1 R95).
17) Petition for the declaration of competency of a
ward. (51 R97).
18) Petition for habeas corpus. (S3 R102).
19) Petition for writ of amparo and writ of habeas
data. (Sec. 5, Rule on the Writ of Amparo; S6
Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data).
20) Petition for cancellation or correction of entries in
the civil registry. (S1 R108).
21) Petition to take deposition in perpetuam rei
memoriam. (Si R24).
22) Petitions governed by summary judicial proceedings
under the Family Code. (Articles 223, 225, 236,
239, 249, and 253 of the Family Code).
23) Suit between members of the same family.
(Article 151, Family Code).
24) Petition for declaration of nullity or annulment of
marriage or for legal separation. (Sec. 2(b)(3) SC
Rule on Legal Separation; Sec. 5, SC Rule on
Declaration of Absolute Nullity of Marriage and
Annulment of Voidable Marriage).
25) Statement of Claim/s and Response in Small
Claims Cases.

280

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Certification against forum shopping (CFS)
Q.

What is forum shopping? (06 Bar Q3.1)

A.

The act of a party who as a result of an adverse
opinion in one forum, seeks a favorable opinion (other
than by appeal or certiorari) in another, or who institutes
two or more actions or proceedings grounded on the
same cause, on the gamble that one or the other court
would make a favorable disposition. (City of Cebu v.
Del Rosario, G.R. No. 169341, 22 November 2006).

Q.

Why is forum shopping prohibited?

A.

Forum shopping is prohibited because of the vexation
caused the courts and parties-litigants by a party who
asks different courts or administrative agencies to rule
on the same or related causes or to grant the same or
substantially the same relief, in the process creating
the possibility of conflicting decisions being rendered
by the different fora upon the same issues. (Municipality
of Taguig v. Court of Appeals, 469 SCRA 588 [20051).

Q.

What is the test for determining whether a party
violates the rule against forum shopping?

A.

The test for determining whether a party violates the
rule against forum shopping is to ask whether a final
judgment in one case will amount to res judicata in the
action under consideration or whether the elements of
litis pendentia are present. If the answer is yes, there
is forum-shopping. (Marcopper Mining Corp. v.
Solidbank Corp., 432 SCRA 360).

281

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his negligence,
X hit and injured V who was crossing the street.
Lawyer L, who witnessed the incident, offered his
legal services to V. V, who suffered physical
injuries including a fractured wrist bone, underwent
surgery to screw a metal plate to his wrist bone.
On complaint of V, a criminal case for Reckless
Imprudence Resulting in Serious Physical Injuries
was filed against X before the Municipal Trial
Court (MTC) of Sta. Maria. Atty. L, the private
prosecutor, did not reserve the filing of a separate
civil action. V subsequently filed a complaint for
Damages against X and Y before the Regional
Trial Court of Pangasinan in Urdaneta where he
resides. In his "Certification Against Forum Shopping,"
V made no mention of the pendency of the criminal
case in Sta. Maria.
a) Is V guilty of forum shopping?
xxx (10 Bar Q4e).

A

a) V is not guilty of forum-shopping.
The Supreme Court has held that the test to
determine whether there is forum-shopping is whether
the second action may be barred by res judicata or is
pendens. (Zamora v. Quinan, 29 November 2017,
Peralta, J.).
Here, the second action is one for physical
injuries and is thus an independent civil action separate
and distinct from and which shall proceed independently
of the criminal action for reckless imprudence (Art. 33,
Civil Code; S3 R111). Hence, there is no res judicata
or is pendens and thus no forum-shopping.

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Q.

What is a certification against forum shopping?

A.

It is a certification under oath by the plaintiff or
principal party in the complaint or other initiatory
pleading asserting a claim for relief or in a sworn
certification annexed thereto and simultaneously filed
therewith, stating that: (CPR)
(a) he has not theretofore commenced any action or
filed any claim involving the same issues in any
court, tribunal or quasi-judicial agency;37
(b) to the best of his knowledge, no such other action
or claim is pending therein; if there is such other
pending action or claim, a complete statement of
the present status thereof; and
(c) if he should thereafter learn that the same or
similar action or claim38 has been filed or is
pending, he shall report that fact within 5 days
therefrom to the court wherein his aforesaid
complaint or initiatory pleading has been filed.39
The authorization of the affiant to act on behalf of
a party, whether in the form of a secretary's certificate
or a special power of attorney, should be attached to
the pleading.49

37Take note that the provisions states "commenced any action or filed any
claim." Hence the requirement of disclosure 'snot limited to initiatory pleadings but to
any pleading or paper asserting a claim for relief, e.g., a counterclaim.
39Although S5 R7 uses the phrase "involving the same issues" and "same
or similar action or claim," the Supreme Court has held that the requirement of
disclosure applies only to actions or claims involving the same cause of action.
391 have recast somewhat the arrangement of the tenor of the certification
into what I think is a more logical arrangement of (a) non-commencement, (b)
non-pendency; and (c) reporting.
° This paragraph was added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure. It
should be read as applying to the situation where the plaintiff or principal party is
a juridical person. If the party is a natural person, he should be the one to
execute the certificate himself. Unlike a verification, the certificate against forum
shopping cannot be made by a counsel or representative, unless there are
justifiable reasons.

283

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a complaint against D for collection of sum
of money. No certification against forum shopping
was contained or annexed to the complaint. D
filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the
ground of failure to comply with S5 R7. P filed an
amended complaint to which is now annexed the
certification against forum shopping. Should D's
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. Failure to comply with the requirements under
the first paragraph of S5 R7 shall be cause for the
dismissal of the complaint without prejudice, unless
otherwise provided. The failure to comply with the
requirements of S5 R7 re the filing of a certification
against forum shopping shall not be curable by mere
amendment of the complaint or other initiatory pleading.

Q.

If P's complaint is dismissed, what is the remedy
or recourse available to P?

A.

P has two options which he can consider. P may
simply refile the complaint and annex thereto the
certification against forum shopping. This is because
the dismissal for failure to comply with the requirement
of annexing a sworn certification against forum
shopping is a dismissal without prejudice.
P may also file a special civil action for certiorari
in order to set aside the dismissal order if P feels that
the order was made with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction.
Appeal is not available to P as an appeal may
not be taken from an order dismissing an action
without prejudice. (Si R41).

284

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Q.

Is the submission of a false certification against
forum shopping a ground for summary dismissal
with prejudice?

A.

No. A violation of 55 R7 — other than through willful
and deliberate forum shopping — does not authorize
the court to dismiss a case without motion and
hearing. Even the submission of a false certification of
non-forum shopping does not automatically warrant
dismissal of the case, even if it might constitute
contempt of court. (De Leon v. Chu, 2 September
2015). There must be motion and hearing.

Q.

When would a dismissal for the violation of S5 R7
be with prejudice?

A.

If the dismissal order so provides or if the acts of the
party or his counsel clearly constitute willful and
deliberate forum shopping. (S5 R7).

Q.

Juan filed with the Makati RTC a petition for
custody against his wife Michelle praying for joint
custody or visitation rights over his two daughters
then in the custody of Michelle. Michelle filed her
motion to admit answer with motion for issuance
of protection order. The Makati RTC denied
Michelle's motion to admit answer. Subsequently
Michelle withdrew her motion for issuance of
protection order. Michelle then filed with the
Muntinlupa RTC a petition for temporary and
permanent protection order under the provisions
of R.A. No. 9262. Juan argues that the Muntinlupa
case should be dismissed on the ground of forum
shopping. Michelle counters that she cannot be
guilty of forum-shopping since she was the
respondent in the Makati case. Is Michelle guilty
of forum-shopping?

285

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. The fact that Michelle was not the plaintiff or
petitioner in the first case does not detract from the
charge of forum-shopping if she asked for the same
reliefs in both cases. In both cases, she asked for the
same relief of a protection order. Hence the second
case should be dismissed on the ground of forumshopping and/or lis pendens. While there was a withdrawal
by Michelle of her motion for protection order in the
Makati case, it should be noted that such withdrawal
was made after her motion was in effect denied by the
Makati RTC. This clearly smacks of forum-shopping.
(Brown-Araneta v. Araneta, 9 October 2013, Velasco, J.).

Q.

A petition for review was filed with the Court of
Appeals. The verification and CFS attached thereto
however lacked the notarial seal although the
notary public's signature and stamp were present
Shall this be a cause for the dismissal of
the petition?

A.

No. The verification and CFS were in fact submitted.
An examination of these documents shows that the
notary public's signature and stamp were duly affixed.
Except for the notarial seal, all the requirements for
the verification and certification documents were
complied with. Hence there was substantial compliance
with the requirements on the verification and certification
against forum shopping. (Regulus Dev't Inc. v. Dela
Cruz, 25 January 2016, Brion, J.).

Q.

In order to set aside a resolution of the Department
of Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board, X availed
of both a petition for review under R43 and a
petition for certiorari under R65. Found liable for
forum shopping, X argued that only one of the
actions is dismissible and that he may choose
which remedy to maintain. Is X's argument correct?

286

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
A.

No. When there is forum shopping, the penalty is
dismissal of both actions. It is wrong to say that only
one of the actions is dismissible and that the litigant
may choose which remedy to maintain. (Heirs of
Mampo v. Morada, 3 November 2020, Caguioa, J.).
Note: The acts of X clearly constituted willful and
deliberate forum shopping.

Q.

Petitioners are husband and wife. They filed a
petition for certiorari and mandamus before the
Court of Appeals but only the husband signed the
CFS. Is the husband's signature sufficient?

A.

Yes, the husband's signature alone is sufficient
compliance with the rule on certification against forum
shopping. (Sps. Dar v. Alonzo-Legasto, 30 Aug 2000).

Q.

May counsel for a party sign the CFS?

A.

As a general rule no. The CFS needs to be signed by
the party himself since he is in the best position to
state the matters therein. Exception would be the
case wherein the party is a juridical person in which
case the lawyer could sign. The lawyer must however
be specially authorized by a board resolution. (BPI
Leasing Corp v. CA, 18 November 2003). If for reasonable
or justifiable reasons, the party-pleader is unable to
sign, he must execute a Special Power of Attorney
designating his counsel of record to sign on his behalf
(Jacinto v. Gumaru, 2 June 2014, Del Castillo, J.).

Q.

May an attorney-in-fact, who was authorized to
prosecute a suit on behalf of the principal, sign
the CFS in behalf of the principal?

A.

As a general rule, no. The reason is that it is the party
himself who is in the best position to state the matters
required in a CFS, particularly, whether actions or
claims involving the same issues have been filed or
are pending. However for justifiable reasons, the
287

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
attorney-in-fact may be the one to sign the CFS, as
for instance, where the attorney-in-fact is himself a
party to the case and shares a common interest with
the other parties (Bandillion v. La Filipina Uygongco
Corporation, 16 September 2015, Peralta, J.) or
where the party is not residing in the Philippines (Wee
v. Galvez, 11 August 2004, Quisumbing, J.).
Q.

Respondent, a resident of the United States,
executed an SPA appointing her daughter, Grace
Galvez, to act as her attorney-in-fact in the
Philippines. The Special Power of Attorney authorizes
Grace Galvez to do the following:
1) To ask, demand and claim any sum of money
that is duly [due] from any person natural,
juridical and/or corporation in the Philippines;
2) To file criminal and/or civil complaints before
the courts of justice in the Philippines to
enforce my rights and interest[s];
3) To attend hearings and/or Preliminary Conference[s],
to make stipulations, adjust claims, to settle
and/or enter into Compromise Agreement[s], to
litigate and to terminate such proceedings;
[and]
4) To sign all papers, documents and pleadings
necessary for the accomplishment of the
above purposes
Is this sufficient authority for Grace Galvez to
sign the CFS in behalf of the Respondent?

A.

Yes. Grace Galvez, as attorney-in-fact of the
respondent, was duly authorized and empowered not
just to initiate complaints, whether criminal or civil, to
enforce and protect the respondent's rights, claims,
and interests in this jurisdiction, but is specifically
288

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
authorized to sign all "papers, documents, and
pleadings" necessarily connected with the filing of a
complaint. The aforementioned papers and documents,
which Grace Galvez was authorized and empowered
to sign, must necessarily include the CFS. (Wee v.
Galvez, supra).
Q.

The registered owner of land authorized his
brother via an SPA to file the petition for issuance
of a new owner's duplicate certificate of title. May
the brother execute and sign the CFS?

A.

Yes. Where the SPA authorized the agent to file and
prosecute cases on behalf of the principal, the agent
has personal knowledge of whether he initiated suits
thus satisfying the requirements for a valid CFS.
(Republic v. Ciruelas, 17 February 2021, Delos
Santos, J.).

Q.

RC filed a complaint for the annulment of
foreclosure sale against Bank V. In its answer,
Bank V set up a counterclaim for actual damages
and litigation expenses. RC filed a motion to
dismiss the counterclaim on the ground that Bank
V's answer with counterclaim was not accompanied
by a certification against forum shopping. Rule.
(07 Bar Q10a).

A.

I would rule for the denial of the motion to dismiss.
The Supreme Court has held that a certification
against forum shopping is not required for asserting a
compulsory counterclaim since it is not an initiatory
pleading or incipient application but merely auxiliary to
the main proceeding. (Sps. Ponciano v. Parentela, 9
May 2000; Spouses Carpio v. Rural Bank of Sto.
Tomas, G.R. 153171, 4 May 2006).

289

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
Here the counterclaim is for actual damages and
litigation expenses and thus compulsory since it arose
out of the transaction or occurrence which is the
subject matter of RC's complaint. Hence the motion to
dismiss should be denied.'"
Q.

The NLRC rendered a decision against Fr. Tabora,
the Ateneo de Naga University, and Edwin Bernal
(the Petitioners). The Petitioners filed a petition
under Rule 65 seeking the reversal of the NLRC
decision. The verification and the certification against
forum shopping (CFS) was however signed only
by Fr. Tabora. The CA dismissed the Petition insofar
as the Ateneo and Bernal were concerned,
notwithstanding a belated showing that Fr. Tabora
had been authorized to sign the verification and
Bernal. Was the
CFS for the Ateneo and
dismissal proper?

A.

No. In verification, the signature of one instead of all
the parties would be sufficient if there is showing that
he had sufficient knowledge and belief to sign the
verification. As regards the CFS requirement, there
was substantial compliance with the submission,
albeit delayed, of proof that Fr. Tabora had been
authorized to sign the CFS for the Ateneo and Bernal.
The SC considered the delay a mere technicality or
procedural imperfection which should not defeat the
ends of justice. (Ateneo de Naga University v. Manalo, 9
May 2005). Doctrine reiterated in China Banking
Corporation v. Mondragon International Phils, 17
November 2005, re belated proof of authority of
corporate signatory to CFS.

41 The bar question does not indubitably indicate that the counterclaim for
actual damages is compulsory. It may be inferred however that the examiner
considered such counterclaim as compulsory, especially since the question was
based on the case of Spouses Carpio v. Rural Bank of Sto. Tomas, supra, which
involved an answer with compulsory counterclaims.

290

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Q.

The verification and the certification against
forum shopping appended to the appeal to the
NLRC were signed by BPI's Assistant VicePresident There was no proof however that the
AVP was authorized by the corporation's board.
Are the verification and the certification against
forum shopping fatally defective?

A.

No. The AVP as a corporate officer has implied or
apparent authority to sign the verification and CFS.
An express authorization is not an indispensable
requirement. The fact that BPI acquiesced and
expressed no objection to the appeal before the
NLRC is proof that it authorized the AVP to sign the
verification and the CFS. (Enriquez v. BPI, G.R.
172812, 12 February 2008).

Q.

Who are corporate officers or employees who
may sign the verification and certification against
forum shopping without need of a board resolution?

A.

(1) Chairperson of the board of directors, (2) the
President, (3) General Manager or acting General
Manager, (4) Personnel Officer, and (5) Employment
Specialist in a labor case. The rationale for this list is
that these officers are in a position to verify the truth
and correctness of the allegations in the complaint or
petition. (Cagayan Valley Drug Corp. v. Commissioner
of Internal Revenue, G.R. No. 151413, 13 February
2008). The Vice-President and Assistant Vice-President
may be added to the list. (Enriquez v. BPI, G.R. No.
172812, 12 February 2008).

Q.

Korean Airlines (KAL), a foreign corporation
licensed to do business in the Philippines filed a
collection case against Expert Travel and Tours
Inc. The verification and CFS was signed by its
counsel and resident agent X. To the motion to
dismiss filed by ETI, KAL countered that X was
291

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
authorized by KAL in a teleconference by the
Board of Directors. No record of such authorization
was attached to the complaint Can the resident
agent sign the verification and CFS in behalf of a
foreign corporation?
A.

No. X was not specifically authorized to execute the
certification in behalf of KAL. Being a resident agent
does not mean that he is authorized to execute the
requisite CFS because while he may be aware of
actions filed against his principal, he may not be
aware of actions initiated by his principal whether in
the Philippines or in the country where such foreign
corp. is organized. (Expertravel and Tours Inc. vs.
CA, 26 May 2005)

Q.

The notarial certificate of the Verification/
Certification of Non-Forum Shopping attached to
private respondents' petition before the CA did not
state whether they presented competent evidence
of their identities, or that they were personally
known to the notary public. Should the petition
be dismissed?

A.

Yes. Under Section 6, Rule II of A.M. No. 02-8-13-SC
dated July 6, 2004, entitled the "2004 Rules on
Notarial Practice" (2004 Rules on Notarial Practice), a
jurat refers to an act in which an individual on a single
occasion appears before the Notary Public and is
personally known to the notary public or identified by
the notary public through competent evidence of identity
as defined by the Rules. Hence the Verification and
CFS are fatally defective for failure to comply with the
said Rules. (William Go Quo Construction v. Singson,
19 April 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

292

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of the
testate estate of Alice, a contingent money claim
for commission in the event of the sale of
properties of the estate was filed by Alan with the
probate court. The executrix moved for the dismissal
of the claim on the ground that no certification
against forum shopping was attached thereto
pursuant to S5 R7. The RTC dismissed the money
claim. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. A certification against forum shopping is required
only for complaints and other initiatory pleadings. A
money claim against the estate is not an initiatory
pleading since the probate proceeding was already
initiated upon the filing of the petition for the
allowance of the decedent's will. A money claim does
not initiate new litigation but merely brings a material
but incidental matter arising in the progress of a case.
Hence a money claim is only incidental to the probate
proceeding, more so if it is contingent since the
claimant cannot even institute a separate action for a
mere contingent claim. (Sheker it Estate of Sheker,
G.R. No. 157912, 13 December 2007).

Q.

Metrobank extrajudicially foreclosed on a real
estate mortgage and purchased the realty at the
auction sale. Since the mortgagor refused to
vacate the realty, Metrobank filed an ex parte
petition for writ of possession over the foreclosed
property, pursuant to Act No. 3135. The mortgagor,
who was allowed by the court to intervene, filed a
motion to dismiss the petition on the ground that
a false CFS was attached since it did not disclose
cases filed by the mortgagor involving the
same parties and the loan agreement secured by
the mortgage.

293

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
b) If the motion to dismiss is granted, what is the
remedy of Metrobank?
A.
a) No. While denominated as a petition for writ of
possession, it is not an initiatory pleading since
under Section 7 of Act No. 3135, such petition is
filed in the form of an ex parte motion. In other
words, the petition for writ of possession is in
substance merely a motion. Hence dismissal of
the petition on the ground of submission of a false
CFS is unwarranted since in the first place a CFS
is not even required. (Metrobank v. Abad Santos,
15 December 2009).
b) The remedy of Metrobank is to file with the Court
of Appeals a special civil action for certiorari
unless the dismissal provided that it is with
prejudice. Appeal is not available since a
dismissal for failure to comply with S5 R7 is
without prejudice and thus it is certiorari under
R65 which should be availed of. (S1[g] R41).42 If
the dismissal provided that it is with prejudice,
then appeal would be proper.
Q.

Does a petition for writ of possession in favor of
the buyer in local tax delinquency sale require a
certification against forum shopping?

421n Metrobank v. Abad, 15 December 2009, the SC said that appeal was
the proper remedy, although it allowed the special civil action for certiorari filed
by Metrobank because of exceptional circumstances. The SC overlooked that
certiorari really was the proper remedy since dismissal under S5 R7, unless
otherwise provided or unless because of willful and deliberate forum-shopping, is
without prejudice.

294

RULE 7
Parts Of A Pleading
A.

No, since such petition is not an initiatory pleading.
(De Guzman v. Chico, 7 Dec 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

Q.

Give in capsule form, the jurisprudential
pronouncements respecting noncompliance with
the requirements on, or submission of defective,
verification and certification.

A.
1) A distinction must be made between noncompliance with the requirement on or submission
of defective verification, and non-compliance with
the requirement on or submission of defective
certification against forum shopping.
2) As to verification, non-compliance therewith or a
defect therein does not necessarily render the
pleading fatally defective. The court may order its
submission or correction or act on the pleading if
the attending circumstances are such that strict
compliance with the Rule may be dispensed
with in order that the ends of justice may be
served thereby.
3) Verification is deemed substantially complied with
when one who has ample knowledge to swear to
the truth of the allegations in the complaint or
petition signs the verification, and when matters
alleged in the petition have been made in good
faith or are true and correct.
4) As to certification against forum shopping, noncompliance therewith or a defect therein, unlike in
verification, is generally not curable by its subsequent
submission or correction thereof, unless there is a
need to relax the Rule on the ground of
"substantial compliance" or presence of "special
circumstances or compelling reasons."
295

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
5)

The certification against forum shopping must be
signed by all the plaintiffs or petitioners in a case;
otherwise, those who did not sign will be dropped
as parties to the case. Under reasonable or
justifiable circumstances, however, as when all
the plaintiffs or petitioners share a common
interest and invoke a common cause of action or
defense, the signature of only one of them in the
certification against forum shopping substantially
complies with the Rule.

6) Finally, the certification against forum shopping must
be executed by the party-pleader, not by his
counsel. If, however, for reasonable or justifiable
reasons, the party-pleader is unable to sign, he must
execute a Special Power of Attorney designating
his counsel of record to sign on his behalf.
(Jacinto v. Gumaru, 2 June 2014, Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

What are the contents of a pleading stating a
party's claims or defenses?

A.

Every pleading stating a party's claims or defenses
shall in addition to those mandated by S2 R7, state
the following:
a) Names of witnesses who will be presented to prove
a party's claim or defense;
b)

Summary of the witnesses' intended testimonies,
provided that the judicial affidavits of said witnesses
shall be attached to the pleading and form an
integral part thereof. Only witnesses whose
judicial affidavits are attached to the pleading
shall be presented by the parties during trial.
Except if a party presents meritorious reasons as
basis for the admission of additional witnesses, no
other witness or affidavit shall be heard or admitted
by the court; and
296

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
c) Documentary and object evidence in support of the
allegations contained in the pleading. (S6 R7,
emphasis supplied).43
Q.

Explain the purpose and significance of S6 R7.

A.

S6 R7 is intended to expedite the trial of cases by
compelling the parties to be ready with their
testimonial evidence before they file their pleadings
stating their claims or defenses, i.e, all pleadings
except the reply and the rejoinder.
It provides that such pleadings shall state the
names of witnesses who will be presented to prove a
party's claim or defense; a summary of the witnesses'
intended testimonies, provided that the judicial affidavits
of said witnesses shall be attached to the pleading
and form an integral part thereof. Only witnesses
whose judicial affidavits are attached to the pleading
shall be presented by the parties during trial. Except if
a party presents meritorious reasons as basis for the
admission of additional witnesses, no other witness or
affidavit shall be heard or admitted by the court.
Examples of meritorious reasons are:
1) The witness is an adverse, hostile, or unwilling witness.
2) Despite the exercise of due diligence, the proponent
could not have discovered the witness or procured
his judicial affidavit prior to the filing of the pleading.
3) Testimony of a witness on rebuttal.

Note that the preclusive effect does not apply to
documentary and object evidence. The reason could be
that it would already be imposing undue hardship on the
pleader if he is also required to be ready with such
evidence at the time of the filing of the pleading.
43S6 R7 is a new provision added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure.

297

RULE 8. MANNER OF MAKING
ALLEGATIONS IN PLEADINGS
Q.

What are ultimate facts?

A.

The facts essential to a claim or defense. A fact is
essential if it cannot be stricken out without leaving
the statement of the cause of action or the defense
insufficient.

Q.

How shall the ultimate facts be stated in a pleading?

A.

Every pleading shall contain in a methodical and
logical form, a plain, concise and direct statement of
the ultimate facts, including the evidence on which the
party pleading relies for his claim or defense, as the
case may be. If a cause of action or defense relied on
is based on law, the pertinent provisions thereof and
their applicability to him shall be clearly and concisely
stated:14

Q.

How may alternative causes of action or defenses
be pleaded?

A.

A party may set forth two or more statements of a
claim or defense alternatively or hypothetically, either
in one cause of action or defense or in separate
causes of action or defenses. (S2 R2).

Q.

In alternative causes of action or defense, what is
the effect of the insufficiency of one of the
alternatives?

A.

In such a case, as long as one of the alternative
statements, if made independently, would be sufficient,
the pleading is not rendered insufficient by the
insufficiency of the other alternative. (Id.).
"'Cause of action" was added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure.

298

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

In pleading alternative causes of action or
defenses, is it required that the causes of action
or defenses be consistent with each other?

A.

No. The causes of action or defenses alleged may be
inconsistent with each other, provided that each
cause of action or defense be consistent in itself.
(Baclayon v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 89132, 26
February 1990).

Q.

Plaintiff sued defendant for collection of P1
million based on the latter's promissory note. The
complaint alleges, among others:
1) Defendant borrowed P1 million from plaintiff
as evidenced by a duly executed promissory
note;
2) The promissory note reads:
"Makati, Philippines
Dec. 30, 2014
For value received from plaintiff, defendant
promises to pay plaintiff P1 million, twelve (12)
months from the above indicated date without
necessity of demand.
Signed
Defendant"
A copy of the promissory note is attached as
Annex "A."
Defendant, in his verified answer, alleged
among others:

299

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
1) Defendant specifically denies the allegation in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of the complaint, the truth
being defendant did not execute any promissory
note in favor of plaintiff, or
2) Defendant has paid the P1 million claimed in
the promissory note (Annex "A" of the Complaint)
as evidenced by an "Acknowledgment Receipt"
duly executed by plaintiff on January 30, 2015
in Manila with his spouse signing as witness.
A copy of the "Acknowledgment Receipt" is
attached as Annex "1" hereof.
Plaintiff filed a motion for judgment on the
pleadings on the ground that defendant's answer
failed to tender an issue as the allegations therein
on his defenses are sham for being inconsistent;
hence, no defense at all. Defendant filed an opposition
claiming his answer tendered an issue. Is judgment
on the pleadings proper? (15 Bar Q7a)
A.

No, judgment on the pleadings is not proper. Under
Section 2 of Rule 8, a party may set forth two or more
statements of a defense alternatively or hypothetically.
The Supreme Court has held that inconsistent
defenses may be pleaded alternatively or hypothetically,
provided that each defense is consistent with itself
(Baclayon v. Court of Appeals, 26 February 1990).
Hence Plaintiff's contention that defendant's
answer failed to tender an issue as his defenses are
sham for being inconsistent is without merit.

300

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

In an action to recover a parcel of land, the
intervenors claimed to be the absolute owners
thereof and asked that they be placed in
possession of the property, but defendants
maintained that they had absolute title on the land
and filed a counterclaim for injunction against
plaintiffs and intervenors. Judgment was rendered
for the defendants. In a subsequent action, the
intervenors claimed from the defendants the
expenses they had incurred in clearing and
cultivating the parcel of land and planting coconut
and other fruit-bearing trees thereon. The defendants
in their answer pleaded that the plaintiffs claim
was a compulsory counterclaim that should have
been set up in the former action as against the
counterclaim for injunction filed by the defendants.
The plaintiffs replied that they could not have set
up in the former case such counterclaim for
improvements because it would have been
inconsistent with and would have weakened their
claim for title to the land. Is the plaintiffs
contention meritorious?

A.

No. Under S2 R8 "[a] party may set forth two or more
statements of a claim or defense alternatively or
hypothetically, either in one cause of action or
defense or in separate causes of action or defenses."
Hence the plaintiff and intervenors in the former case
could have set up the claim that they were entitled to
the parcel of land and alternatively that assuming
hypothetically that they were not entitled to the land,
at least they are entitled as possessors in good faith
to the coconut and other fruit-bearing trees planted by
them in the land and their fruits or their value. Their
failure to set up that alternative claim in the former
case bars it forever. (Camara v. Aguilar, 50 O.G.
1549, 12 March 1954).
301

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioners filed with the CFI of Cebu an action for
recovery of land against the Private Respondents.
The Private Respondents filed an answer raising
the defense of their ownership. The CFI decided in
favor of the Private Respondents but on appeal
the Court of Appeals reversed and decided in
favor of the Petitioners declaring them as the
owners of the land and ordering the Private
Respondents to vacate the premises. In the body
of its decision, the Court of Appeals stated that
there was no fraud or bad faith on the part of the
Private Respondents. The Court of Appeal's judgment
became final and executory. The Petitioners
moved for the execution of the judgment before
the CFI. This was opposed by the Private Respondents
on the ground that a hearing supplementary to
execution should be conducted to allow them to
present evidence to prove that they are builders in
good faith and to prove the value of the
improvements. The Petitioners argued that the
Private Respondents should have set up their
claim for reimbursement in the action for
recovery. The Court of Appeals allowed the
Private Respondents to present such evidence,
stating that the Private Respondents could not
have presented such evidence in the trial court
since it would be inconsistent with their defense
of ownership. Is the reason cited by the CA for
allowing the Private Respondents to present
evidence tenable?

A.

No. The Court of Appeals' statement that Private
Respondents could not have raised the counterclaim
for reimbursement of the value of the improvements
as it would run counter to their defense of ownership
is without merit. Under S2 R8 a party may set forth
two or more statements of a defense alternatively or
hypothetically. Inconsistent defenses may be pleaded
302

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
alternatively or hypothetically provided that each
defense is consistent with itself. Not having been set
up, the counterclaim is barred under 32 R9.
(Baclayon v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 89132, 26
February 1990).
Q.

Same facts as the previous question.
a) Should the CFI grant the opposition of the
Private Respondents to Petitioners' motion
for execution?
b) May the Private Respondents file a separate
action to recover the value of the improvements
introduced by them?

A.
a) No. Once a decision has become final and
executory, the only jurisdiction left with the court
is to order its execution. To allow the supplemental
hearing would be to amend or alter a final and
executory judgment.
b)

Q.

No. Under S2 R9, a compulsory counterclaim
not set up is deemed barred. The claim for
reimbursement of the value of the improvements is
in the nature of a compulsory counterclaim since
it is connected with the transaction or occurrence
constituting the subject matter of the Petitioners'
claim. Hence it should have been set up as a
compulsory counterclaim in the action filed by
Petitioners against the Private Respondents.

What facts may be averred generally in a pleading?

A.
a) Performance or occurrence of conditions precedent.

303

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b) Malice, intent, knowledge, or other condition of the
mind of a person (MIKO).
Q.

What facts must be averred with particularity?

A.
a) In all averments of fraud or mistake, the
circumstances constituting fraud or mistake must
be stated with particularity. (S5 R8).
b) Facts showing the capacity of a party to sue or be
sued or the authority of a party to sue or be sued
in a representative capacity or the legal existence
of an organized association of persons, must be
averred. (84 R8).
c)

Q.

A party desiring to raise an issue as to the legal
existence of any party or the capacity of any party
to sue or be sued in a representative capacity,
shall do so by specific denial, which shall include
such supporting particulars as are peculiarly
within the pleader's knowledge. (id.).45

Lirio and Semicon Integrated Electronics Corporation
(Semicon) entered into a lease contract covering
Lirio's properties. Villalon, who was then
Semicon's president and chairman of the board,
represented the lessee corporation in the lease
contract. Prior to the expiration of the lease,
Semicon terminated the contract and allegedly left
unpaid rentals, damages, and interest Lirio demanded
payment but Semicon and VillaIon failed to pay.

45 The second sentence of S4 R8 omits "capacity of a party to sue or be
sued,' mentioning only "capacity of a party to sue or be sued in a representative
capacity." It is believed that this is simply a drafting oversight. This is apparent
from the use of the word "capacity" when the more appropriate word as may be
gleaned from the first sentence is "authority." There is no good reason why a
party desiring to make an issue as to the adverse party's capacity to sue or be
sued should not do so by way of specific denial.

304

RULES
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Lirio thus filed a complaint for sum of money
against Semicon and VillaIon. In his complaint,
Lirio alleged that Semicon and VillaIon unjustly
preterminated the lease and failed to pay the
unpaid rentals despite demand. Lirio alleged also
in his complaint that "VillaIon fraudulently and
surreptitiously removed Semicon's equipment,
merchandise, and other effects from the leased
premises, preventing him to exercise his right,
among others, to take inventories of these effects,
merchandise, and equipment."
VillaIon filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that the complaint failed to state a cause
of action against him. He argued that he is not a
real party-in-interest as he is merely an officer of
Semicon. VillaIon further contended that there
was no competent allegation in the complaint
about any supposed wrongdoing on his part to
warrant his inclusion as a party defendant.
The RTC granted Villalon's motion to dismiss.
It held that under the theory of separate corporate
entity, the action should be limited against Semicon,
the lessee; it cannot be expanded against VillaIon,
a mere corporate officer.
The Court of Appeals reversed the RTC
holding that the allegation of fraud against VillaIon
placed the case within the doctrine of piercing the
veil of corporation fiction and thus stated a cause
of action against VillaIon. Did the Court of Appeals
correctly reverse the RTC's dismissal order?
A.

No. S5 R8 requires that in all averments of fraud, the
circumstances constituting fraud must be stated with
particularity.

305

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
Here Lirio's mere invocation of the words
"surreptitiously and fraudulently" does not make the
allegation particular without specifying the circumstances
of Villalon's commission and employment of fraud,
and without delineating why it was fraudulent for him
to remove Semicon's properties in the first place. The
allegation of fraud would have been averred with
particularity had Lirio alleged, for example, that VillaIon
removed the equipment under the false pretense that
they needed repair and refurbishing but the equipment
were never returned, or that VillaIon removed the
merchandise because Semicon needed to sell them
in exchange for new supplies but no new supplies
were bought. No such allegation was ever made.
Thus, the RTC could not have properly ruled on
whether there was a need to pierce the veil of
corporate entity precisely because the complaint
failed to state with particularity how VillaIon committed
and employed fraud. Hence the complaint failed to
state a cause of action against VillaIon. (Villa/on v.
Lirio, 3 August 2015).
Q.

The complaint alleged that the defendant acted in
bad faith, arbitrarily, illegally, wrongfully, and in
violation of law. However, it did not contain any
averment of facts showing that defendant's acts
were done in the manner alleged. Does the complaint
state a cause of action? Explain. (96 Bar Q3).

A.

Yes. Malice, intent, knowledge or other condition of
the mind (MIKO) may be averred generally. (S5 R8).

Q.

How is a judgment or decision pleaded?

A.

In pleading a judgment or decision of a domestic or
foreign court, judicial or quasi-judicial tribunal, or of a
board or officer, it is sufficient to aver the judgment or
decision without setting forth matter showing jurisdiction
306

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
to render it. However the 2020 Rules require that an
authenticated copy" of the judgment or decision shall
be attached to the pleading. (86 R8).
Actionable document
Q.

What is an actionable document?

A.

An actionable document is a written instrument or
document on which an action or defense is based
upon. (S7 R8).

Q.

Give examples of actionable documents.

A.

P files an action to collect a loan from D. D files an
answer raising the defense of payment. The promissory
note signed by D evidencing the loan is an actionable
document for plaintiff. On the other hand, a receipt
showing payment of the loan is an actionable
document for the defendant.

Q.

What is the requirement regarding an actionable
document?

A.

They shall be set forth in the pleading. (87 R8).

Q.

How is an actionable document set forth in a
pleading?

A.

The substance of the actionable document shall be
set forth in the pleading, and the original or a copy
thereof shall be attached to the pleading as an exhibit,
which shall be deemed to be a part of the pleading.47
(S7 R8).

4eThis is a somewhat burdensome requirement, especially in the case of a
judgment or decision of a foreign court or body. It is submitted that an authentic
copy would suffice for the meantime.
47The other way of setting forth an actionable document under the 1997
Rules of Civil Procedure, that is, by setting forth a copy of the document in the
pleading was deleted in the 2010 Rules since it was rarely if ever used.

307

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Should an actionable document be attached to the
pleading? Would a failure to so attach result in
the dismissal of the action?

A.

Yes, the actionable document should be attached to
the pleading as required under S7 R8. However, a
failure to so attach or set forth should not result in the
outright dismissal of the complaint. (Keihin-Everett
Forwarding Co. v. Tokio Marine Malayan Insurance
Ca, 28 January 2019, Reyes, J.). The court should
simply order the plaintiff to attach or set forth the
actionable document.

Q.

The insurer paid the shipper-insured upon loss of
the cargo while in possession of the freightforwarder. Having been subrogated to the rights
of the insured, the insurer sued the freightforwarder. Judgment rendered in favor of the
insurer. On appeal, the freight-forwarder contends
that the trial court should not have considered in
evidence the insurance policy, since being an
actionable document, it should have been attached
or set forth in the complaint. Is the contention
correct?

A.

No.Failure to attach/set forth actionable document
does not preclude its subsequent offer in evidence.
There is no specific provision in the Rules of Court
which prohibits the admission in evidence of an
actionable document in the event a party fails to
comply with the requirement of the rule on actionable
documents under S7 R8. (Keihin-Everett Forwarding
Co. v. Tokio Marine Malayan Insurance, 28 January
2019, Reyes, J.).

308

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

If the adverse party wants to contest the
genuineness and due execution of an actionable
document, how shall he do so? (SOS)

A.

The adverse party shall specifically deny under oath
the genuineness and due execution of the actionable
document and set forth what he claims to be the facts.
(S8 R8). Otherwise the genuineness and due execution
of the actionable document shall be deemed
admitted. (Id.).

Q.

What specific facts are deemed included within
the admission by the adverse party of the
genuineness and due execution of an actionable
document? (SAW Deform)

A.

1) That the party whose signature it bears signed it.
2) That if signed by another, it was signed for the
adverse party and with his authority.
3) That at the time it was signed, it was in words and
figures exactly as set out in the pleading of the
party relying upon it.
4) That the document was duly delivered.
5) That any formal requisites of law, such as seal,
acknowledgment or revenue stamp which it lacks,
are waived by him. (Hibberd v. Rhode, 32 Phil. 476).

Hence the following defenses, among others, are
barred by the implied admission:
1) Forgery.
2) The agent signing was
exceeded his authority.

not authorized

or

3) The party signing the document signed it in some
other capacity than that alleged in the pleading.
309

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
4)

That the document was never delivered. (Id.).

5)

Lack of documentary stamps. (Filipinas Textile
MilIs Inc. v. State Investment House Inc., 12
November 2003).

Q.

P filed an action for collection of loan against D.
P attached to the complaint a copy of the
promissory note evidencing the loan signed by D.
D filed an unsworn answer specifically denying
that he signed the note. After the presentation of
his testimonial evidence, P rested his case forgetting
to formally offer in evidence the promissory note.
The court rendered judgment in P's favor taking
into consideration the promissory note. On
appeal, D assigns as error the court's taking into
consideration the promissory note although it
was not formally offered in evidence. Is D's
assignment of error meritorious? a

A.

No. D's failure to specifically deny under oath the
promissory note which was an actionable document
resulted in D's implied admission of its genuineness
and due execution. The same is a judicial admission
and hence does not require proof pursuant to S4
R129.

Q.

In an action for collection of P2,000,000, plaintiff
bank alleged that defendant Oriental Textile Mills,
Inc., for valuable consideration, executed in favor
of the bank a promissory note for said amount, a
copy of the note being attached to the complaint
Defendant filed an answer to the complaint
denying liability and alleging that the signatory
Jesus Lim had no authority to negotiate and obtain
a loan in its behalf, nor to sign the promissory

"Based on Question No

4 of 1974 Bar.

310

RULES
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
note. The answer was not verified. During the trial,
defendant sought to introduce evidence to show
that Jesus Lim was not authorized to enter into
the transaction and to sign the promissory note
for and in behalf of the defendant corporation.
Plaintiff objected to such evidence, claiming that
Lim's authority had been admitted by defendant's
failure to verify the answer. The judge sustained
the objection. Was the ruling correct? (91 Bar
Q12a ed).
A.

Yes, the judge's ruling sustaining the objection was
correct. The Supreme Court has held that the implied
admission of the actionable document's genuiness
and due execution includes an admission that the
agent signing the same was duly authorized by the
adverse party. Hence the defense that the agent
signing the same was not authorized by the principal
is barred by the implied admission. (Hibberd v.
Rhode, 32 Phil. 476).

Q.

P purportedly sold a parcel of land to D. Later, P
claimed that what he signed was a document
captioned Lease Contract and not a deed of sale.
P then filed a complaint against D and M, to whom
D sold the property. In their answer, D and NI
attached the purported deed of sale. P did not file
a reply specifically denying under oath the deed
of sale. During the trial, can P be allowed to testify
that what he actually signed was a lease contract
and not a deed of sale?

A.

Yes. Failure to deny the genuineness and due
execution of an actionable document does not preclude
a party from arguing against it by evidence of fraud,
mistake, compromise, payment, statute of limitations,
estoppel and want of consideration. (Acabal v. Acabal,

311

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
31 March 2005, Carpio Morales, J.). Here P's evidence
to the effect that what he actually signed was a lease
contract and not a deed of sale is evidence of mistake
or fraud.
Q.

In his answer to the complaint, Mario Reyes
alleged that he does not owe Norma Alajar any
sum of money, and that he executed the promissory
note only to enable Alajar to show the same to her
husband to explain the disappearance of the
amount from the conjugal funds as Norma Alajar
lost the same in the casino. The answer is not
verified. At the trial, the lawyer of Norma Alajar
objected to the testimony of Mario Reyes as to his
accommodation story because, as the answer is
not verified, he is deemed to have admitted the
genuineness and due execution of the promissory
note. Decide on the objection with reasons. (90
Bar Q7)

A.

Objection overruled. Failure to deny the genuineness
and due execution of an actionable document does
not preclude a party from arguing against it by
evidence of want of consideration. (Acabal vs. Acabal,
31 March 2005). Here Mario Reyes's defense that he
was only an accommodation party is a defense of
want of consideration.

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action to recover a parcel of land
against the Defendants. Attached to the complaint
is a copy of the deed of sale executed by the
Defendants' father in favor of the Plaintiff. The
Defendants specifically denied but not under oath
the deed of sale. At the trial of the case, Defendants
sought to present an expert witness to testify that
the signature of the seller in the deed of sale is a
forgery. Plaintiffs objected to the presentation of
the witness saying that the Defendants impliedly
312

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
admitted the genuineness and due execution of
the deed of sale when they failed to specifically
deny it under oath. How should the trial court rule
on the objection?
A.

The trial court should overrule the objection. Under
38 R8 the requirement of an oath does not apply
when the adverse party does not appear to be a party
to the instrument. Here the Defendants were not
parties to the deed of sale. (See Toribio v. Bidin, 134
SCRA 162). Note: although the requirement of an
oath does not apply, the adverse party should still
specifically deny the actionable document and set
forth what he claims to be the facts.

Q.

Pedro filed an action for recovery of land against
Ding. Ding filed an answer in which he raised the
defense that he was the owner of the land as
Pedro's late father, Frondo, had sold the land to
him. Ding attached to his answer a copy of the
deed of sale over the subject land purportedly
executed by Frondo in favor of Ding. Pedro did
not file a reply. During the trial, may Pedro be
allowed to prove over the relevant objection
that his father's signature to the deed of sale was
a forgery?

A.

No. Although the requirement of an oath does not
apply to Pedro since he is not a party to the deed of
sale, nevertheless Pedro should still specifically deny
the actionable document, that is the deed of sale, and
set forth what he claims to be the facts.
Since he failed to do so, Pedro is deemed to
have admitted the genuineness and due execution of
the deed of sale and he is thus precluded from
proving that his father's signature thereon was forged.

313

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

"A" filed suit against "B" and "C" for the recovery
of personal property which, according to the
complaint had been sold to him by the defendants'
father during the latter's lifetime under a document
entitled Bill of Sale, the substance of the bill was
pleaded in the complaint, and a copy thereof was
attached to the complaint as an exhibit "B" and
"C" filed an answer which disclaimed knowledge
or information about the Bill of Sale and averred
that the signature thereon allegedly belonging to
their father appears to be a forgery. At the trial of
the case, "B" and "C" commenced, through counsel
and by means of an expert witness, to adduce
evidence to prove that the seller's signature was a
forgery. "A" objected, saying that the genuineness
and due execution of the Bill of Sale was deemed
admitted because the answer was unverified, as a
matter of law, inasmuch as the verification was
made only on the express basis of best
information and belief. Resolve the objection with
reasons. (87 Bar Q9).

A.

Objection overruled. Under 58 R8 the requirement of
an oath does not apply when the adverse party does
not appear to be a party to the instrument.
Here the Defendants "B" and "C" were clearly not
parties to the Bill of Sale. Hence there was no need
for their answer to be verified or under oath. The
disclaimer by "B" and "C" of knowledge or information
about the Bill of Sale and their averment that the
signature purporting to be their father's appears to
have been forged may be considered as a specific
denial under the third sentence of S10 R8.

314

RULES
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

Y leased a warehouse to Z for 2 years evidenced
by a written lease contract. As Z refused to vacate
after the expiration of the lease, X, only son of Y
who had died, filed action to recover possession,
alleging that although Z sought renewal of the
lease contract, this was denied by Y in his
lifetime, shown by a copy of a letter-reply signed
by him addressed to Z, attached to the complaint
as Annex A. In his answer, Z asserted that the
contract was verbally renewed but he failed to
deny under oath the due execution and authenticity
of Annex A.
During the trial Z's testimony showing Y's
signature on Annex A to be a forgery is
vehemently objected to on the ground that the
absence of a sworn denial in the answer constitutes
an implied admission of the due execution and
authenticity of Annex A, an actionable document
Resolve the objection with reasons. (79 Bar Q6-1).

A.

Objection overruled. The rule on implied admission
under S7 & 8 R8 applies only to an actionable
document, that is, a written instrument or document
upon which an action or defense is based.
Here the action of X was based upon the written
lease contract and not upon the letter-reply which is
merely an evidentiary document.
Even assuming that the letter-reply was an
actionable document, the requirement of an oath does
not apply when the adverse party does not appear to
be a party to the instrument. (S8 R8). Here Z was not
a party to the letter-reply which was unilaterally
prepared by Y.

315

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Respondent sold and delivered fabricated steel
products to Petitioner construction corporation
under a sales contract. Petitioner failed to pay so
Respondent sued Petitioner for the price of the
sale. Attached to the complaint were charge
invoices issued by Respondent to Petitioner
which indicated the items sold and delivered to
Petitioner. Petitioner filed an unsworn answer.
Did Petitioner admit the genuineness and due
execution of the charge invoices by its failure to
specifically deny them under oath?

A.

No. Under S7 R8, a document is actionable when an
action or defense is grounded upon such written
instrument or document. Here, the charge invoices
are not actionable documents per se as these only
provide details on the alleged transactions. These
documents need not be attached to or stated in the
complaint as these are evidentiary in nature. In fact,
Respondent's cause of action is not based on these
documents but on the contract of sale between the
parties. (Asian Construction & Dev't Corp. v. Mendoza,
27 June 2012, Del Castillo, J.).

Q.

Action by BP Oil to recover value of petroleum
products delivered to Total Distribution under an
agency agreement executed between the two.
The complaint of BP Oil includes as an annex a
letter from BP Oil to Total which states the value
of stocks of unsold lubricants. This letter was not
specifically denied under oath by Total. Is
Total deemed to have admitted the genuineness
of the letter?

A.

No. The letter is not an actionable document but an
evidentiary document. BP Oil's action was based on
the agency agreement, not the letter. Hence Total's

316

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
failure to put its denial under oath will not amount to
an implied admission. (BP Oil v. Total Distribution, 6
Feb 2017, Mendoza).
Q.

Young Builders Corporation (YBC) sued Benson
Industries Inc. (BII) for payment under a construction
contract where YBC would construct a building
for BII. In its complaint YBC averred that it had
accomplished work on the building in the amount
of P54 million of which BII had paid only P40
million. Attached to the complaint was a copy of
the accomplishment billing. During the trial, YBC
failed to authenticate the accomplishment billing.
Thus the court ruled in favor of BII. On appeal,
YBC contends that there was no need to
authenticate the accomplishment billing since BII
failed to specifically deny it under oath and thus
impliedly admitted its genuineness and due
execution. Is YBC's contention meritorious?

A.

No. The actionable document which was the basis of
YBC's action is the construction contract between the
parties. The accomplishment billing is merely an
evidentiary document. Thus the implied admission rule
does not apply and hence YBC needs to authenticate
the accomplishment billing. (Young Builders Corp. v.
Benson Industries Inc., 19 June 2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Suppose a defendant denies under oath the due
execution of an actionable document attached to
plaintiffs complaint under Rule 8, Rules of Court.
However, before the trial, plaintiff serves on
defendant a request for admission under Rule 26
of the Rules of Court, asking him to admit the
genuineness of the same actionable document
described in and exhibited with the request but
the latter fails to serve on the plaintiff within 15
days a sworn statement denying specifically the
authenticity of the document. As far as the
317

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
probative value is concerned, which will prevail,
the sworn denial in the answer or the implied
admission arising from defendant's failure to
serve a sworn denial to the request for admission?
Explain. (79 Bar Q6-2).
A.

It is the sworn denial in the answer which will prevail.
A request for admission is not proper where the
subject matter thereof is the same as that alleged in
the requesting party's complaint for which the
requested party had already denied in his answer. A
party should not be required to make a second denial
of those allegations already denied in his answer to
the complaint. (Lanada v. CA, G.R. No. 102390, 1
February 2002).

Q.

P filed a verified complaint against D seeking to
recover a parcel of land. In the complaint, P
alleged that he never sold the land to D but D took
possession under a false claim of ownership. D
filed an answer to which he attached a copy of a
deed of sale between him and P over the land. P
did not specifically deny under oath the genuineness
and due execution of the deed of sale. Was there
an implied admission under S8 R8?

A.

No. The verified complaint with a specific allegation
that P never sold the land to D was a substantial
traversal of the actionable document. (Toribio v. Bidin,
134 SCRA 162).

Q.

Manuel filed a verified complaint to annul a deed
of sale over community property which his wife
Martha had executed in favor of Titan Corporation.
Manuel alleged that the sale was made without his
knowledge and consent. In its answer, Titan
Corporation attached a special power of attorney
purportedly executed by Manuel in favor of his
318

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
wife authorizing her to sell the land. Manuel filed
a reply which was not under oath alleging that his
signature to the SPA was forged. May Manuel
prove that his signature to the SPA was forged?
A

Yes. The allegation in the verified complaint that
Manuel did not know or consent to the sale of the land
put Titan Corporation on adequate notice that it would
be called upon during the trial to prove the
genuineness and due execution of the SPA. Hence
the implied admission rule under 58 R8 does not
apply. (Titan Construction Corp. v. David, G.R. No.
169548, 15 March 2010, Del Castillo, J.; citing Toribio
v. Bidin, 134 SCRA 162). It may also be said that the
complaint, which was verified and which alleged that
Manuel did not consent or know about the sale, was a
substantial traversal of the SPA's genuineness and
due execution.

Q.

State Investment House Inc. (SIHI) filed an action
for collection against Filipinas Textile Mills Inc.
(Filtex). In its complaint SIHI alleged that Filtex
applied with SIHI for the issuance of letters of
credit to finance the purchase of raw materials
from various suppliers and that SIHI issued the
letters of credit but Filtex did not pay the loan it
had incurred from SIHI in relation to the letters of
credit. The letters of credit were attached to the
complaint Filtex filed an unsworn answer denying
liability. Judgment was rendered in favor of SIHI.
Filtex contends that the trial court erred in
admitting in evidence the letters of credit since
the documentary stamps were not affixed thereto
and cancelled and hence the letters of credit
cannot be used in evidence pursuant to Section
201 of the National Internal Revenue Code. Is
Filtex's contention valid?

319

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Since Filtex failed to specifically deny under oath
the letters of credit, it is deemed to have impliedly
admitted the genuineness and due execution of the
same. Such implied admission includes the waiver of
the objection to the lack of documentary stamps.
(Filipinas Textile Mills Inc. v. State Investment House
Inc., G.R. No. 119800, 12 November 2003; citing
Elibberd v. Rhode, supra).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action to annul a deed of sale
against the Defendant on the ground that he had
not made any sale thereof. The Defendant filed an
answer to which he attached a copy of a deed of
sale purportedly executed by the Plaintiff. Plaintiff
did not file a reply under oath. During the trial,
Plaintiff presented without objection an expert
witness who testified that the Plaintiff's signature
on the deed of sale was forged. May the court take
into account the testimony of the expert witness
in deciding the case?

A.

Yes. While the Plaintiff impliedly admitted the
genuineness and due execution of the deed of sale
when he did not specifically deny it under oath and
set forth what he claims to be the facts, the benefits of
the implied admission were lost by the Defendant
when he failed to timely object to evidence
challenging the genuineness and due execution of the
actionable document. (Koh v. Ongsiako, 36 Phil. 185;
Titan Construction Corp. v. David, G.R. No. 169548,
15 March 2010).

Q.

What are the three modes of specific denial?

A.

FIRST MODE: The defendant must specify each
material allegation of fact the truth of which he does
not admit, and whenever practicable, set forth the

320

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
substance of the matters upon which he relies to
support his denia1.49
SECOND MODE: Where a defendant desires to
deny only a part of the averment, he shall specify so
much of it as is true and material and deny only the
remainder.
THIRD MODE: Where a defendant is without
knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief as
to the truth of a material averment made in the
complaint, he shall so state, and this shall have the
effect of a denial. (510 R8).
Q.

What is the effect if material averments in a
pleading asserting a claim or claims, other than
those as to the amount of unliquidated damages,
are not specifically denied?

A.

They shall be deemed admitted. (S11 R8).5° These
are judicial admissions.

Q.

Petitioner filed an action for quieting of title
against GSIS. The complaint alleged that since
1968 until the time the complaint was filed, GSIS
never exercised its rights as a mortgagee; the real
estate mortgage over his property constituted a
cloud on the title; GSIS' right to foreclose had
prescribed. In its answer, GSIS assailed that the
complaint failed to state a cause of action and
that prescription does not run against it because
it is a government entity.

"A party desiring to raise an issue as to the legal existence of any party or
the capacity of any party to sue or be sued in a representative capacity shall do
so by specific denial. (84 R8)
' °Trie 2020 Rules amended "material averment in the complaint" to
"material averments in a pleading asserting a claim or claims." This is to make
clear that the provision applies not only to a complaint, but also to a
counterclaim, cross-claim, third-party complaint, and complaint-in-intervention.

321

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Petitioner argued that GSIS had judicially
admitted that its right to foreclose the mortgage
had prescribed because of its failure to specifically
deny the paragraph in the complaint to that effect.
Is the petitioner's contention correct?
A.

No. It must be remembered that conclusions of fact
and law stated in the complaint are not deemed
admitted by the failure to make a specific denial. This
is true considering that only ultimate facts must be
alleged in any pleading and only material allegation of
facts need to be specifically denied.
A conclusion of law is a legal inference on a
question of law made as a result of a factual showing
where no further evidence is required. The allegation
of prescription in petitioner's complaint is a mere
conclusion of law. Labelling an obligation to have
prescribed without specifying the circumstances behind it
is a mere conclusion of law. The fact that GSIS had
not instituted any action within ten years after the loan
had been contracted is insufficient to hold that
prescription had set in. Thus, even if GSIS' denial
would not be considered as a specific denial, only the
fact that GSIS had not commenced any action, would
be deemed admitted at the most. This is true considering
that the circumstances to establish prescription against
GSIS have not been alleged with particularity.
In fine there was no judicial admission on the
part of GSIS with regard to prescription because
treating the obligation as prescribed, was merely a
conclusion of law. It would have been different if
petitioner's complaint alleged details necessary to
determine when GSIS' right to foreclose arose, i.e.,
date of maturity and whether demand was necessary.
(Mercene v. GSIS, 10 January 2018, Martires, J.).

322

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

Capitol Motors filed a complaint for sum of money
against Yabut. A copy of the promissory note
upon which the action was based was attached to
the complaint The complaint alleges that Yabut
defaulted in the payment of the note. Yabut filed
an answer in which he admits the paragraph
regarding his personal circumstances but "specifically
denies" the rest of the allegations for want of
knowledge or information sufficient to form a
belief as to the truth thereof. Capitol Motors
moved for a judgment on the pleadings in its
favor. Should the trial court grant the motion?

A.

Yes. The third mode of specific denial may not be
availed of when the fact as to which want of
knowledge or information is claimed is so plainly and
necessarily within the defendant's knowledge that his
averment of ignorance must be palpably untrue. The
defendant must aver positively or state how it is that
he is ignorant of the fact alleged. (Capitol Motors v.
Yabut, 32 SCRA 1).

Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant corporation for nonpayment of hospital equipment delivered to it.
Paragraph 6 of the complaint stated that Defendant's
total obligation as of 15 February 2009 was
P123,901,650.00, but its balance thereafter became
only P54,654,195.54 because it had since then
paid P67,357,683.23 to the Plaintiff. The Defendant
in its answer denied paragraphs no. 6 of the
complaint "for lack of knowledge or information
sufficient to form a belief as to the truth or falsity
thereof, inasmuch as the alleged transactions
were undertaken during the term of office of the
past officers of Defendant corporation, subject to
its special and affirmative defenses." The Defendant

323

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
in its answer raised the special and affirmative
defenses of lack of personal jurisdiction, improper
venue, lis pendens, and forum shopping. Was the
manner of denial effective as a specific denial?
A.

No. Considering that paragraph no. 6 of the complaint
averred matters that the Defendant ought to know or
could have easily known, the answer did not
specifically deny such material averments. It is settled
that denials based on lack of knowledge or information of
matters clearly known to the pleader, or ought to be
known to it, or could have easily been known by it are
insufficient, and constitute ineffective or sham denials.
That the Defendant qualified its admissions and
denials by subjecting them to its special and affirmative
defenses of lack of jurisdiction over its person,
improper venue, litis pendentia and forum shopping
was of no consequence because these affirmative
defenses, by their nature, involved matters extrinsic
to the merits of the Plaintiffs claim, and thus did not
negate the material averments of the complaint.
(Fernando Medical Enterprises v. Wesleyan University
Philippines, Inc., 20 January 2016, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

Paragraph 9 of the Complaint alleged thus:
"That as a result thereof, Plaintiff was
compelled to file a case in court and in so doing
has to retain the services of counsel for the
contracted amount of no less than P1,500."
Defendant in his answer alleged thus:
"That if in fact the Plaintiff had contracted,
as alleged in Par. 9 of the Complaint, the
services of counsel and will spend the amounts
therein specified occasioned by the institution

324

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
of the action, the same is his own personal
responsibility, for which reason, Defendant
denies any part and assumes no liability therefor."
Is the Defendant deemed to have admitted
Paragraph 9 of the Complaint?
A.

Yes. The Defendant failed to specifically deny
Paragraph 9 under any of the modes set forth in S10
R8. The defendant does not deny the alleged fact;
what he denies is his liability therefor, which is an
issue of law. Since the defendant neither denies nor
admits the material allegation about the services of
plaintiffs counsel, he is deemed to have admitted
Paragraph 9. (Galofa v. Nee Bon Sing, 22 SCRA 48).
The Defendant should have employed the third form
of denial.

Q. In his complaint for foreclosure of mortgage to
which was duly attached a copy of the mortgage
deed, plaintiff PP alleged inter alia as follows: (1)
that defendant DD duly executed the mortgage
deed, copy of which is Annex "A" of the complaint
and made an integral part thereof; and (2) that to
prosecute his complaint, plaintiff contracted a
lawyer, CC, for a fee of P50,000. In his answer,
defendant alleged, inter &la, that he had no
knowledge of the mortgage of the mortgage deed,
and he also denied any liability for plaintiff's
contracting with a lawyer for a fee.
Does defendant's answer as to plaintiff's
allegation no. 1 as well as no. 2 sufficiently raise
an issue of fact? Reason briefly. (04 Bar Q6b).
A.

Defendant's answer as to plaintiff's allegation no. 1
does not sufficiently raise an issue of fact.

325

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The third mode of specific denial may not be
availed of when the fact as to which want of
knowledge or information is claimed is so plainly and
necessarily within the defendant's knowledge that his
averment of ignorance must be palpably untrue. The
defendant must aver positively whether he duly
executed the mortgage deed or not. It cannot be that
he had no knowledge of plaintiff's allegation. (Capitol
Motors v. '(abut, 32 SCRA 1).
Defendant's answer as to plaintiff's allegation no.
2 also does not sufficiently raise an issue of fact.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that where defendant did not deny the
alleged fact regarding the engagement of a lawyer for
a fee but denied only his liability therefor, he is
deemed to have admitted the alleged fact. (Galofa v.
Nee Bon Sing, 22 SCRA 48).
Q.

Lim filed an action for forcible entry against Gaza
and other defendants. Paragraph 2 of the Answer
states that "Defendants specifically deny the
allegations in Paragraphs 2 & 3 for want of
knowledge or information sufficient to form a
belief as to the truth thereof, the truth of the
matter being those alleged in the special and
affirmative defenses of the Defendants." In the
special and affirmative defenses, the Defendants
alleged that Plaintiff did not show concrete title
while the Defendants are owners by virtue of a
TCT which was annexed to the answer; the
Defendants denied also having wrested possession
from the Plaintiffs. Did the Defendants specifically
deny the allegation in the complaint regarding
Lim's prior physical possession and the Defendants'
unlawful physical invasion?

326

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
A.

Yes. While the substance of the matters upon which
Defendants relied upon to support their denial was not
stated in Paragraph 2 of the Answer, these were
stated or indicated in the special and affirmative defenses.
(Gaza v. Lim, G.R. 126863, 16 January 2003).

Q. What is a negative pregnant? What is the effect of
a negative pregnant?
A.

A negative pregnant is a denial not of the fact itself
but only of a qualification or modification of the fact.
(STEVEN H. GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 136 [1975]).
The effect is that the defendant is deemed to
have denied only the qualification or modification but
not the fact itself which is deemed admitted or
affirmed. The denial is "pregnant" with the affirmation.

Q.

Give an example of a negative pregnant.

A.

Paragraph 4 alleges that Defendant bumped Plaintiff's
car while under the influence of alcohol. The
Defendant denies bumping Plaintiff's car while under
the influence of alcohol. The Defendant is deemed to
have denied only the fact of being intoxicated but is
deemed to have admitted the bumping.

Q.

Plaintiff Galofa filed a case against Nee Bon Sing
for recovery of possession of and to quiet title
over a parcel of land. Plaintiff in Paragraph 4 of
the complaint alleges that Plaintiff was unable to
take possession due to unwarranted adverse
claim of ownership and possession by Defendant
alleging sale by a certain Fe Nicolas of subject
property to Defendant. In paragraph 3 of his
answer, the Defendant alleged thus: "Defendant
specifically denies Paragraph 4 of the Complaint,
the truth being that Defendant never asserted title
of ownership to the property in virtue of any deed
327

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
of conveyance executed in favor of Defendant by
Fe Nicolas nor claimed any possessory right"
The Plaintiff moved for judgment on the pleadings.
Should the court grant the Plaintiff's motion?
A.

Yes. Paragraph 3 of the answer was a negative
pregnant. The Defendant's denial as to the material
averments in par. 4 conjoined with his disclaimer of
dominical or possessory rights in the manner alleged
in the complaint. The Defendant's denial is therefore
a negative pregnant which is equivalent to an
admission. The Defendant is deemed to have denied
only the qualification regarding the sale by Fe Nicolas
but not the fact that he prevented Plaintiff from taking
possession by an unwarranted adverse claim of
ownership. Hence, a judgment on the pleadings is
proper. (Galofa v. Nee Bon Sing, 22 SCRA 48).

Affirmative defenses
Q.

How shall a defendant raise his affirmative defenses?

A.

A defendant shall raise his affirmative defenses in his
answer, which shall be limited to the following:
A)

The affirmative defenses stated in the second
paragraph of S5 R6,51 that is,

1) Lack of subject-matter jurisdiction.
2) Lis pendens.
3) Res judicata.

51 512(a) R8 speaks of the affirmative defenses "set forth under Section
5(b), Rule 6." This is a drafting error. It should read "set forth under the second
paragraph of Section 5 of Rule 6."

328

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
As well as the following:
4) Lack of personal jurisdiction.
5) Improper venue.
6) Lack of legal capacity to sue.
7) Failure to state a cause of action.
8) Failure to comply with a condition precedent for
filing the claim.
B) The affirmative defenses under the first paragraph
of S5(b) R6, which include:
1) Fraud.
2) Prescription.
3) Release.
4) Payment.
5) Illegality.
6) Statute of frauds.
7) Estoppel.
8) Former recovery.
9) Discharge in bankruptcy.
10) Any other matter by way of confession and
avoidance. (S12 R8, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

How should the court resolve or act on the
affirmative defenses?

A.

The affirmative defenses under (A) above shall be
motu proprio resolved by the court within 30 days
from the filing of the answer. (512[c] R8, 2020 Rules
of Civil Procedure).

329

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
As to the affirmative defenses under (B), the
court may conduct a summary hearing within 15 days
from the filing of the answer.52 Such affirmative
defenses shall be resolved by the court within 30 days
from the termination of the summary hearing. (Si 2[d]
R8, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Under the first paragraph, the court has a duty to
resolve the affirmative defenses while in the second
paragraph, the court has the discretion to conduct or
not the summary hearing for the resolution of the
affirmative defense. If the court decides not to conduct
the summary hearing, the affirmative defenses would
be resolved during the trial proper.
Subject to the right of appeal, an order granting a
motion to dismiss or an affirmative defense that the
cause of action is barred by a prior judgment or by the
statute of limitations; that the claim or demand set
forth in the plaintiffs pleading has been paid, waived,
abandoned or otherwise extinguished; or that the
claim on which the action is founded is unenforceable
under the provisions of the statute of frauds, shall bar
the refiling of the same action or claim. (S13 R15,
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

When should the affirmative defenses be raised?

A.

Affirmative defenses should be raised at the earliest
opportunity;53 otherwise the failure to do so shall
constitute a waiver thereof. (512[b] R8, 2020 Rules
of Civil Procedure).

52Note that a motion to hear affirmative defenses is a prohibited motion.
(512[b] R15).
53At the time of the filing of the answer. Where the affirmative defense
was acquired after the answer was filed, the defendant should promptly file a
motion for leave to admit supplemental answer averring the affirmative defense.
However the affirmative defenses of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, res
judicata, us pendens, and prescription may be raised at any stage of the case.
(51 R9).

330

RULES
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
Q.

What is the remedy of the defendant from the
denial of the affirmative defense?

A.

Affirmative defenses, if denied, shall not be the
subject of a motion for reconsideration or petition for
certiorari, prohibition or mandamus, but may be among
the matters to be raised on appeal after a judgment
on the merits. (S12[e] R8, 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).54

Lack of legal capacity to sue
Q.

What is meant by the plaintiff having no legal
capacity to sue?

A.

The term "lack of legal capacity to sue" means either
that the plaintiff does not have the necessary
qualifications to appear in the case because he is not
in the full exercise of his civil rights, as in the case of
a minor or incompetent who is not assisted by his
father, mother, guardian, or guardian ad litem; or
when he does not have the character or representation
which he claims, as when he is not a duly appointed
executor or administrator of the estate he purports to
represent. Thus an administrator has no legal capacity
to sue after her resignation as such has been
accepted by the court. (Lao v. Dee, L-3890, 23
January 1952). Other examples are: (1) a foreign
corporation doing business in the Philippines without
a license (Sec. 133, Corporation Code); and (2) an
unincorporated association.

54Even if the affirmative defense is granted, a motion for reconsideration
thereof is prohibited. (Si 2[c] R15). The remedy of the plaintiff is an appeal.

331

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When the plaintiff is not the real party in interest,
what is the ground for dismissal?

A.

Failure to state a cause of action.
Roque, 98 Phil. 880).

Q.

Distinguish between lack of legal capacity to sue
and lack of personality to sue.

A.

A litigant lacks the personality to sue when he or she
is not the real party in interest. In this situation, the
initiatory pleading may be dismissed on the ground of
failure to state a cause of action.

(Casimiro v.

The lack of the legal capacity to sue, on the other
hand, refers to a litigant's "general disability to sue,
such as on account of minority, insanity, incompetence,
lack of juridical personality or any other general
disqualifications of a party." In this case, the initiatory
pleading may be dismissed on the ground of lack of
legal capacity to sue.
When an entity has no separate juridical personality,
it has no legal capacity to sue. Si R3 states that "only
natural or juridical persons or entities authorized by
law may be parties in a civil action." (National
Electrification Administration v. Maguindanao Electric
Cooperative, Inc., 11 April 2018, Jardeleza, J.).
Q.

Plaintiff Zuiden Bros. Ltd. is a Hong Kong
corporation. On several occasions, GTVL Inc.
purchased lace products from Zuiden. As per
instruction of OWL, the lace products were
delivered by Zuiden to Kenzar Ltd., a Hong Kong
corporation. The products are then considered as
sold upon receipt by Kenzar of the goods purchased
by OWL. Kenzar then had the obligation to
deliver the products to the Philippines and/or to
follow whatever instructions GTVL had on the
matter. GTVL failed to pay Zuiden, so the latter
332

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
brought a suit before the RTC of Paranaque City
for collection of a sum of money. GTVL filed an
answer raising the affirmative defense of plaintiffs
lack of legal capacity to sue. It was alleged that
Zuiden is doing business in the Philippines without
a license and thus barred from suing under
Section 133 of the Corporation Code. Should the
action be dismissed?
A.

No. An unlicensed foreign corporation not doing
business in the Philippines can sue before Philippine
courts. The transactions between Zuiden and GTVL
cannot be considered as "doing business" in the
Philippines. An essential condition to be considered
as doing business in the Philippines is the actual
performance of specific commercial acts within the
territory of the Philippines for the plain reason that the
Philippines has no jurisdiction over commercial acts
performed in foreign territories. Here the perfection
and the consummation of these transactions were
done outside the Philippines. Moreover the transactions
are simply export transactions. An exporter is not
deemed to be doing business in a foreign country by
the simple fact of exporting products to such foreign
country. (B. Van Zuiden Bros., Ltd., v. GTVL Mfg.
Industries, Inc., G.R. No. 147905, 28 May 2007).

Q. In 1996, Magna Ready Mix Corporation (MAGNA)
ordered from ANDERSEN, a foreign corporation,
the form design and drawing development for its
project on the development of a precast plant
Pursuant to the contract, ANDERSEN delivered
the designs. MAGNA made partial payments, but
left an unpaid balance in the amount of
US$60,786.59. ANDERSEN thus sued MAGNA for
payment of the balance. MAGNA raised the
defense that ANDERSEN had no legal capacity to
333

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
sue since it was doing business in the Philippines
without a license. Should ANDERSEN's complaint
be dismissed for lack of legal capacity to sue?
A.

No. A contract to render professional services is not
an isolated transaction but one which constitutes
doing business. Nevertheless, a defendant is estopped
from challenging the legal capacity of an unlicensed
foreign corporation to sue after having contracted with
it and benefited from the contract. The principle will be
applied to prevent a person contracting with a foreign
corporation from later taking advantage of its
noncompliance with the statutes chiefly in cases
where such person has received the benefits of the
contract. (Magna Ready Mix v. Andersen Bjomstad
Kane Jacobs Inc., 20 January 2021, Hernando, J.).

Q.

May a corporation file a case after its dissolution
and the lapse of the 3-year grace period provided
for in Section 122 of the Corporation Code?

A.

No. In such a case the corporation petitioner lacks
capacity to sue because it no longer possesses
juridical personality by reason of its dissolution and
lapse of the three-year grace period provided for
under Sec. 122 of the Corporation Code. The case
was properly dismissed on ground of lack of legal
capacity to sue. (Alabang Dev't Corp. v. Alabang Hills
Village Association, 2 June 2014).

Pleading asserting the claim states no cause of action
Q.

When does a pleading fail to state a cause of action?

A.

A pleading fails to state a cause of action when it
contains no allegation that there is an act or omission
by the defendant which violated the right of the
plaintiff. For example a complaint to collect on a
promissory note which avers that the promissory note
334

RULE 8
Manner Of Making Allegations In Pleadings
is not yet due but that the defendant was having
financial difficulties. Mere financial difficulty does not
make the obligor lose the benefit of the period under
Article 1198 of the Civil Code.
Q.

Where the plaintiffs cause of action is premature,
is there a ground for a motion to dismiss?

A.

Yes. A complaint which contains a premature cause
of action may be dismissed for failure to state a cause
of action. (Erlanger & Galinger, Inc. v. Villamor, L8767, 23 March 1956).

Q.

Distinguish failure to state a cause of action from
lack of cause of action.

A.

Failure to state a cause of action relates to the failure
of the allegations of the pleading to state a cause of
action, while lack of cause of action relates to a failure
of proof, that is, the plaintiff's failure to prove by
evidence his allegations relating to his cause of action.
Dismissal of the complaint on the ground of
failure to state a cause of action would not bar the refiling of the complaint, while a judgment for defendant
on the ground of lack of cause of action would amount
to res judicata.

Q.

In an action for recovery of a parcel of land, will
the defense that the defendant was an innocent
purchaser for value lead to the failure of the
complaint to state a cause of action?

A.

No. It is an affirmative defense to be proved during
the trial. (Colmenar v. Colmenar, 21 June 2021,
Lazaro-Javier, J.).

335

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Failure to comply with a condition precedent
Q.

May a court motu proprio dismiss a case for
failure to comply with Article 151 of the Family Code?

A.

No. Non-compliance with the earnest effort
requirement under Article 151 of the Family Code is
not a jurisdictional defect which would authorize the
courts to dismiss suits filed before them motu proprio.
Rather, it merely partakes of a condition precedent
such that the non-compliance therewith constitutes a
ground for dismissal of a suit should the same be
invoked by the opposing party at the earliest
opportunity, as in a motion to dismiss or in the
answer. Otherwise, such ground is deemed waived.
(Moreno v. Kahn, 30 July 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for redemption of land.
After he had filed his answer, defendant raised for
the first time the failure of the plaintiff to tender or
consign the redemption price. May the court
consider this defense?

A.

No. The defense of failure to tender or consign the
redemption price is an affirmative defense of failure to
comply with a condition precedent which is waived if
not raised in the answer. (Baltazar v. Miguel, 28 June
2021, Delos Santos, J.).

336

RULE 9. EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PLEAD
Q.

What is the effect if defenses and objections are
not pleaded either in a motion to dismiss or in the
answer?

A.

They are deemed waived. However, when it appears
from the pleadings or the evidence on record that the
court has no jurisdiction over the subject matter, that
there is another action pending between the same
parties for the same cause, or that the action is barred
by prior judgment or by statute of limitations, the court
shall dismiss the claim. (JRLP)55

Q.

Petitioners Rebecca and Rosalie, children of
Spouses Lourdes and Luciano Pacaria, filed an
action for accounting and damages against Rovila
Inc., and Respondents. The Petitioners alleged
that Respondents had embezzled the funds and
property of Rovila Water Supply, the family business
owned by their parents. The Petitioners filed the
complaint in their own names although Rosalie
was authorized by Lourdes through an SPA.
Lourdes and Luciano died. The Petitioners
informed the court of this development and
amended the complaint but the caption of the
amended complaint remained the same. Respondents
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction, which was denied, and later an
answer. During the pretrial, the Respondents
stated for the first time that they would seek the
dismissal of the complaint because the Petitioners

55Since the only grounds that may be raised in a motion to dismiss are res
judicata, lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, is pendens, and prescription (512[a]
R15), and these are not waived by failure to set them up in the motion to dismiss,
the application of Si R9 would now be limited only to failure to raise the defense
or objection in the answer.

337

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
are not the real parties in interest but rather the
deceased spouses Pacana who are the alleged
owners. The RTC issued a pretrial order where
one of the issues submitted was whether the
complaint should be dismissed for failure to
comply with S2 R2 which requires that every
action must be prosecuted in the name of the real
party in interest.
Respondents then filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground that the Petitioners are not the real
party in interest and hence the complaint fails to
state a cause of action. Petitioners argued that
the ground of failure to state a cause of action
was waived while Respondents countered that the
ground of failure to state a cause of action was
timely raised pursuant to S2(f) R18. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

The motion to dismiss should not be granted. Under
Si R9, defenses and objections not raised either in
the motion to dismiss or in the answer are deemed
waived. Under the 1997 Rules, grounds other than
lack of subject matter jurisdiction, res judicata, lis
pendens, and prescription are deemed waived if not
raised either in the motion to dismiss or in the answer.
Failure to state a cause of action was deleted as an
exception to the waiver rule.
Although S2(f) R18 provides that the court during
the pretrial may consider the propriety of dismissing
the action should a valid ground therefor be found to
exist, this applies only to the issues that would govern
the trial proper. The issue of failure to state a cause
of action can no longer be taken up by the trial court
since it had been waived under Si R9. (PacanaContreras v. Rovila Water Supply, Inc., G.R. No.
168979,2 December 2013, Brion, J.).
338

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
Q.

What is the effect if a compulsory counterclaim,
or cross-claim, is not set up in a case?

A.

It shall be barred. (S2 R9).

Q.

What is the reason behind S2 R9?

A.

The rule is designed to achieve resolution of the
whole controversy at one time and in one action and
to avoid multiplicity of suits. (Baclayon v. Court of
Appeals, 182 SCRA 761; Ledesma v. Morales, 87
Phil. 199).

Q.

How should a compulsory counterclaim or crossclaim be set up?

A.

A compulsory counterclaim or a cross-claim that a
defending party has at the time he files his answer
shall be contained therein. (88 R11).

Q.

May a compulsory counterclaim be set up in a
motion to dismiss?

A.

No. The Supreme Court has stated that if the
defendant has a compulsory counterclaim, he should
not file a motion to dismiss but an answer with a
counterclaim, with the ground for the motion to
dismiss being asserted as an affirmative defense
pursuant to 86 R16 (1997 Rules). In such a case, the
dismissal of the complaint shall be without prejudice
to the prosecution in the same or separate action of a
counterclaim pleaded in the answer. (Financial Building
Corp. v. Forbes Park Association, G.R. No. 133119,
17 August 2000).56

56Although 816 R16 was not transposed or re-enacted in the 2020 Rules,
it is submitted that the procedure in the second paragraph thereof regarding the
prosecution in the same action of a counterclaim pleaded in the answer is still
valid under the 2020 Rules.

339

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the remedy of a party if he fails to set up
his counterclaim or cross-claim in the answer?

A.

When a pleader fails to set up a counterclaim or a
cross-claim through oversight, inadvertence, or excusable
neglect, or when justice requires (Keyword: JOIE), he
may, by leave of court, set up the counterclaim or
cross-claim by amendment before judgment. (S10 R11).

Q.

What is the rule on pleading regarding afteracquired counterclaims or cross-claims?

A.

An after-acquired counterclaim is merely permissive
even if it arises from or is connected with the
transaction or occurrence constituting the subjectmatter of the opposing party's claim.
A counterclaim or a cross-claim which either
matured or was acquired by a party after serving his
pleading may, with the permission of the court, be
presented as a counterclaim or a cross-claim by
supplemental pleading before judgment. (S9 R11).
In Banco de Oro Universal Bank vs. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 160354, 25 August 2005, the
Supreme Court also allowed the setting up of the
after-acquired counterclaim in a separate action.

Q.

If a compulsory counterclaim or cross-claim not
set up is made the subject of a separate action,
what is the remedy of the defendant?

A.

The remedy of the defendant is to file a motion to
dismiss or answer raising the ground of litis pendentia
if the first case is still pending or the ground of res
judicata if the first case is already final and
unappealable. The basis for this is that under S47(b)
R39, the final judgment is conclusive not only with
respect to the matter directly adjudged but also as to
340

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
any other matter that could have been raised in
relation thereto. (Metals Engineering Resources
Corporation v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 95631, 28
October 1991).57
Q.

P sues D for tort. D files a motion to dismiss on
the ground of res judicata. The court dismisses
P's complaint and the dismissal order becomes
final and unappealable. Later D sues P for moral
and exemplary damages for having brought a
harassment suit. P moves to dismiss on the
ground that the claim for moral and exemplary
damages should have been brought as a
counterclaim in the torts case. Should the motion
to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. Had D wanted to prosecute his claim for moral
and exemplary damages, he should have not filed a
motion to dismiss but an answer wherein he should
have raised res judicata as an affirmative defense and
included a counterclaim in the answer for moral and
exemplary damages. Not having done so, the claim
for damages is barred under S2 R9. See Financial
Building Corp. v. Forbes Park Association, supra.

Q.

While driving his car, Mamerto Polo met an
accident which resulted in the death of his
passenger son. Based on this incident, he filed a
criminal complaint for homicide thru reckless
imprudence and a separate civil case for damages
against Ricardo Bala, the owner and driver of the
alleged offending vehicle.

•

57The author is of the view that the more precise affirmative defense is that
the claim has been waived or otherwise extinguished. (87 Re, 82 R9). Res
judicata would apply only if there is identity of causes of action. There is no
identity of cause of action between the complaint and the compulsory
counterclaim. See for instance Financial Building Corp. v. Forbes Park
Association, 338 SCRA 346 [2000] where it was held that the basis for dismissal
is bar by prior judgment or waiver.

341

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
In his answer in the civil case, Bala did not
assert any claim or demand but merely pleaded
the defense that it was plaintiff who was guilty of
reckless imprudence.
Bala was acquitted in the criminal case. The
civil case was also dismissed upon a finding by
the trial court that defendant Bala drove his car
carefully, while Mamerto Polo did so recklessly.
No appeal was taken from the dismissal of either case.
A year later, Bala instituted a civil case
against Polo for recovery of the damages he
sustained in said vehicular accident, including the
expenses he incurred in connection with the suits
instituted by Polo and moral damages arising
from the mental anguish he suffered in defending
himself in said suits.
What judicial remedy should Mamerto Polo
avail himself of to effect an early termination of
the case? Reasons. (83 Bar QI)
A.

The judicial remedy that Mamerto Polo should avail
himself of to effect an early termination of the case is
to file a motion to dismiss on the ground of res
judicata. [Metals Engineering Resources Corporation v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 95631, 28 October 1991]
The Supreme Court has held that a compulsory
counterclaim not raised in an action is barred by res
judicata if the action has become final and
unappealable.
Here, the civil case filed by Bala against Polo for
the recovery of damages he sustained in the vehicular
accident, expenses incurred in connection with Polo's
suits, and moral damages arising from the mental
anguish he suffered is in the nature of a compulsory
counterclaim which should have been set up in the
342

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
civil case filed by Polo against Bala. This is because
the claim for damages arose out of the subject matter
of the civil case filed against Bala. The dismissal of
such action or civil case became final and unappealable
since no appeal was taken therefrom.
Hence, the judicial remedy that Polo should avail
of is a motion to dismiss on the ground of res judicata.
Declaration of Default
Q.

When may a defendant be declared in default?
What happens thereafter?

A.

If the defendant fails to answer within the time allowed
therefor, the court shall upon motion of the claiming
party with notice to the defending party, and proof of
such failure, declare the defending party in default.
Thereupon, the court shall:
1) Proceed to render judgment granting the claimant
such relief as his pleading may warrant; or
2) In its discretion, require the claimant to submit
evidence. (S3 R9).

Q.

May the reception of evidence be delegated?

A.

Yes, it may be delegated to the clerk of court (S3 R9),
who must be a member of the bar. (S9 R30).

Q.

Should a motion to declare defendant in default
be set for hearing?

A.

While such a motion is a litigious motion, a hearing is
discretionary upon the court. (S6 R15). The defendant
however should be given the chance to oppose the
motion to declare him in default. (S5[c] R15).

343

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May the court motu proprio declare a defendant in
default for failure to timely file an answer?

A.

No. There should be a motion by the plaintiff. Note
however that under the Rule on Summary Procedure,
the court may motu proprio render judgment in favor
of the plaintiff if the defendant fails to timely answer.

Q.

What is the effect of the order of default?

A.

A party in default shall be entitled to notice of
subsequent proceedings but not to take part in the
trial. (53[a] R9).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a action for sum of money against
the defendant before the MTC. For failure to
answer, the defendant was declared in default
Subsequently however the MTC dismissed the
case motu proprio for failure of the plaintiff to comply
with the requirement of prior barangay conciliation.
Was the motu proprio dismissal proper?

A.

No. The ground of non-compliance with a condition
precedent, i.e., undergoing prior barangay conciliation
proceedings, was not invoked at the earliest opportunity,
as in fact, respondent was declared in default for
failure to file a responsive pleading despite due notice.
Hence such ground was deemed waived. (Lansangan
v. Ca/sip, 6 August 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

May a party who is declared in default testify in
behalf of the non-defaulted defendants?

A.

Yes. There is nothing in the Rules of Court which
prohibit or disqualify a defaulted party from being a
witness for the non-defaulted defendant/s. (Cavili v.
Florendo, G.R. No. 73039, 9 October 1987).

344

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
Q.

D, E, and F are solidarily indebted to P in the
amount of P900,000. P filed a complaint for
collection of the P900,000 against D, E, and F
before the RTC. D filed an answer within the
reglementary period but E and F did not
a) May E and F be declared in default upon motion of P?
b) May P move for a default judgment against E and F?
c) May E and F take part in the trial?
d) May E and F testify in behalf of D?

A
a) Yes, since E and F did not file their answers.
b) No. This is a case of partial default under 33(c) R9.
When a pleading asserting a claim states a
common cause of action against several defending
parties, some of who answer and the others fail to
do so, the court shall try the case against all upon
the answers thus filed and render judgment upon
the evidence presented. Here the court should
try the case against D, E, and F upon the answer
filed by D.
c)

No. A party in default shall be entitled to notice of
subsequent proceedings but not to take part in
the trial.

d) Yes. A defaulted party is not disqualified from
testifying in court in behalf of a non-defaulted
party. (Cavili v. Florendo, supra).

345

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a complaint against D, E, and F wherein he
alleges that defendants are jointly indebted to
him for P900,000. D filed an answer within the
reglementary period but E and F did not
a) May E and F be declared in default upon motion of P?
b) May P move for a default judgment against E and F?

A.
a) Yes since E and F did not file an answer within the
reglementary period.
b) Yes. The provisions of S3(c) R9 do not apply since
the complaint does not state a common cause of
action against D, E, and F. In a joint obligation,
each obligation of the joint debtor is separate and
distinct from the other joint debtors. Hence the
court may render default judgment against E and
F ordering them to pay P300,000 each to P.
Q.

P filed a complaint for collection of a P500,000
loan against D. D did not file an answer and was
declared in default The clerk of court received P's
evidence which proved that the amount of the
loan was actually P550,000. May the court award
P550,000 to P?

A.

No. A judgment rendered against a party in default
shall not exceed the amount or be different in kind
from that prayed for nor award unliquidated damages.
(S3[d] R9). This is different from the rule where the
defendant was not declared in default and which is
thus covered by 35 R10.

346

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant for collection of a
P45,000 loan plus interest of 12% per annum from
2 March 1991 until full payment. Defendant did not
file an answer and was accordingly declared in
default. After Plaintiff presented his evidence ex
parte, the RTC rendered judgment ordering Defendant
to pay Plaintiff P45,000 plus interest of 5% per
month from 2 March 1991 until full payment.
Defendant failed to appeal. Subsequently Defendant
filed a petition for annulment of judgment regarding
the portion thereof that awarded 5% per month
interest rather than 12% per annum interest. The
Plaintiff contends that the judgment has already
become final and executory and that there are
only two grounds for a petition for annulment, that
is, extrinsic fraud and lack of jurisdiction, none of
which is present May the petition for annulment
of judgment prosper?

A.

Yes, a petition for annulment of judgment is an
exception to the final judgment rule, which states that
final and executory judgments can no longer be set aside.
While under S2 R47 a Petition for Annulment of
Judgment may be based only on the grounds of
extrinsic fraud and lack of jurisdiction, jurisprudence
recognizes lack of due process as additional ground
to annul a judgment. A final and executory judgment
may still be set aside if, upon mere inspection thereof,
its patent nullity can be shown for having been issued
without jurisdiction or for lack of due process of law.
Here the grant of 5% monthly interest is way beyond
the 12% per annum interest sought in the Complaint
and smacks of violation of due process. The reason is
that under 33(d) R9, a judgment rendered against a
party in default shall not exceed the amount or be
different in kind from that prayed for. (Diona v.
Balangue, 7 January 2013, Del Castillo, J.).
347

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the cases wherein no defaults are allowed?

A.

In actions for annulment or declaration of nullity of
marriage or for legal separation. If the defending party
fails to answer, the court shall order the Solicitor
General or his deputized public prosecutor to investigate
whether or not a collusion between the parties exists,
and if there is no collusion, to intervene for the State
in order to see to it that that evidence submitted is not
fabricated or suppressed. (53[e] R9; Articles 48 and
60, Family Code). No judgment shall be based on a
stipulation of facts or confession of judgment.
(Articles 48 and 60, Family Code).

Q.

Atty. Victor Dabo is the lawyer of the defendant in
Civil Case No. 1286 of the Regional Trial Court of
Manila entitled "Sweet Sugar Inc. v. National
Landair Inc." The defendant was served summons
on 6 July 2008. As of 17 October 2008, Atty. Dabo
had not filed any responsive pleading on behalf of
the defendant on account of numerous social
engagements with important and prospective clients.
On 18 October 2008, the counsel for the
plaintiff filed with the court a "Motion to Declare
Defendant in Default," a copy of which was duly
served upon Atty. Dabo. By way of opposition to
the said motion, Atty. Dabo served and filed with
the court a "Motion to Admit Answer" with the
defendant's answer attached thereto. The tendered
answer recited facts which constituted valid defenses
to the claim asserted in the complaint.
The counsel for the plaintiff opposed the
admission of the answer arguing that it was filed
out of time; that the inattention of Atty. Dabo did
not constitute fraud, accident, mistake or
excusable neglect; and that it would be unfair and
348

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
unjust if the prejudice caused by the social
activities of Atty. Dabo be inflicted upon the
plaintiff, and not upon Atty. Dabo and his client.
What action should the court take? Reasons.
(83 Bar Q1 ed).
A.

The court should admit the amended complaint.
The Supreme Court has held that the defendant's
answer should be admitted where it was filed before
he had been declared in default as default judgments
are generally disfavored. (Cathay Pacific Airways v.
Romillo, 141 SCRA 451, De los Santos v. Carpio, 501
SCRA 390 [2006]).
While Atty. Dabo unduly delayed in filing the
answer, this was counterbalanced by the delay of
plaintiff's counsel in filing the motion to declare the
defendant in default. Moreover the answer contained
valid defenses. Cases should as much as possible be
decided on the merits rather than on technicalities.

Q.

What are the remedies of a party who fails to file
an answer and/or is declared in default?

A.
1) Before notice of order of default. File a motion to
admit answer giving a justifiable cause for the
delay in the filing of the answer. Where an
answer has been filed belatedly but before the
defendant is declared in default, the court should
admit the answer in order to resolve the case on
the merits rather than on technicalities.
2) After order of default but before judgment. File a
motion under oath to set aside the default order
upon proper showing that his failure to answer

349

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
was due to fraud, accident, mistake or excusable
negligence and that he has a meritorious defense.
(S3[b] R9).
3) After judgment but before it becomes final. File a
motion for new trial on the ground of FAME under
R37. If the motion for new trial is denied, the
defendant may appeal within 15 days from receipt
of the order denying the motion for new trial.
4)

After judgment becomes final. File a petition for
relief under R38. If the defendant was improvidently
or wrongly declared in default he may move to set
aside the judgment by way of a special civil action
for certiorari.

5) After period to file a petition for relief has lapsed.
File a petition for annulment of judgment based
on extrinsic fraud under R47.
Q.

P files a collection case for P500,000 against D.
D was declared in default on the ground that his
answer was filed beyond the reglementary period.
D filed a motion for reconsideration in which he
submitted proof that his answer was filed on the
day from service of summons. The trial court
denied the motion on the ground that it was not
accompanied by an affidavit of merits. Default
judgment rendered against D who received a copy
of the judgment on March 1. D filed a motion for
reconsideration which was denied in an order
received by D on April 1. On May 3 D filed a
special civil action for certiorari with the CA to set
aside the default judgment. P argued that the
petition should be dismissed since the proper
remedy was appeal. Should the petition for
certiorari be dismissed?

350

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead
A.

No. The trial court acted with grave abuse of discretion
when it declared the defendant in default despite the
fact that there was proof that he had timely filed his
answer. Furthermore, a motion for reconsideration
need not be accompanied by an affidavit of merits.
Appeal is not an adequate remedy since D was not
able to present any countervailing evidence before
the court a quo. (Balangcad v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 83888, 12 February 1998).

Q.

Tan filed with the MTC a collection case against
Otero for failure to pay purchases of petroleum
products. Otero failed to file his answer and was
duly declared in default During presentation of
evidence ex parte, Tan presented the testimonies
of his two Petron outlet employees who attended
to Otero when he made his purchases. Tan also
presented statements of accounts prepared by his
employee Lito, who however was not presented to
testify. The MTC rendered a default judgment in
favor of Tan. On appeal Otero contends that the
MTC should not have taken into consideration the
SOAs since Tan failed to authenticate them, the
employee who actually prepared them not having
been presented to testify. Nonetheless, the RTC
and the CA affirmed. May Otero on appeal still
raise the failure of Tan to authenticate the SOAs?

A.

Yes. A defendant against whom a default judgment
was rendered is not barred on appeal from challenging
the judgment for being contrary to the law and the
evidence. Hence the defendant on appeal may
challenge the evidence received as unauthenticated
and as hearsay. (Otero v. Tan, 15 August 2012,
Reyes, J.). The SOAs were not authenticated as no
witness was presented to identify the signature of the

351

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
one who prepared it. They were also hearsay since
the one who prepared them was not presented in
court nor was there a showing that he was unavailable
to testify.
Q.

May a party declared in default appeal from the
default judgment of the RTC and file appeal brief
in the CA?

A.

Yes. The provision that the defaulting party cannot
take part in the trial only meant that he has already
lost his standing in the trial court. In other words, the
effect of the judgment of default is limited only to
those stages in the prosecution of the case which
terminated with and included in the judgment of the
trial court on the merits. A defaulted party may appeal
from the judgment rendered against him. And
concomitant with the said right is the filing of the
appellant's brief in order to be heard, or an appellee's
brief, if the one who appealed the judgment was the
plaintiff. (Royal Plains View Inc. v. Mejia, 12 Nov
2018, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Distinguish between the effects of the failure to
file an answer in a civil case governed by the
Summary Rules and in a civil case governed by
the regular provisions of the Rules of Court. (89
Bar Q17-2).

352

RULE 9
Effect Of Failure To Plead

Failure to file an answer
under the Rules on
Summary Procedure

Failure to file an answer
under the regular
provisions of the Rules of
Court

Governed by S6 of the RSP.
Reglementary period to
answer is 10 days from
service of summons.

Governed by 53 R9.
Reglementary period as a
rule is 15 days from service
of summons.

Plaintiff files motion to render
judgment. Motion to declare
defendant in default a
prohibited motion.

Plaintiff files motion to
declare defendant in default.

Court may motu proprio
render judgment in favor of
the plaintiff as may be
warranted by the facts
alleged in the complaint.

Court cannot motu proprio
declare defendant in default,
much less render judgment in
plaintiffs favor.

Court cannot require plaintiff
to submit evidence but
should just render judgment
as may be warranted by facts
alleged in the complaint,

The court may proceed to
render judgment granting the
plaintiff such relief as his
pleading may warrant or in its
discretion require the plaintiff
to submit evidence.

353

RULE 10. AMENDED &
SUPPLEMENTAL PLEADINGS
Q.

How may a pleading be amended?

A.

Pleadings may be amended by (1) adding or striking
out an allegation or the name of any party, or (2)
correcting a mistake in the name of a party or a
mistaken or inadequate allegation or description in
any other respect. (Si R10).

Q.

What is the reason for allowing the amendment of
pleadings?

A.

So that the actual merits of the controversy may
speedily be determined, without regard to technicalities,
and in the most expeditious and inexpensive manner.
(Id.).

Q.

What are the kinds of amendments?

A.

Amendments may either be formal or substantial. A
formal amendment is one which seeks to correct a
mere defect in the designation of the parties and other
clearly clerical or typographical error. Amendments
which go beyond such corrections are substantial.
Formal amendments may be corrected by the
court at any stage of the action, at its initiative or on
motion, provided no prejudice is caused thereby to
the adverse party.
Except where the amendment is a matter of
right, a substantial amendment may be made only
upon leave of court. Such leave shall be refused if it
appears to the court that the motion was made with
intent to delay or confer jurisdiction on the court, or

354

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
the pleading stated no cause of action from the
beginning which could be amended. (S3 R10, as
amended by the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

A complaint was filed in the name of a sole
proprietorship. On appeal to the Supreme Court,
may the plaintiff be substituted by the owneroperator of the sole proprietorship?

A.

Yes. Substitution of a sole proprietorship by the
owner-operator is merely a formal amendment which
may be done at any stage of the action. (Yon Mitori
International Industries v. Union Bank, 14 October
2020, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

When are amendments a matter of right?

A.

A party may amend his pleading once as a matter of
right at any time before a responsive pleading is
served or, in the case of a reply, at any time within 10
days after it is served. (S2 R10).

Q.

When amendment is a matter of right, should the
pleader file a motion to admit the amended pleading?

A.

No since it is the ministerial duty of the court to accept
the amended pleading. The pleader should just file
the amended pleading without any corresponding
motion. (Marcos-Araneta v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 154096, 22 August 2008).

Q.

What is the remedy of a party if an amendment is
refused by the court although the same is a
matter of right?

A.

The party may avail of mandamus since it it a
ministerial duty of the court to accept the amendment
made as a matter of right. (Marcos-Araneta v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 154096, 22 August 2008; Ong
Peng v. Custodio, L-14911, 25 March 1961).
355

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When may the complaint be amended as a matter
of right?

A.

At any time before the answer is served upon the
plaintiff. (S2 R10)

Q.

When may the answer be amended as a matter of
right?

A.

Under the 1997 Rules, an answer may be amended
as a matter of right at any time before the reply, which
is the responsive pleading to an answer, is served
upon the defendant. (Id.) However under the 2020
Rules, an answer may be responded to by a reply
only if the defendant attaches an actionable document
to the answer.
It is submitted that if no reply is filed by the plaintiff,
the defendant may amend his answer as a matter of
right until the issuance of the pre-trial order.
Thereafter, the answer may no longer be amended if
such amendment would raise an issue not included in
the pretrial order.

Q.

When may the reply be amended as a matter
of right?

A.

Within 10 days after it is served. (Id.)

Q.

F sues his brother G to recover ownership of a
parcel of land but the latter, within the period for
pleading, moves to dismiss based on two
grounds, to wit: first, the suit being between
members of the same family, the complaint fails
to aver that earnest efforts towards a compromise
have been made, and second, the action is barred
by extinctive prescription.

356

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
Pending resolution of the motion to dismiss,
F serves notice to take G's deposition, which the
latter opposes, claiming that at this stage of the
proceeding no deposition can be obtained without
leave of court.
Meanwhile, obviously to meet G's objections
in the motion to dismiss still unresolved, F files
an amended complaint seeking this time the
partition of the land between him and his brother
and alleging that earnest efforts at amicable
settlement have been exerted and have failed.
1) If you were the trial judge, would you admit F's
amended complaint and deny G's motion to
dismiss despite the latter's contention that
the amendment would result in a radical
change of the cause of action or theory of the
case? Reasons. (79 Bar Q5).
A.
1)

Yes if I were the trial judge I would admit F's
amended complaint. Under S2 R10 a party may
amend his pleading once as a matter of right
before a responsive pleading is served.

Here no responsive pleading has been served
since a motion to dismiss is not a responsive
pleading. Hence F may amend his complaint as a
matter of right.
Q.

P filed an action for recovery of possession of
land against D before the RTC of Manila. The
complaint did not allege the assessed value of the
land. D filed an answer raising the affirmative
defense of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction since
the action was a real one and the complaint did
not aver the assessed value of the land involved.
P then moved for leave of court to admit an
357

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
amended complaint which alleged that the land
had an assessed value of P55,000. Should the
court grant the motion for leave to admit the
amended complaint?
A.

No. It is axiomatic that if the purpose of the
amendment is to confer jurisdiction upon the court
then the court cannot admit the amended complaint.
This is because the court which does not have
jurisdiction under an original complaint is without
power to admit an amended complaint. (Rosario v.
Carangdang, 96 Phil. 845 [1955]).

Q.

P filed an action for recovery of possession of
land against D before the RTC of Manila. The
complaint did not allege the assessed value of the
land. D filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of
lack of subject-matter jurisdiction since the action
was a real one and the complaint did not aver the
assessed value of the land involved. P then filed
an amended complaint which alleged that the land
had an assessed value of P55,000. Should the
court grant the motion to dismiss?

A.

No. In this case P may amend his complaint as a
matter of right since a motion to dismiss is not a
responsive pleading. Since the filing of the amended
complaint is a matter of right, there is no power or
discretion that needs to be exercised by the trial court.
Hence the amended complaint supersedes the
original complaint and the trial court would have
jurisdiction by virtue of the amended complaint. (See
Rosario v. Carangdang, supra.).

Q.

On 12 May 2005, the plaintiff filed a complaint in
the Regional Trial court of Quezon City for the
collection of P250,000. The defendant filed a
motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground
that the court had no jurisdiction over the action
358

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
since the claimed amount of P250,000 is within
the exclusive jurisdictionof the Metropolitan Trial
Court of Quezon City.
Before the court could resolve the motion,
the plaintiff, without leave of court, amended his
complaint to allege a new cause of action
consisting in the inclusion of an additional
amount of P200,000, thereby increasing his total
claim to P450,000. The plaintiff thereafter filed his
opposition to the motion to dismiss, claiming that
the Regional Trial Court had jurisdiction over his
action. Rule on the motion of the defendant with
reasons. (05 Bar Q9).
A.

The motion to dismiss of the defendant on the ground
of lack of jurisdiction should be denied.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, a plaintiff
may amend his complaint as a matter of right before
service of a responsive pleading upon him. The Rules
of Civil Procedure also provide that the amended
pleading supersedes the original pleading.
Here the amendment was a matter of right since
a motion to dismiss is not a responsive pleading.
Hence the amended complaint supersedes the
original complaint and thus the RTC has jurisdiction.
(See Rosario v. Carangdang, supra.).

Q.

Arturo lent P1 Million to his friend Robert on the
condition that Robert execute a promissory note
for the loan. Robert complied. In his promissory
note dated 20 September 2019, Robert undertook
to pay the loan within a year from its date at 12%
per annum interest. In July 2020, Arturo requested
Robert to pay ahead of time but the latter refused
and insisted on the agreement. Arturo issued a

359

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
demand letter and when Robert did not comply,
Arturo filed an action for collection of the P1
Million on 10 September 2020.
a) On 1 October 2020, Arturo filed an amended
complaint alleging that Robert's debt had in
the meantime become due but that Robert still
refused to pay. Should the amended complaint
be allowed considering that no answer has
yet been filed?
b)

Would your answer be different had Arturo
filed instead a supplemental complaint stating
that the debt became due after the filing of the
original complaint?58

A.
a) No. Unless the plaintiff has a valid and subsisting
cause of action at the time his action is
commenced, the defect cannot be cured or
remedied by the acquisition or accrual of one
while the action is pending, and a supplemental
complaint or an amendment setting up such
after-accrued cause of action is not permissible.
The reason for this rule is that a person should
not be summoned before the public tribunals to
answer for complaints which are premature or
groundless. (Swagman Hotels v. Court of Appeals,
455 SCRA 175, 186-188 [2005]; Surigao Mine
Exploration Co. v. Harris, 68 Phil. 113, 121-122
[1939]).59
581he problem is based on Question 11 of the 2008 Remedial Law Bar
Examination.
591he Swagman ruling was codified in 53 R10 in this manner: "leave [to
amend] shall be refused if it appears to the court that ... the pleading stated no
cause of action from the beginning which could be amended." (Italics supplied).
The wording is somewhat circuitous and begs the question of when such a
pleading could be amended. It is opined that a clearer phrasing, following the
wordings of Swagman, is as follows: "leave shall be refused if it appears to the

360

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
b) No, my answer would not be different for the same
reason as above. Moreover, a supplemental
pleading may not be filed without leave of court.
(56 R10; 1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 117 [5th rev.
ed., 3rd printing]).
Q.

Pandoy filed against Dong a complaint to collect a
P1,000,000 loan which was yet to fall due. At the
time the complaint was filed, Dong was already
insolvent. The complaint however failed to allege
Dong's insolvency. Dong filed an answer raising
the affirmative defense of failure to state a cause
of action. Pandoy then moved for leave of court
to file an amended complaint which would include
an allegation regarding Dong's prior insolvency.
Should the court admit the amended complaint?

A.

Yes. At the time Pandoy filed the complaint, he
already had a valid and subsisting cause of action
since Dong's insolvency made his debt due and
demandable at once. (Article 1198[1], Civil Code).
Hence the failure to state a cause of action may be
cured by an amendment. (1 JOSE FERIA & MARIA
CONCEPCION NOCHE, CML PROCEDURE ANNOTATED
332 [2001]). This should be distinguished from the
holdings in Swagman and Surigao Mining where there
was no valid and subsisting cause of action at the
time the complaint was filed and where such cause of
action accrued only after the complaint had been filed.

Q.

The Iglesia ni Cristo filed a complaint against
Siasoco and Carissa Homes for specific performance
and damages wherein the INC prayed that a deed
of sale over the subject parcel of land be executed
in its favor. Carissa filed an answer while Siasoco

court that ... the plaintiff had no cause of action at the time of the filing of the pleading
and the purpose of the amendment is to set up an after-accrued cause of action."

361

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
filed a motion to dismiss. Pending the resolution
of the motion to dismiss, Carissa Homes sold the
land to the INC. The INC then filed an amended
complaint dropping Carissa as defendant and
changing the nature of the case to a mere action
for damages. Siasoco filed a motion to strike out
the amended complaint on the ground that it was
filed without leave of court. Should the amended
complaint be expunged from the records?
A.

No. Where some but not all the defendants have
answered, the plaintiff may still amend the complaint
as a matter of right as against the non-answering
defendant or defendants. (Siasoco v. Court of
Appeals, 303 SCRA 186). Here Siasoco had not filed
an answer. Hence the INC can still amend the
complaint as a matter of right.

Q.

On 10 September 1981, Private Respondents filed
with the CFI of Pasay an action for specific
performance and damages to compel Petitioners
to execute a deed of sale over a parcel of land in
their favor (Civil Case No. 9412). On 16 September
1981, the Private Respondents filed another case
for annulment of sale and damages against the
Petitioners and the Quiazons when the Private
Respondents learned that the land had been
transferred by the Petitioners to the Quiazons
(Civil Case No. 9432). Civil Case No. 9432 was
eventually dismissed on the ground that the
Private Respondents had split their cause of
action. In 1996 after Petitioners had already filed
their answer, the Private Respondents filed a
motion for leave to admit amended complaint in
Civil Case No. 9412. The amendment consists of
changing the nature of the case from specific
performance and damages to annulment of sale
and damages. The Petitioners opposed the
362

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
motion on the ground that the amendment
substantially changes cause of action and the
theory of the case. Should the amended answer
be admitted?
A.

Yes. Granting arguendo that the amendment would
change the cause of action and theory of the case,
the clear import of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure,
when it deleted the phrase, "or that the cause of
action or defense is substantially altered," is that the
amendment may now substantially alter the cause of
action or defense. This should however be true when
the amendments sought to be made shall serve the
higher interest of justice, prevent delay, and secure a
just, speedy, and inexpensive disposition of every
action or proceeding. In the interest of substantial
justice, the amendment is allowed so as to afford
party-litigants the full and genuine opportunity to
substantiate their respective claims and defenses and
for the court to decide the case on the merits.
(Valenzuela v. CA, 363 SCRA 777 [2001]).

Q.

Respondent WG&A entered into a lease contract
with the Philippine Ports Authority over a marine
slip way in the North Harbor. The lease contract
provides that "the lease of the area shall take
effect on 1 January 2001 to 30 June 2001 or until
such time PPA turns over its operation to the
winning bidder in the North Harbor modernization."
Believing that the lease contract expired on 30
June 2001 PPA wrote a letter to Respondent
asking it to vacate the leased premises. Respondent
replied that the lease contract is up to the turnover of the premises to the winning bidder but the
PPA insisted on its stand. Respondent thus filed
an action for injunction against PPA. PPA filed its
answer. Then WG&A filed a motion to admit
amended complaint. The amended complaint is
363

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
for injunction and reformation of the contract.
PPA opposed the admission of the amended
complaint on the ground that the reformation
sought by Respondent constituted a substantial
amendment which if granted will substantially
alter the Respondent's cause of action and theory
of the case. Should the trial court admit the
amended complaint?
A.

Yes the trial court should admit the amended
complaint. Under the 1964 Rules the court may grant
leave for a substantial amendment "unless the motion
was made with intent to delay the action or that the
cause of action or defense is substantially altered."
The 1997 Rules amended the old S3 R10 by deleting
the phrase "or that the cause of action or defense is
substantially altered." The clear import of such
amendment in S3 R10 is that under the new Rules
the amendment may substantially alter the cause of
action or defense. (Philippine Ports Authority v.
William Gothong and Aboitiz Inc., G.R. No. 158401,
28 January 2008).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a case against Defendant for
annulment of real estate mortgage. The complaint
states that the Plaintiff was defrauded into signing
the mortgage. During the trial, the Plaintiff without
objection presented evidence that the mortgaged
property was conjugal property and that his wife
did not give her written conformity thereto. No
amendment of the complaint was made. May the
court render judgment annulling the mortgage on
the ground that the spouse's written consent was
not obtained?

364

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
A.

Yes. Under S5 R10, when issues not raised by the
pleadings are tried with the express or implied
consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all
respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings.
No amendment of such pleadings deemed amended
is necessary to cause them to conform to the
evidence. Here the Defendant's failure to object
amounted to an implied consent to the trial of the
issue of lack of spousal consent.

Q.

Same as above but the Defendant timely objected
to the introduction of evidence regarding lack of
spousal consent. How should the court rule on
the objection?

A.

The court should sustain the objection. The third
sentence of 35 R10 which provides that liff evidence
is objected to at the trial on the ground that it is not
within the issues made by the pleadings, the court
may allow the pleadings to be amended and shall do
with liberality if the presentation of the merits of the
action and the ends of substantial justice will be
subserved thereby" was deleted in the 2020 Rules of
Civil Procedure.
Furthermore, under 37 R18, the contents of the
pre-trial order shall control the subsequent proceedings,
unless modified before trial to prevent manifest
injustice. Hence such modification of the pre-trial
order cannot be made during the trial.

Q.

A complaint was filed by the counsel for Superior
Sales (an entity without a distinct juridical
personality) against Mr. Garcia on a money claim
for goods delivered. Mr. Garcia did not file a
motion to dismiss. Eventually, trial was held and
his liability was established through several
invoices, each of which uniformly showed on its
face that Mr. Tan is the proprietor of Superior
365

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Sales. After Superior Sales had rested its case,
Mr. Garcia filed a motion to dismiss on the ground
that, since there is actually no person properly
suing as plaintiff, no relief can be granted by the
court. On the other hand, the counsel for Superior
Sales filed a motion to amend the complaint to
make it conform to the evidence, that the real
party plaintiff is Mr. Tan. The court denied the said
motion on the ground that it was filed too late and
instead, dismissed the case. Did the trial court act
correctly? Explain. (92 Bar Q12).
A.

No, the trial court did not act correctly.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, when issues
not raised by the pleadings are tried with the express
or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated
in all respects as if they had been raised in the
pleadings. No amendment of such pleadings deemed
amended is necessary to cause them to conform to
the evidence. (S5 MO).
Here the issue that Mr. Tan was the real party in
interest was tried with the implied consent of the parties
since Mr. Garcia failed to object to the presentation of
the invoices. Hence, there was even no need to
amend the complaint to conform to the evidence. (Id.).

Q.

During trial, plaintiff was able to present, without
objection on the part of defendant in an ejectment
case,6° evidence showing that plaintiff served on
defendant a written demand to vacate the subject
property before the commencement of the suit, a
matter not alleged or otherwise set forth in the
pleadings on file. Was the jurisdictional defect of
the complaint cured? Explain. (Based on 04 Bar Q4a)

ealt is deemed understood that the ejectment case referred to in the bar
question is an unlawful detainer suit under 52 R70. Otherwise the question
would not have stated that the defect was jurisdictional.

366

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
A.

No, the jurisdictional defect of the complaint was not
cured.
The Supreme Court has held that a court's
subject-matter jurisdiction is determined by the
allegations in the complaint and that in an ejectment
suit, particularly, an unlawful detainer case provided
for in S2 R70, an allegation that a prior written
demand to vacate was served upon the defendant is
jurisdictional.
Here there was no such allegation in the
complaint. This was not cured by the failure to object
to the evidence because the court, not having any
jurisdiction over the complaint, had no power to admit
the evidence.

Q.

Plaintiff filed an accion publiciana before the RTC
against the defendant. The complaint did not
contain any allegation regarding the assessed
value of the subject land. The defendant's motion
to dismiss on the ground of lack of jurisdiction
was denied and the trial court rendered decision
in favor of the plaintiff. On appeal, the plaintiffappellee annexed to his brief the tax declaration
of the property showing that it had an assessed
value of more than P50,000. No objection was
interposed by the defendant-appellant. The defendant
argued that the trial court did not acquire
jurisdiction because of the failure to allege the
assessed value of the land. The plaintiff countered
that in accordance with S5 R10, the lack of
jurisdiction was cured by the introduction of the
tax declaration without objection by the defendant.
Was the lack of jurisdiction cured by the
introduction of the tax declaration?

367

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
A.

No. The plaintiff's invocation of 55 R10 to support his
claim that failure of the defendant to object to his
presentation of the tax declaration before the CA
constitutes an implied amendment is misplaced.
Such rule contemplates an amendment to conform to
or authorize presentation of evidence before the trial
court during the trial on the merits of the case.
Here plaintiff presented the tax declaration to
prove the assessed value of the property for the first
time on appeal before the CA in his brief. There was
no proof or allegation that he presented the same
during the trial or that the court examined such
document. Since the tax declaration was never duly
identified by testimony during the trial albeit
incorporated in the appellee' s brief, the CA will not be
required to review such document that was not
previously scrutinized by the RTC. As the assessed
value is a jurisdictional requirement, the belated
presentation of document proving such value before
the appellate court will not cure the glaring defect in
the complaint. Thus, jurisdiction was not acquired.
(Cabrera v. Clarin, 28 Nov 2016, Peralta, J.)

Q.

Pia filed an action reivindicatoria over a parcel of
land against Didith. At the time Pia filed the
action, she was not yet the owner of the land.
Didith filed an answer raising the affirmative
defense of failure to state a cause of action as Pia
was not the owner of the land and therefore not a
real party in interest. Before trial, Pia was able to
buy the land from its owner through a notarized
deed of sale. During the trial, Pia offered in evidence
the deed of sale without any objection from
Didith. After trial, Didith argued that a judgment
be rendered dismissing the case since Pia was
not a real party in interest. Pia contended that the

368

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
failure of the complaint to state a cause of action
was cured under the implied amendment rule in
S5 R10 when Didith failed to object to the offer of
the deed of sale. Is Pia's contention correct?
A.

No. The curing effect of S5 R10 will come into play
only if a cause of action in fact exists at the time of the
filing of the complaint, but the complaint is defective
for failure to state a cause of action. Here there was
no cause of action on the part of Pia at the time of the
filing of the complaint since she was not yet the owner
of the land. This defect cannot be cured by an
amendment, whether express or implied. (Swagman
Hotels v. Court of Appeals, 455 SCRA 175, 185-186
[2005]; Surigao Mine Exploration v. Harris, 68 Phil.
113 [1939]).

Q.

In the trial of a homicide case, the fiscal was able
to prove treachery and evident premeditation
without objection on the part of the defense. By
reason thereof, the fiscal moved to amend the
information invoking the provisions of the Rules
of Court which allows amendment of the pleadings
to conform to the evidence. He then filed
anamended information changing the homicide to
that of murder which, however, was vehemently
objected to by the defense.
(A) Resolve the merits of the fiscal's motion to
amend. (85 Bar 09).
XXX

A.

(A) The fiscal's motion to amend the information
should be denied. The provisions of S5 R10 do not
apply to criminal cases which are specifically
governed by S14 R110 under which a substantial
amendment can no longer be made after the accused
had pleaded.
369

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Here the amendment is substantial as it seeks to
change the nature of the offense charged and the
accused had already pleaded since the case had
already reached the trial stage. Hence the motion
should be denied.
Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant for collection of the
purchase price of a land in the amount of
P2,200,000. Defendant in her answer stated that
she had paid P2 million and therefore owes the
Plaintiff only P200,000. During the trial, Defendant,
without objection, presented a receipt showing
payment of the P200,000. Nor did the Plaintiff
object to the admissibility of the receipt when it
was formally offered. The trial court rendered
judgment dismissing the case stating that Defendant
had fully paid her obligation. On appeal, Defendant
contends that the trial court erred in considering
the evidence of payment since there was a judicial
admission by Defendant that she still owes
P200,000. Is the Defendant's contention correct?

A.

No. It is noteworthy that when Defendant presented
the evidence of payment, Plaintiff did not object
thereto. When the receipt was formally offered as
evidence, Plaintiff did not manifest their objection to
the admissibility of said document on the ground that
payment was not an issue. Since there was an
implied consent on the part of Plaintiff to try the issue
of payment, the RTC cannot be faulted for admitting
respondent's testimonial and documentary evidence
to prove payment. (Dela Cruz v. Concepcion, 11
October 2012, Peralta, J.).

370

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
Q.

What is a supplemental pleading?

A.

It is one setting forth transactions, occurrences or
events (TOE) which have happened since the date of
the pleading sought to be supplemented. Upon
motion and upon reasonable notice and such terms
as are just, the court may permit a party to serve a
supplemental pleading. (56 R10).

Q.

In November 1989, Petitioner Superclean Services
Corporation filed with the RTC a complaint for
"mandamus/certiorari" seeking to compel the
Home Development & Mutual Fund to award the
1990 janitorial contract to Petitioner as the lowest
bidder. HDMF filed an answer alleging that Petitioner
did not qualify as a bidder. In 1991 Petitioner
moved for the admission of a "supplemental
complaint" alleging that the delay in the case had
rendered it moot and academic and accordingly
instead of pursuing its prayer for mandamus, it
was now seeking damages. The trial court denied
the motion to admit the "supplemental complaint."
Was it proper for Petitioner to supplement its
complaint?

A.

No. The supervening event was cited not to reinforce
or aid the original demand but to change the relief
sought to one for recovery of damages. Hence
Petitioner's remedy was not to supplement but rather
to amend its complaint. Indeed the new relief sought
is actually an alternative remedy to which Petitioner
was entitled at the time of the filing of its original
complaint. (Superclean Services Corp. v. Court of
Appeals, 258 SCRA 165 [1997]). Nonetheless the trial
court should simply have allowed the Plaintiff to file a
motion to admit amended complaint rather than
denying outright the motion to admit supplemental
complaint. (See Superclean Services Corp. v. Court
of Appeals, supra).
371

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a complaint for damages against D for
breach of contract. In his complaint, P alleged that
/ of the house he undertook to
D completed only 14
construct Subsequently P amended his complaint
by alleging that D completed only % of the house.
Trial was held and thereafter the parties submitted
their evidence. The original complaint was not
marked and offered in evidence. May the court in
rendering its decision take into consideration P's
statement in the original complaint that D
completed 3/4 of the house?

A.

No. An amended pleading supersedes the pleading
that it amends. Hence admissions in the superseded
pleadings are merely extrajudicial admissions and still
need to be offered in evidence if a party decides to
use them. (Ching v. Court of Appeals, 331 SCRA 16).
D should have offered the original complaint in evidence.

Q.

In an action for reconveyance of a parcel of land
filed in the Regional Trial Court, the defendant,
through his lawyer, filed an answer therein admitting
the averment in the complaint that the land was
acquired by the plaintiff through inheritance from
his parents, the former owners thereof.
Subsequently, the defendant changed his
lawyer and, with leave of court, amended the
answer. In the amended answer, the abovementioned
admission no longer appears; instead, the alleged
ownership of the land by the plaintiff was denied
coupled with the allegation that the defendant is
the owner of the land for the reason that he
bought the same from the plaintiff's parents
during their lifetime.

372

RULE 10
Amended & Supplemental Pleadings
After trial, the Regional Trial Court rendered a
decision upholding the defendant's ownership of
the land.
On appeal, the plaintiff contended that the
defendant is bound by the admission contained in
his original answer. Is the contention of plaintiff
correct? Why? (93 Bar Q4)
A.

No, the contention of plaintiff is not correct.
Under S8 R10, an amended pleading
supersedes the pleading that it amends. Hence the
admissions in the superseded pleading cease to be
judicial admissions and may not be considered by the
court unless offered in evidence.

373

RULE 11. WHEN TO FILE
RESPONSIVE PLEADINGS
Q.

When are the periods for filing an answer?

A.
COMPLAINT/THIRD-PARTY COMPLAINT
1) General Rule: 30 days after service of summons.
(Si R11).
2) Rule on Summary Procedure and ejectment: 10
days after service of summons. (35 RSP; S6
R70).
3) Defendant is foreign private juridical entity.
a) Resident agent: 30 days after service of summons.
(Si R11)
b) Government official designated by law to receive
summons: 60 days after receipt of summons by
foreign private juridical entity. (32 R11).
c) Officers, agents, directors or trustees within the
Philippines: 30 days after service of summons.
(Si R11).
4) Defendant whose identity or whereabouts are
unknown. 60 days after notice. (316 R14).
5) Extraterritorial service on non-resident: Reasonable
time as specified in the order granting leave for
extraterritorial service, which time shall not be
less than 60 days after notice. (S17 R14).

374

RULE 11
When To File Responsive Pleadings
AMENDED COMPLAINT
Amended as a matter of right: 30 days after
service of amended complaint. (83 R11).
Amended not as a matter of right. 15 days from
notice of order admitting amended complaint. (Id.).
Complaint amended pursuant to court order
after denial of motion to dismiss: Within the time to
answer as provided for in R11 counted from service
of the amended pleading. (S4 R16, 1997 Rules of
Civil Procedure).61
COUNTERCLAIM & CROSS-CLAIM
20 days from service of counterclaim or crossclaim. (34 R11).
SUPPLEMENTAL COMPLAINT.
20 days from notice of order admitting supplemental
complaint. (S7 R11).
COMPLAINT-IN-INTERVENTION
15 days from notice of order admitting
complaint-in-intervention. (S4 R19).

6IThere is no equivalent provision in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure on
the time to plead an answer if a motion to dismiss is denied and the plaintiff is
instead ordered to amend his complaint. In such a case the relevant provision in
the 1997 Rules, i.e., S4 R16 should govern.

375

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
MOTION TO DISMISS/MOTION FOR BILL OF
PARTICULARS DENIED
Balance of period under R11 but in no case
less than 5 days. (54 R16 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure,62 S5 R12).
Q.

Summons was served upon the defendant on 1
March. The Defendant filed a motion to dismiss on
25 March. The Defendant received the order
denying his motion to dismiss on 1 April. Up to
when may the Defendant file his answer?

A.

Up to 8 April. The Defendant had until March 31 to file
his answer, so that when he filed his motion to
dismiss on March 25, he had 7 days remaining. The
day of the act causing the interruption (March 25) is
excluded from the computation, that is, defendant is
not deemed to have consumed the same.63 Thus the
allowable period after the interruption or the remaining
period is seven days (March 25 to March 31). When
the Defendant received notice of the cessation of the
cause of interruption on April 1, the allowable period
started to run on the next day (April 2 up to April 8).
One may simply add the remaining period to the day
of notice of cessation: April 1 + 7 days = April 8.

Q.

When may a reply be filed?

A.

A reply, if allowed under 510 R6, may be filed within
15 days from service of the answer. (S6 R11, S10 R6).

62There is no equivalent provision in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure on
the time to plead an answer if a motion to dismiss is denied. In such a case the
relevant provision in the 1997 Rules, i.e., 54 R16 should govern.
63See De las Alas v. Court of Appeals, 83 SCRA 200 (1978); JOSE Y.
FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 73-74 (1997).

376

RULE 11
When To File Responsive Pleadings
Q.

May the period to file a pleading be extended?

A.

A defendant may, for meritorious reasons, be granted
an additional period of not more than 30 days to file
an answer. A defendant is allowed to file only one
motion for extension of time to file an answer.
A motion for extension to file any pleading,
other than an answer, is prohibited and considered a
mere scrap of paper. The court, however, may allow
any other pleading to be filed after the time fixed by
these Rules. (S11 R11, as amended in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).64

64It appears that this provision (second paragraph, second sentence of
511 R11) does not apply to an answer.

377

RULE 12. BILL OF PARTICULARS
Q.

What is the remedy of a party if the adverse
party's pleading contains allegations which are
not averred with sufficient definiteness or
particularity so that he cannot properly prepare
his responsive pleading?

A.

He may file a motion for a bill of particulars. Note
however that if the pleading is not only indefinite or
ambiguous but fails to state a cause of action, the
remedy of the party is to file a motion to dismiss on
the ground that the pleading states no cause of action.

Q.

What is a bill of particulars?

A.

A bill of particulars is a definite statement of any
matter which is not averred with sufficient definiteness
or particularity in a pleading so as to enable the
opposing party to properly prepare his responsive
pleading. (Si R12). A bill of particulars becomes a
part of the pleading for which it is intended. (S6 R12).

Q.

Within what time may a motion for a bill of
particulars be filed?

A.

Within the time to file a responsive pleading under R11.

Q.

Does the filing of a motion for a bill of particulars
stay the period to file responsive pleadings?

A.

Yes. After service of the bill of particulars or after
notice of denial of his motion, the movant may file his
responsive pleading within the period to which he was
entitled at the time of filing his motion, which shall not
be less than 5 days in any event. (S5 R12).

378

RULE 12
Bill Of Particulars
Q.

Within what time shall the order requiring a
pleader to file a bill of particulars be complied with?

A.

The compliance therewith must be effected within 10
days from notice of the order, unless a different period
is fixed by the court. The bill of particulars may be
filed either in a separate pleading or in an amended
pleading. (83 R12).

Q.

What is the effect on non-compliance or insufficient
compliance with the order requiring the filing of a
bill of particulars?

A.

The court may order the striking out of the pleading or
the portions thereof to which the order was directed or
make such other order as it deems just. (S4 R12).
For instance a court may pursuant to S3 R17 dismiss
the plaintiff's complaint if he fails to comply with an
order requiring the filing of a bill of particulars.

379

RULE 13. FILING & SERVICE
OF PLEADINGS, JUDGMENTS
& OTHER PAPERS
Q.

Distinguish filing from service of pleadings and
other papers.

A.

Filing is the act of submitting the pleading or other
paper to the court, while service is the act of providing
a party with a copy of the pleading or any other court
submission. (S2 R13).

Q.

How is service made upon a party who has
appeared by counsel?

A.

Service is the act of providing a party with a copy of
the pleading or any other court submission. If a party
has appeared by counsel, service upon such party
shall be made upon his counsel or one of them,
unless service upon the party and the party's counsel
is ordered by the court. Where one counsel appears
for several parties, such counsel shall only be entitled
to one copy of any paper served by the opposite side.
(S2 R13 as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).
Where several counsels appear for one party,
such party shall be entitled to only one copy of any
pleading or paper to be served upon the lead counsel
if one is designated, or upon any one of them if there
is no designation of a lead counsel. (82 R13, as
added in 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Note however that a request for admission must
be served on the party himself, not his counsel.
(Lanada v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 102390, 1
February 2002).
380

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
Doctrine of actual notice
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for legal redemption
against the Defendant Upon motion, the court
dismissed the complaint (first dismissal order).
The Plaintiff (but not his lawyer) received the first
dismissal order on 23 April 2003. On 8 May 2003
the Plaintiff through counsel moved for reconsideration.
Meanwhile the Plaintiffs lawyer received the first
dismissal order on 15 May 2003. The Plaintiff then
received on 23 May 2003 a copy of the order
denying the motion for reconsideration on the
ground that it lacked a notice of hearing. On 27
May 2003 Plaintiff filed a notice of appeal with the
court. The court denied the order for having been
filed more than 15 days from 23 April and that the
motion for reconsideration did not toll the period
to appeal since it was a mere scrap of paper for
lack of a notice of hearing. The Plaintiff on the
other hand argued that the period to appeal
should have been reckoned from service on the
counsel on 15 May 2003 and not from 23 April
2003. Was the notice of appeal filed on time?

A.

No. The general rule is that where a party is
represented by counsel, service should be made
upon the counsel and not the party himself and that
the reglementary period should be reckoned from
service upon the counsel. Nonetheless appeal here
should be reckoned not from the formal notice to
counsel but upon actual notice to him. Here it cannot
be denied that Plaintiff's counsel had actual notice of
the first dismissal order on 8 May 2003 at the latest
when he filed a motion for reconsideration thereof
Hence the 15 day period to appeal should be reckoned
from 8 May 2003 and not 15 May 2003. The notice to

381

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
appeal should have been filed on or before 23 May
2003 (15th day from 8 May 2003) rather than 30 May
2003 (15th day from 15 May 2003). (Hemel v. De
Guzman, G.R. No. 181568, 26 June 2008).
Q.

The Republic, as represented by the Office of the
Solicitor General, filed a complaint for cancellation of
title and reconveyance with the RTC. The OSG
entered its appearance and deputized Atty. Artemio
C. Legaspi and the members of the LRA legal staff
to appear in the case, with the OSG exercising
supervision and control over its deputized
counsel. The OSG also requested that notices of
hearings, orders, decisions and other processes
be served on both the OSG and the deputized
counsel. The Notice of Appearance, however,
stated that "only notices of orders, resolutions,
and decisions served on him will bind the party
represented." Subsequently, Atty. Alexander N.V.
Acosta (Atty. Acosta) of the LRA entered his
appearance as deputized LRA lawyer, pursuant to
the OSG Letter dated August 7, 2001. The letter
also contained the statement, "only notices of
orders, resolutions and decisions served on him
will bind the [Republic], the entity, agency and/or
official represented." The notice of pretrial was
sent to the OSG but not to the deputized counsel
Atty. Acosta. Atty. Acosta thus failed to appear
during the trial for which reason the case was
dismissed with prejudice. Is notice to the OSG
binding upon the Republic?

A.

Yes. The OSG's deputized counsel is "no more than
the 'surrogate' of the Solicitor General in any
particular proceeding" and the latter remains the
principal counsel entitled to be furnished copies of all
court orders, notices, and decisions. In this case,
records show that it was the OSG that first entered an
382

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
appearance in behalf of the Republic; hence, it
remains the principal counsel of record. The appearance
of the deputized counsel did not divest the OSG of
control over the case and did not make the deputized
special attorney the counsel of record. Thus, the RTC
properly acted within bounds when it relied on the rule
that it is the notice to the OSG that is binding.
(Republic v. Viaje, 27 January 2016, Reyes, J.).65
Q.

What papers are required to be filed and served?

A.

Every judgment, resolution, order, pleading subsequent
to the complaint, written motion, notice, appearance,
demand, offer of judgment or similar papers shall be
filed with the court and served upon the parties
affected. (S4 R13).

Q.

Are ex-parte written motions required to be served
on the parties affected?

A.

Yes although they need not be set for hearing.
However ex-parte motions for preliminary attachment,
temporary restraining order, replevin, or receivership
need not be served on the adverse party if such
service would compromise the efficacy of these
provisional remedies.

Q.

What are the four modes of filing pleadings and
other papers and when are they considered filed?

A.

The filing of pleadings and other court submissions
shall be made by:
(a) Submitting personally the original thereof, plainly
indicated as such, to the court;
(b) Sending them by registered mail;

"Nonetheless, because of the special circumstances of the case, that is, a
342,000-square-meter land alleged to be part of the public domain, the SC
relaxed the rule on notice and reversed the dismissal of the complaint,

383

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(c) Sending them by accredited courier; or
(d) Transmitting them by electronic mail or other
electronic means as may be authorized by the
Court in places where the court is electronically
equipped.66
In (a), the clerk of court shall endorse on the
pleading the date and hour of filing. In (b) and (c), the
date of the mailing of motions, pleadings, and other
court submissions, and payments or deposits, as
shown by the post office stamp on the envelope or the
registry receipt, shall be considered as the date of
their filing, payment, or deposit in court.67 The
envelope shall be attached to the record of the case.
In (d), the date of electronic transmission shall be
considered as the date of filing. (S3 R13, as amended
by the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

May a pleading be filed by ordinary mail?

A.

No. Pleadings may only be personally filed, filed by
registered mail or accredited courier, or by electronic
mail or other electronic means. (S3 R13).

Q.

What are the modes of service of pleadings,
motions, notices, orders, judgments, and other
court submissions?

A.

Pleadings, motions, notices, orders, judgments,66 and
other court submissions shall be served personally or
by registered mail, accredited courier, electronic mail,
facsimile transmission, other electronic means as may

It appears that filing by facsimile transmission is not allowed.
There is no mention of how sending by courier service is deemed filed
and how this is shown. This appears to be an inadvertent omission. One may
reasonably assume that the date of deposit to the courier for mailing, as shown
by the acknowledgment receipt of the courier, is deemed to be the date of filing.
68 While orders and judgments are mentioned in 55 R13, it is opined that
the governing provision insofar as final orders and judgments are concerned is
S13 R13.
88

68

384

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
be authorized by the Court, or as provided for in
international conventions to which the Philippines is a
party. (55 R13 as amended by the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).
Q.

How is personal service made?

A.

Court submissions may be served by personal
delivery of a copy to the party or to the party's
counsel or to their authorized representative named
in the appropriate pleading or motion, or by leaving it
in his office with his clerk, or with a person having
charge thereof. If no person is found in his office, or
his office is not known, or he has no office, then by
leaving the copy, between the hours of eight in the
morning and six in the evening, at the party's or
counsel's residence, if known, with a person of sufficient
age and discretion residing therein. (56 R13, as
amended by the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

How is service by mail made?

A.

Service by registered mail shall be made by
depositing the copy in the post office, in a sealed
envelope, plainly addressed to the party or to the
party's counsel at his office, if known, otherwise at his
residence, if known, with postage fully pre-paid, and
with instructions to the postmaster to return the mail
to the sender after ten days if undelivered. If no
registry service is available in the locality of either the
sender or the addressee, service may be done by
ordinary mail. (S7 R13).

Q.

What is substituted service and when may it be
resorted to?

A.

If personal service or service by mail cannot be made,
the office and place of residence of the party or his
counsel being unknown, service may be made by
385

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
delivering the copy to the clerk of court, with proof of
failure of both personal service and service by mail.
(S8 R13).
Q.

When and how is service by electronic means and
facsimile made?

A.

Service by electronic means and facsimile shall be
made if the party concerned consents to such modes
of service.
Service by electronic means shall be made by
sending an e-mail to the party's or counsel's electronic
mail address, or through other electronic means of
transmission as the parties may agree on, or upon
direction of the court.
Service by facsimile shall be made by sending a
facsimile copy to the party's or counsel's given
facsimile number. (39 R13, as added in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

What shall a party do if he changes his electronic
mail address or facsimile number while the action
is pending?

A.

The party must promptly file, within 5 days from such
change, a notice of change of e-mail address or
facsimile number with the court and serve the notice
on all other parties.
Service through the electronic mail address or
facsimile number of a party shall be presumed valid
unless such party notifies the court of any change, as
aforementioned. (S11 R13, as added in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).

386

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
Q.

Do the rules prescribe a format for electronic mail
and facsimile?

A.

Yes. The subject of the electronic mail and facsimile
must follow the prescribed format: case number, case
title and the pleading, order or document title. The title
of each electronically-filed or served pleading or other
document, and each submission served by facsimile
shall contain sufficient information to enable the court
to ascertain from the title: (a) the party or parties filing
or serving the paper, (b) nature of the paper, (c) the
party or parties against whom relief, if any, is sought,
and (d) the nature of the relief sought. (S12 R13, as
added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

Is there a presumption regarding service of notice
to a party of a court setting?

A.

Yes. Under S10 R13, a new provision under the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure, there shall be presumptive
notice to a party of a court setting if such notice
appears on the records to have been mailed at least
20 days prior to the scheduled date of hearing and if
the addressee is from within the judicial region, or at
least 30 days if the addressee is from outside the
judicial region.
The purpose of the new provision is to minimize
delays caused by cancellation and rescheduling of court
settings, even if the other party was absent, where
there was no proof of service upon such other party.

Q.

How are judgments, final orders or resolutions
served?

A.

Judgments, final orders or resolutions shall be served
either personally or by registered mail. Upon ex parte
motion of any party in the case, a copy of the
judgment, final order, or resolution may be delivered
by accredited courier at the expense of such party.
387

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
When a party summoned by publication has failed to
appear in the action, judgments, final orders or
resolutions against him69 shall be served upon him
also by publication at the expense of the prevailing
party. (513 R13).
Justice Feria believes that if a party served with
summons subsequently absconds and his present
address is unknown, the court may order that
judgments, final orders or resolutions shall be served
upon him by publication. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997
RULE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 45 [1997]).
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for judicial foreclosure
against Defendant A judgment on the pleadings
sent by registered mail was received on 15 March
2002 by the security guard at the building where
the Defendant's counsel held office but the
judgment was received by the Defendant's counsel
only on 13 June 2002. The Defendant's counsel
filed a notice of appeal the next day but this was
not given due course by the RTC which said that
the notice of appeal was filed out of time since it
was filed more than 15 days from 15 March 2002.
Was the notice of appeal filed out of time?

A.

Yes. Service of judgment on security guard of
building where counsel's office is located is valid and
binding. Counsel should devise system to ensure prompt
receipt of official communications and cannot hide
behind the security guard's negligence. (Mendoza v.
Court of Appeals, 15 July 2015, Perez, J.).

69Despite the phrase "against him," in the last sentence of 513, it is opined
that the last sentence applies regardless of whether the judgment is for or
against the party summoned by publication.

388

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
Q.

If a party is resorting to modes of service or filing
other than personal, should the pleading or paper
be accompanied by a written explanation why the
service or filing was not done personally?

A.

No longer. The provision of 311 R13 (priorities in
modes of service and filing) under the 1997 Rules of
Civil Procedure which required such a written
explanation was no longer incorporated in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure.

Q.

What orders, pleadings, and other documents
must be served or filed personally or by
registered mail when allowed?

A.

The following orders, pleadings, and other documents
must be served or filed personally or by registered
mail when allowed, and shall not be served or filed
electronically, unless express permission is granted
by the Court: (CASI)
a)

Initiatory pleadings and initial
pleadings, such as an answer;

b)

Subpoenae," protection orders, and writs:

c)

Appendices and exhibits to motions, or other
documents that are not readily amenable to
electronic scanning may, at the option of the party
filing such, be filed and served conventionally; and

d)

Sealed and confidential documents or records.
(S14 R13, as added in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).

responsive

7°The specific rule governing service of subpoenas is $6 R21 which
provides that service of a subpoena shall be made in the same manner as
personal or substituted service of summons.

389

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the proof of service of pleadings and papers?

A.

PERSONAL SERVICE. Proof of personal service
shall consists of a written admission of the party
served, or the official return of the server, or the affidavit
of the party serving, containing a full statement of the
date, place and manner of service. (517 R13). If there
is written acknowledgment of receipt by the party
served, an affidavit of service is no longer necessary,
since the written acknowledgment is in effect a written
admission.
SERVICE BY ORDINARY MAIL. Affidavit of
the person mailing of facts showing compliance with
S7 R13.
SERVICE BY REGISTERED MAIL. Affidavit of
the person mailing showing compliance with S7 R13
and the registry receipt issued by the mailing office.
The registry return card shall be filed immediately
upon its receipt by the sender, or in lieu thereof the
unclaimed letter together with the certified or sworn
copy of the notice given by the postmaster to the
addressee.
ACCREDITED COURIER SERVICE. Proof shall
be made by an affidavit of service executed by the
person who brought the pleading or paper to the
service provider, together with the courier's official
receipt or document tracking number. (As added in
the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
SERVICE BY E-MAIL, FACSIMILE, OR OTHER
AUTHORIZED ELECTRONIC MEANS OF TRANSMISSION.
Proof shall be made by an affidavit of service executed
by the person who sent the e-mail, facsimile, or other
electronic transmission, together with a printed proof
of transmittal. (Id.).

390

RULE 13
Filing & Service Of Pleadings,
Judgments & Other Papers
Q.

May a court electronically serve orders and other
documents to the parties?

A.

Yes. The court may electronically serve orders and
other documents to all the parties in the case which
shall have the same effect and validity as provided
herein. A paper copy of the order or other document
electronically served shall be retained and attached to
the record of the case. (518 R13, as added in the
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).71

Q.

What is a notice of lis pendens?

A.

It is a notice of the pendency of a real action which
the plaintiff or the defendant may record in the office
of the registry of deeds where the property subject of
the action is situated.

Q.

What is the purpose of a notice of lis pendens?

A.

To serve as constructive notice to those not parties to
the case that the real property is the subject of a
pending litigation. (S19 R13).

Q.

May a notice of lis pendens be cancelled?

A.

Yes, in the following cases:

•

1) Upon order of court after proper showing that the
notice is for the purpose of molesting the adverse
party, or that it is not necessary to protect the
rights of the party who cause it to be recorded.
(S19 R13).
2) By the register of deeds, upon verified petition of
the party who caused its registration. (Sec. 77,
PD 1529).

' l it is opined that this section does not apply to final orders, judgments,
and resolutions which must be served in accordance with S13 R13.

391

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3) After final judgment in favor of the defendant or
other disposition of the action such as to
terminate finally all rights of the plaintiff in and to
the land and/or building involved, upon the
registration with the register of deeds of a
certificate of the clerk of court in which the action
or proceeding was pending stating the manner of
disposal thereof. (Id.).
Q.

May a notice of Hs pendens be registered in respect
of unregistered property?

A.

Yes pursuant to Sec. 113(d) of PD 1529. The notice
of is pendens shall be recorded by annotation on the
space provided therefore in the Registration Book.

392

RULE 14. SERVICE OF SUMMONS
Q.

Define summons and give its object or purpose.

A.

It is a mandate requiring the appearance of said
defendant in an action under penalty of having
judgment entered against him for failure so to do.
The object of the summons is to notify the defendant
that he has been sued. (STEVEN GIFIS, LAW
DICTIONARY [1975]).

Q.

What is the effect of service of summons upon the
defendant?

A.

By the service of summons, the court acquires
jurisdiction over the person of the defendant. Note
however that under S17 R14, service of summons
only confers jurisdiction over the res and not over the
person of the defendant.

Q.

How does a court acquire jurisdiction over the
person of the defendant?

A.

Either by service of summons or by the defendant's
voluntary appearance. Under S23 R14 the defendant's
voluntary appearance in the action shall be equivalent
to service of summons.

Q.

When is the summons issued?

A.

Unless the complaint is on its face dismissible under Si
R9, the court shall, within five days from receipt of the
initiatory pleading and proof of payment of the
requisite legal fees, direct the clerk of court to issue
the corresponding summons to the defendants. (Si
R14, as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).

393

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Give the contents of a summons.

A.

The summons shall be directed to the defendants,
signed by the clerk of court under seal, and contain:
a) The name of the court and of the parties to the
action.
b) When authorized by the court upon ex parte
motion, an authorization for the plaintiff to serve
summons to the defendant.
c) A direction that the defendant answer within the
time fixed by the Rules.
d) A notice that unless the defendant so answers,
plaintiff will take judgment by default and may be
granted the relief applied for. Note that under S3
R9, judgment by default may be rendered even
without reception of evidence.
A copy of the complaint and order for appointment
ad !item, if any, shall be attached to the
guardian
of
original and each copy of the summons.

Q.

What is the effect of failure to attach a copy of the
complaint to the summons?

A.

The defendant must nevertheless appear and apprise
the court of this defect; the court can then simply
furnish him with a copy of the complaint and give him
a new time to answer. Otherwise he may be declared
in default and judgment rendered against him and he
may not be heard to complain. (See Pagalaran v. Ballatan, 13 Phil. 135).

394

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Q.

Who are the persons who may serve summons?

A.

The summons may be served by the sheriff, his
deputy, or other proper court officer, and in case of
failure of service of summons by them, the court may
authorize the plaintiff to serve the summons together
with the sheriff.
There is failure of service after unsuccessful
attempts to personally serve the summons on the
defendant in his address indicated in the complaint.
Substituted service should be in the manner provided
under S6 R14.72
In cases where summons is to be served outside
the judicial region of the court where the case is
pending, the plaintiff shall be authorized to cause the
service of summons.
If the plaintiff is a juridical entity, it shall notify the
court, in writing, and name its authorized representative
therein, attaching a board resolution or secretary's
certificate thereto, as the case may be, stating that
such representative is duly authorized to serve the
summons on behalf of the plaintiff.
If the plaintiff misrepresents that the defendant
was served summons, and it is later proved that no
summons was served, the case shall be dismissed
with prejudice, the proceedings shall be nullified, and
the plaintiff shall be meted appropriate sanctions.
If summons is returned without being served on
any or all the defendants, the court shall order the
plaintiff to cause the service of summons by other
means available under the Rules.

72This paragraph is taken from the second paragraph of S4 R14. It seems
that it is misplaced there and that its logical place is after the first paragraph of
S3 R14

395

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Failure to comply with the order shall cause the
dismissal of the initiatory pleading without prejudice.
(53 R14, as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).
Q.

Is summons required to serve an amended
complaint?

A.

It depends on two factors. First, whether or not the
amended complaint changes the cause of action or
introduces a new cause or causes of action. Second,
whether or not the defendant had already voluntarily
appeared in the action.
If the amended complaint does not change the
cause of action or introduce a new cause or causes of
action, there is no need to serve summons on the
amended complaint. (De Dios vs. Court of Appeals,
212 SCRA 519 [1992]; Pan-Asiatic Travel Corp. v.
Court of Appeals, 164 SCRA 623 [1988], 1 MANUEL
V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF
COURT 362 [1979 ed.]). Thus if the amended
complaint merely set forth the promissory note on
which the complaint was based, no summons is
needed to serve the amended complaint. (Ong Peng
v. Custodio, L-14911, 25 March 1961). The amended
complaint can simply be filed and served as in the
case of any other pleading. (Id.).
If the defendant had voluntarily appeared in court
(e.g., by filing a motion to dismiss or an answer or
motion for extension of time to file answer without
invoking lack of personal jurisdiction), there is no
need for summons to serve the amended complaint,
even if the amended complaint changes the cause of
action or introduces a new cause or causes of action.
(Ong Peng v. Custodio, supra; Vlason Enterprises v.

396

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Court of Appeals, 310 SCRA 26). The amended
complaint can simply be filed and served as in the
case of any other pleading. (Id.).
Q.

P filed a complaint to collect an unpaid loan of
P500,000 from D. Summons and copy of the
complaint was served upon D. P then filed and
served upon D an amended complaint changing,
after a recomputation, the amount of the unpaid
loan from P500,000 to P600,000. No summons was
issued to serve the amended complaint Upon P's
motion the court rendered a default judgment for
P600,000 against D. May the default judgment be
set aside on the ground that there was no service
of summons on the amended complaint?

A.

No. The rule is that it is only when new causes of
action are alleged in an amended complaint filed
before the defendant has appeared in court that
another summons must be served on the defendant
with the amended complaint. (De Dios vs. Court of
Appeals, 212 SCRA 519 [1992]). Here the cause of
action remained the same, the amendment consisting
of a mere correction. Hence the judgment of the court
is valid.

Q.

When an additional defendant is impleaded in a
later pleading, it is necessary to serve summons
upon him?

A.

Yes in order to obtain jurisdiction over his person.
The service upon him of a copy of the court order
admitting the later pleading together with a copy
thereof is not the process required for bringing him to
court. (Fetalino v. Sanz, 44 Phil. 691).

397

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
Q.

May a stenographer or court interpreter serve
summons?

A.

No, they are not proper court officers as their functions do
not relate to the service of summons and court
processes. A process server may serve summons.

Q.

May service of summons be made at night or on a
Sunday or holiday?

A.

Yes because of its ministerial character. (Laus v.
Court of Appeals, 219 SCRA 688, 691).

Q.

Up to when shall a summons remain valid? When
is alias summons issued?

A.

Summons shall remain valid until duly served, unless
it is recalled by the court. In case of loss or
destruction of summons, the court may, upon motion,
issue an alias summons.

Q.

What are the modes of service of summons?
(PEPSI)

A.

1) Personal service of summons. (S5 R14).
2) Substituted service of summons. (S6 R14).
3) Summons by publication. (S14, S16, S17, S18
R14).
4) Extraterritorial service of summons. (S17 R14).
5) Service consistent with international conventions.
(S9 R14).

Q.

How is summons served upon natural persons?

A.

Through personal service under S5 R14 or substituted
service under S6 R14.

398

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Special rules are provided for serving summons
on prisoners (S8 R14), spouses (S11 R14), and for
minors and incompetents (S10 R14).
Q.

How is personal service on the defendant made?

A.

Whenever practicable, the summons shall be served
by handing a copy thereof to the defendant in person
and informing the defendant that he is being
served, or, if he refuses to receive and sign for it, by
leaving the summons within the view and in the
presence of the defendant. (85 R14, as amended
by the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

The process server served a copy of the
complaint and summons upon the Spouses Mogul
while they were in the courtroom attending
another case. The Moguls challenged the validity
of the service of summons, arguing that the
process server should have served the summons
at their residence as indicated in the complaint
Are the Moguls correct?

A.

No. S5 R14 does not require that the service of
summons on the defendant in person must be
effected only at the latter's residence as stated in the
summons. In other words, personal service of
summons may be made in any place where the
defendant may be found. (Sansio v. Sps. Mogul, 14
July 2009, Chico-Nazario, J.).

SEC. 7. Substituted service
Q.

When may substituted service be effected?

A.

Substituted service may be effected if for justifiable
causes, the defendant cannot, within a period of 30
days from issue and receipt of summons, be served

399

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
personally after at least three attempts on two
separate dates. (S6 R14, S20 R14).73
Q.

How is substituted service of summons effected?

A.

Substituted serviced may be effected by:
a) By leaving copies of the summons at the
defendant's residence to a person at least 18
years of age and of sufficient discretion residing
therein;
b) By leaving copies of the summons at the
defendant's office or regular place of business
with some competent person in charge thereof. A
competent person includes, but not limited to, one
who customarily receives correspondences for
the defendant;
c) By leaving copies of the summons, if refused entry
upon making his authority and purpose known,
with any of the officers of the homeowners'
association or condominium corporation, or its
chief security officer in charge of the community
or the building where the defendant may be
found; and
d)

By sending an electronic mail to the defendant's
electronic mail address, if allowed by the court.
(56 R14, as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).

73S6 & 520 R14 adopts the guidelines for substituted service laid down in
Manotoc v. Court of Appeals, 16 August 2016, and abandons the case-by-case
approach in determining propriety of substituted service.

400

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Q.

P filed a collection case against D with the RTC of
Quezon City. The sheriff went to D's residence in
Paranaque, waited for ten minutes and saw two
young ladies arrive by tricycle. When advised by
them that D was not around, the sheriff left a copy
of the summons with one of them who was
indicated in the return as "Josephine Areola." It
turned out that Areola was just a guest of D's
maid and was only 11 years old. The return does
not show impossibility of personal service within
a reasonable time. The court declared D in default
and rendered a judgment by default against D.
Nine days later D filed a motion to dismiss the
case for lack of jurisdiction over their persons.
a) Was there a valid service of summons?
b) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
The trial court denied the motion to dismiss.
D's motion for reconsideration was denied. The
trial court then issued a writ of execution. D filed a
petition for certiorari under Rule 65 with the Court
of Appeals. The appellate court denied the petition
on the ground that D's failure to appeal from the
judgment of default rendered it final and executory.
c) Was the Court of Appeal's denial of the petition
correct?

A.

a) No there was no valid service of summons. Before
substituted service may be effected, there must have
been at least three attempts on two separate dates.
Here the sheriff resorted to substituted service on his
first - - and only - - attempt to effect personal service.
b) Yes. If a defendant had not been properly
summoned, the period to file a motion to dismiss
for lack of jurisdiction over his person does not
commence to run until he voluntarily submits to
401

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the jurisdiction of the court, since the court has no
jurisdiction to adjudicate the controversy as to
him until such time. Here D did not voluntarily
submit to the jurisdiction of the trial court.
Consequently the period to file a responsive
pleading did not even commence to run.
c) No. Since the trial court did not validly acquire
jurisdiction over the person of D, the judgment
issued by it is null and void. It is axiomatic that a
void judgment cannot become final and executory
and may be assailed or impugned at any time.
An action to declare the nullity of a void judgment
does not prescribe. (Laus v. Court of Appeals,
219 SCRA 688). What would only bar the action
to annul the judgment would be estoppel or laches.
(Ang Ping v. Court of Appeals, 310 SCRA 34).
Q.

Is there a need for strict compliance with the
requirements of substituted service or would
substantial compliance suffice?

A.

There must be strict compliance. Since substituted
service is in derogation of the common law and is
extraordinary in character, it must be used only as
prescribed and in the circumstances authorized by
statute. Statutes prescribing modes other than personal
service of summons must be strictly complied with to
give the court jurisdiction, and such compliance must
appear affirmatively in the return. (Laus v. Court of
Appeals, 219 SCRA 688).

Q.

What does "person of sufficient discretion" in S6
R14 mean?

A.

A person of sufficient discretion is considered to have
enough discernment to understand the importance of
a summons. "Discretion" is defined as "the ability to
make decisions which represent a responsible choice
402

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
and for which an understanding of what is lawful, right
or wise may be presupposed". Thus, to be of sufficient
discretion, such person must know how to read and
understand English to comprehend the import of the
summons, and fully realize the need to deliver the
summons and complaint to the defendant at the
earliest possible time for the person to take appropriate
action. Thus, the person must have the "relation of
confidence" to the defendant, ensuring that the latter
would receive or at least be notified of the receipt of
the summons. The sheriff must therefore determine if
the person found in the alleged dwelling or residence
of defendant is of legal age, what the recipient's
relationship with the defendant is, and whether said
person comprehends the significance of the receipt of
the summons and his duty to immediately deliver it to
the defendant or at least notify the defendant of said
receipt of summons. These matters must be clearly
and specifically described in the Return of Summons.
(Manotoc v. Court of Appeals, 16 August 2006).
Q.

What does "competent person in charge thereof"
in S6(b) R14 mean?

A.

If the substituted service will be done at defendant's
office or regular place of business, then it should be
served on a competent person in charge of the place.
Thus, the person on whom the substituted service will
be made must be the one managing the office or
business of defendant, such as the president or manager;
and such individual must have sufficient knowledge to
understand the obligation of the defendant in the
summons, its importance, and the prejudicial effects
arising from inaction on the summons. Again, these
details must be contained in the Return. (Id.).

403

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The process server served summons and copies
of the complaint upon Ms. Charlotte Magpayo, the
Property Custodian at Nation Petroleum, where
the Defendants regularly hold office. May the
Property Custodian be considered as a "competent
person in charge" of Nation Petroleum on whom
substituted service may be made?

A.

No. A "competent person in charge" refers to one
managing the office or the business, such as the
president, manager, or the officer-in-charge. The rule
presupposes the existence of a relation of confidence
between such person and the defendant. Charlotte
Magpayo is a Property Custodian at Nation Petroleum.
Her position denotes limited responsibility to office
equipment, inventory, and supplies. Plaintiff did not
submit any evidence that Magpayo's job description
includes the management of Nation Petroleum's
Makati office. She cannot be considered as the
competent person in charge of the defendants' business
or office. (Ang v. Chinatrust Commercial Bank Corp.,
18 April 2016, Brion, J.).

Q.

GSP Inc. filed a collection case against Consar
Trading Corporation (CTC), its President, R.
Consulta, and its Vice President, N. Sarayba,
before the RTC. As the sheriff failed to serve the
summons and copies of the complaint on any of
CTC's authorized officers as well as on Consulta
and Sarayba, he left copies of such documents
with Agnes Canave (Canave) who, according to
the sheriff's return, was Sarayba's secretary and
an authorized representative of both Sarayba and
Consulta. None of the defendants filed an answer
so upon motion they were declared in default and
judgment rendered against them. Subsequently,
Consulta filed with the Court of Appeals an action
404

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
to annul the judgment of the RTC. Consulta
argues that Canave was not a competent person
in charge of CTC. Was there a valid substituted
service of summons upon Consulta?
A.

Yes. It is not necessary that the person in charge of
the defendants' regular place of business be
specifically authorized to receive the summons. It is
enough that he appears to be in charge. In this case,
Canave, a secretary whose job description necessarily
includes receiving documents and other correspondence,
would have the semblance of authority to accept the
court documents. (Gentle Supreme PhiIs. Inc. v.
Consults, 1 September 2010, Abad, J.; Gochangco v.
CFI of Negros Occidental, 15 January 1988, e.b.,
Narvasa, J.). Under 36(b) R14 as amended in the
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure, a competent person
includes one who customarily receives correspondence
for the defendant.

Q.

What should the return in case of substituted
service of summons contain?

A.

Should substituted service have been effected, the
return shall state:
1) The impossibility of prompt personal service within a
period of 30 days from issue and receipt of
summons;
2) The date and time of the three attempts on at least
two separate dates to cause personal service and
the details of the inquiries made to locate the
defendant residing thereat; and
3) The name of the person at least 18 years of age
and of sufficient discretion residing thereat; name
of competent person in charge of the defendant's
office or regular place of business, or name of the
officer of the homeowners' association or condominium
405

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
corporation or its chief security officer in charge of
the community or building where the defendant
may be found. (820 R14, as amended in the
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

What is the effect if the return does not state the
matters required under 520 R14?

A.

The substituted service is presumed to be invalid.
The sheriff or process server cannot invoke the
presumption of regularity in the performance of official
functions.
Nevertheless, such failure does not conclusively
prove that the service is invalid. The plaintiff may still
establish compliance with the matters stated in 820
R14 during the hearing of any incident assailing the
validity of the substituted service. (See Ang v.
Chinatrust Commercial Bank Corp., 18 April 2016,
Brion, J.).

Q.

UCPB filed a complaint against Ongpin to enforce
his liability as surety. The sheriff went to the
office of PILTEL in order to serve summons on
Ongpin who was then the chairman of the board
of PILTEL and was expected to attend a board
meeting on that day. Ongpin however did not
attend the board meeting. The sheriff served
summons on Anne Morallo, executive secretary of
the President of PILTEL, who told the sheriff that
she was authorized to receive summons in behalf
of Ongpin. When Morallo tried to forward the
summons to Ongpin, the latter's lawyers (also the
counsel of PILTEL) refused to receive it. Subsequently
Ongpin entered a special appearance challenging
the jurisdiction of the trial court. Did the trial court
acquire jurisdiction over Ongpin?

406

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
A.

No. There was non-compliance with the rule on
substituted service under S6(b) R14. The phrase
therein, "at the defendant's office or regular place of
business" does not include a corporation where the
defendant is a chairman of the board of directors as
he does not regularly hold office or conduct business
therein. (UCPB v. Ongpin, G.R. 146593, 26 October 2001).

Q.

In the ejectment case filed by Petitioner against
Respondent, while Respondent was in Norway,
the service of summons was served upon
Respondent's brother who was then at the house
indicated in the complaint as Respondent's
residence. It turned out that the house was being
leased by Respondent to Gonzalez. The MTC
rendered judgment in favor of the Petitioner. The
Respondent then filed with the RTC an action to
annul the MTC judgment. The RTC ruled in favor
of Respondent and the CA affirmed the RTC
judgment, adding that an action for ejectment is
an action quasi in rem.
a) Is an action for ejectment quasi in rem or in
personam?
b) Was the judgment annulling the MTC decision
proper?

A.
a) An ejectment case is an action in personam since
it merely seeks to enforce personal liability
against the Defendant. This can be gleaned from
Sections 1, 15, and 17 of Rule 70. (Note: Also a
judgment in an ejectment case only relates to physical
possession and not possession as a real right).
b) Yes. There was no valid service of summons upon
Respondent. The Respondent although staying at
Norway was a Philippine resident as shown by
407

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
documents (including an REM) executed by her
where she indicated her address as Buenlag,
Calasiao, Pangasinan. However the substituted
service was effected not at her residence but at a
house which although owned by her was being
leased to Gonzalez who also resides thereat.
Also Oscar Layno the brother of Respondent was
merely visiting the premises to collect rental and
did not reside thereat. The sheriff's return did not
even indicate that the house was Respondent's
residence and that Oscar resided there. Residence,
for purposes of summons, is not synonymous to
domicile, but the place where the person named
in the summons is actually residing. As it turned
out, the occupant of the house was Gonzalez and
Respondent's brother was only in the premises to
collect rent from Gonzalez. Since the MTC did
not acquire jurisdiction over the person of Respondent,
its judgment is null and void. (Domagas vs.
Jensen, G.R. 155847, 17 January 2005)
Q.

The Plaintiff filed a complaint for sum of money
against the Defendant. The sheriff attempted to
serve summons on the Defendant at her given
address but the attempt was unsuccessful since
the Defendant no longer resided at the given
address. Later the trial court issued an alias
summons to be served upon the Defendant at her
new address at Alabang Hills Subdivision, Muntinlupa
City. The security guard however refused to allow
the sheriff to enter the subdivision since the
Defendant had given the security guards strict
instructions not to allow anyone to proceed to her
house when she's not around. When the sheriff
came back to Alabang Hills, the same thing
happened. The sheriff then left the summons with
the security guard by the name of A.H. Geroche
who refused to sign the receipt. Subsequently a
408

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
judgment by default was rendered against the
Defendant. Defendant filed with the trial court a
petition for relief. She contended that the
substituted service of summons was not valid
since it was not made in accordance with 56 R14.
Should the trial court grant the petition for relief?
A.

No, the trial court should not grant the petition for relief.
The Supreme Court has held that an overly strict
application of 36 R14 may be dispensed with if the
sheriff was prevented from effecting substituted
service by the defendant himself
Here the Defendant herself gave strict instructions
to the security guards not to allow anyone to proceed
to her house if she was not around. In his return the
sheriff declared that he was refused entry by the
security guard. She should bear the consequences of
such strict instructions. It can be considered that summons
was properly served upon the Defendant. (Robinson v.
MiraIles, GR. No. 163584, 12 December 2006).

Q.

Express Padala filed a petition for recognition of
foreign judgment against 0. At the time the
petition was filed, 0 was already residing in Italy.
The sheriff resorted to substituted service upon 0
through her uncle, who was the caretaker of O's
old family residence in Tanauan, Batangas. Judgment
was rendered in favor of Express Padala. 0
appealed to the CA. May the CA set aside the
RTC's judgment?

A.

Yes. Substituted service presupposes that the place
where the summons is being served is the
defendant's current residence or office/regular place
of business. Thus, where the defendant neither
resides nor holds office in the address stated in the
summons, substituted service cannot be resorted to.
409

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Not being a resident of the address where the
summons was served, the substituted service of
summons is ineffective. Accordingly, the RTC did not
acquire jurisdiction over the person of 0 and its
judgment is thus void and should be set aside.
(Express Padala v. Ocampo, 6 September 2017,
Jardeleza, J.).
Q.

Spouses A and B sold a parcel of land to Spouses
C and D. By virtue of said sale, a deed of absolute
sale was entered into between the parties and 18
promissory notes were issued by Spouses C and
D in favor of Spouses A and B. Later, X, as the
trustee of Spouses A and B, brought an action for
rescission of promissory notes, deed of sale of
real property and cancellation of title against
Spouses C and D before the RTC. Substituted
service was made at C's (the wife's) office, the
clerk therein acknowledging receipt only for C.
Was the summons on C binding on D?

A.

Yes. Service of summons on the wife is deemed
binding on husband where the spouses are being
sued on an obligation chargeable to the conjugal
partnership. Considering that the obligation entered
into by C and D clearly appeared to be a transaction
that their conjugal partnership is liable for, they were
therefore correctly made co-defendants as they had
the same interests therein. Also, as the case involves
an action in personam over documents entered into
as regards a conjugal property, the receipt of C of the
summons is binding to her as it is to D. The notation
that the summons was "received for C only" had no
effect as its receipt nevertheless bound D. (Villarama
v. Guno, 6 August 2018, Tijam, J.).74

74The ruling herein should be deemed superseded by S11 R15 of the 2020
Rules which provides that "[w]hen spouses are sued jointly, service of summons
should be made to each spouse individually,"

410

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Q.

May service be made through methods which are
consistent with international conventions to which
the Philippines is a party?

A.

Yes. (S9 R14, as added in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure). An example of an international convention
on service is the Hague Service Convention. While
there are reports that the Philippines will join the
convention, as of the time of this writing the
Philippines has not yet signed the convention.

Q.

Give the rule on service of summons upon spouses.

A.

When spouses are sued jointly, service of summons
should be made to each spouse individually. (S11
R14, 2020 Rules).
In Villarama v. Guno, 6 August 2018, it was held
that service of summons on the wife is binding on the
husband where the obligation subject of the suit was
chargeable to the conjugal partnership. Villarama is
no longer good case law because of S11 R14."

Q.

How is service of summons made upon a domestic
private juridical entity?

A.

When the defendant is a corporation, partnership, or
association organized under the laws of the Philippines
with a juridical personality, service may be made on
the president, in-house counsel, general manager,
managing partner, treasurer, or corporate secretary of
the corporation wherever they may be found, or in
their absence or unavailability, on their secretaries.
If such service cannot be made upon any of the
foregoing persons, it shall be made upon the person
who customarily receives the correspondence for the
defendant at its principal office.

411

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
In case the domestic juridical entity is under
receivership or liquidation, service of summons shall
be made on the receiver or liquidator, as the case
may be.
Should there be a refusal on the part of the
persons above-mentioned to receive summons
despite at least three attempts on two separate dates,
service may be made electronically, if allowed by the
court, as provided under S6 R14. (S12 R14, as
amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

P filed a complaint against Acme Corporation.
Summons was served upon the President of
Acme Corporation while he was on holiday in
Boracay. Was there a valid service of summons?

A.

Yes. While ordinarily the service of summons under
S12 R14 would be at the corporation's office or place
of business, there is no requirement that it be done
so. It may be effected anywhere. (See Baltazar v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 78728, 8 December
1988). The ruling herein was incorporated in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure which states that service on
the persons mentioned therein may be made
"wherever they may be found."

Q.

Villarosa Corporation has its principal office in
Davao City and has branch offices in Paranaque
and Cagayan de Oro City. Summons was served
upon the branch manager at Cagayan de Oro City.
Was there a valid substituted service of summons?

A.

No. A branch manager is not among the persons
enumerated in S12 R14. (E. B. Villarosa & Partner
Co., Ltd. v. Judge Benito, G.R. No. 136426, 6 August
1999). The ruling would still be valid under the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure which provides in the second
paragraph of S12 R14 that "[i]f such service cannot be
412

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
made upon any of the foregoing persons, it shall be
made upon the person who customarily receives the
correspondence for the defendant at its principal
office." (Emphasis supplied).
Q.

Is service of summons upon the cost accountant
of a corporation valid?

A.

No as a cost accountant is not among the designated
persons in S12 R14 on whom summons may be validly
served. (Green Star Express, Inc. v Nissin Universal
Robina Corporation, 6 July 2015, Peralta, J.)

Q.

Centrogen obtained loans from Far East Bank in
the total amount of P2 million secured by a real
estate mortgage executed by Irene° Santiago.
When Centrogen defaulted in the payment of the
loan, BPI (successor-in-interest of FEBTC) instituted
extrajudicial foreclosure proceedings. Santiago
filed a complaint for annulment of mortgage
against BPI. The sheriff served the summons and
a copy of the complaint upon the branch manager
of BPI Sta. Cruz, Laguna. Subsequently, instead
of filing an answer, BPI filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction over its
person. BPI argued in the motion that a branch
manager is not one among the persons authorized
under S11 R14 to receive summons.
a) Was summons validly served upon BPI?
b) Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.
a)

No. The service of summons on BPI's branch
manager did not bind the corporation for the
branch manager is not included in the enumeration
in the statute of the persons upon whom service
413

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
of summons can be validly made in behalf of the
corporation. Such service is therefore void and
ineffectual.
b) No. A case should not be dismissed simply
because an original summons was wrongfully
served. It should be difficult to conceive that when
a defendant personally appears before a court
complaining that he had not been validly
summoned, that the case against him should be
dismissed. An alias or new summons can be
actually served on said defendant. (See Bank of
the Philippine Islands v. Spouses Santiago, G.R.
No. 169116, 26 March 2007).
Q.

P filed a complaint against ACME Bus Corporation.
(ABC). The sheriff left a copy of the summons and
complaint with the security guard of ABC at its
office in Calamba. The security guard then turned
over the summons and complaint to the in-house
counsel of ABC. ABC filed a motion for extension
of time to file answer. Later ABC filed an answer
raising the affirmative defense of lack of personal
jurisdiction. Should the affirmative defense be
granted?

A.

No. Under S23 R14 the defendant's voluntary
appearance in the action shall be equivalent to
service of summons and the SC has held that the
filing of a motion for extension of time to file answer is
a voluntary appearance. (Orosa v. Court of Appeals,
261 SCRA 376 [1996]). Hence the affirmative defense
should be denied.

Q.

In the preceding problem, what if instead of filing
a motion for extension of answer, ABC filed an
answer raising the affirmative defenses of lack of
personal jurisdiction. Would your answer be
the same?
414

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
A.

Yes my answer would still be the same. A case
should not be dismissed outright, on motion of
defendant, because the original summons was wrongfully
served or there was failure of service. It is
inconceivable that a complaint would be dismissed
where the defendant has appeared in court and no
judgment has yet been rendered in favor of plaintiff.
The court can simply order or allow the plaintiff to
move for the issuance of an alias summons. (Bank of
the Philippine Islands v. Spouses Santiago, G.R. No.
169116, 26 March 2007; Far Corp. v. Francisco, G.R.
57218, 12 December 1986; Lingner & Fischer GMBH
v. Intermediate Appellate Court, 125 SCRA 527 [1983]).

Q.

RCBC filed a complaint for damages arising from
fraud against Defendant corporation. Summons
was served upon the Defendant's liaison officer,
upon the phoned instruction of the Defendant's
corporate secretary. Was summons validly served
upon the Defendant?

A.

Yes. It is clear that the liaison officer, in receiving the
summons, did so in representation of the corporate
secretary, who is one of the officers competent under
the Rules of Court to receive summons on behalf of a
private juridical person. While there was no direct,
physical handing of the summons to the corporate secretary,
the latter could at least be charged with having
constructively received the same. (Nation Petroleum
'Gas, Inc. v. RCBC, 17 August 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

A lawyer made two special appearances in court
in behalf of defendant corporation in order to
challenge the validity of service of summons
upon it. The summons was served upon the
lawyer while in court. Did the trial court acquire
jurisdiction over the defendant corporation?

415

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

No. A lawyer is not within the persons enumerated
under 512 R14 who may validly receive summons in
behalf of the corporation.
S13 R14 of the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure
provides that "[w]here the summons is improperly
served and a lawyer makes a special appearance on
behalf of the defendant to, among others, question the
validity of service of summons, the counsel shall be
deputized by the court to serve summons on his
client."75

Q.

The SEC promulgated a rule that if a management
committee was formed to oversee the affairs of a
corporation pursuant to P.D. 902-A, only the
chairman of the management committee can
validly receive summons. Summons was served
on the corporation through its corporate secretary.
Was there a valid service of summons?

A.

Even if a management committee was formed to
oversee the affairs of a corporation pursuant to PD
902-A, it would not authorize the SEC to promulgate
a rule that only the chairman of the Mancom can

75This provision is anachronistic. A special appearance was a motion to
dismiss based solely on the ground of lack of personal jurisdiction. It was
necessary under the 1964 Rules because the case law then was that a motion to
dismiss which raised grounds aside from lack of personal jurisdiction, would
amount to a voluntary appearance. (De Midgely V. Ferandos, 64 SCRA 23
[19751). A special appearance became obsolete under the 1997 Rules which
provided that the inclusion in a motion to dismiss of grounds aside from lack of
personal jurisdiction shall not be deemed a voluntary appearance. Under the
2020 Rules, lack of personal jurisdiction can no longer be raised in a motion to
dismiss but should be set forth as an affirmative defense in the answer. The
example cited as being covered by 513 R14 is where the complaint is
accompanied by an application for preliminary attachment or preliminary
injunction and summons was not validly served upon the defendant who thus
seeks to discharge the attachment or to dissolve the preliminary injunction. But in
such a case, the appropriate remedy for the defendant is not to enter a special
appearance but to file a motion to discharge the attachment under S13 R57 or to
dissolve the preliminary injunction under S6 R58.

416

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
validly receive summons. Such rule cannot amend or
alter the Rules of Court promulgated by the SC which
allows officers of a corporation to receive summons
in its behalf. In this case, summons was validly served
upon the corporate secretary. (Tyson's Super Concrete
Inc. v. CA, 23 June 2005).
Q.

Petitioner filed a petition for cancellation of
adverse claim against respondent cooperative.
Article 51 of Republic Act No. 9520 or the Philippine
Cooperative Code of 2008 provides that "[e]very
cooperative shall have an official postal address
to which all notices and communications shall be
sent [and that] [s]uch address and every change
thereof shall be registered with the Authority."
Relying on the above provision, petitioner
argued that respondent was sufficiently served
with summons and a copy of its petition for
cancellation of annotations because it allegedly
sent these documents to respondent's official
address as registered with the Cooperative
Development Authority. Was there a valid service
of summons upon respondent cooperative?

A.

No. On matters relating to court procedure, it is the
rules of court which will govern not substantive law.
The pertinent provision in the rules is S12 R14. There
was no proper service upon the officers mentioned in
S12 R14; hence the service of summons was invalid.
(Cathay Metal Corp. v. Laguna West Multi-Purpose
Cooperative, Inc., 2 July 2014).

417

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
SEC. 14, Service upon foreign private juridical entity
Q.

May a foreign corporation bring a suit before
Philippine courts?

A.

Yes, unless it is transacting business in the
Philippines without a license. (Sec. 150, Revised
Corporation Code). Hence a foreign corporation not
licensed to do business in the Philippines can sue on
an isolated transaction.

Q.

May a foreign private juridical entity be sued
before Philippine courts?

A.

Yes provided it has transacted or is doing business in
the Philippines, as defined by law, regardless of
whether it has a license to do so or not. (See S14
R14). Philippine courts however do not have jurisdiction
over foreign corporations which have not transacted
or is doing business in the Philippines.

Q.

What is the meaning of the phrase, "has
transacted or is doing business in the Philippines"?

A.

"Doing business" is defined in Sec. 3(d) of the Foreign
Investments Act as including the following: (Keyword:
SOAMI)
1) Soliciting orders or service contracts;
2) Opening offices, whether called "liaison" offices or
branches;
3) Appointing representatives or distributors domiciled
in the Philippines or who in any calendar year
stay in the country for a period or periods totaling
180 days or more;
4)

Participating in the management, supervision or
control of any domestic business, firm, entity or
corporation in the Philippines; and
418

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
5) Any other act or acts that imply a continuity of
commercial dealings or arrangements, and
contemplate to that extent the performance of
acts or works, or the exercise of some of the
functions normally incident to, and in progressive
prosecution of, commercial gain or of the purpose
and object of the business organization.
Provided, however, that the phrase "doing
business" shall not be deemed to include mere
investment as a shareholder by a foreign entity in
domestic corporations duly registered to do business,
and/or the exercise of right as such investor, nor
having a nominee director or officer to represent its
interests in such corporation; nor appointing a representative
or distributor domiciled in the Philippines which transacts
business in its own name and for its own account.
The phrase "has transacted business" has no
special significance but is simply meant to emphasize
that even a single act can be construed as "doing
business" if it implies a continuity of commercial
dealings or arrangements.
Q.

How is service of summons made upon a foreign
private juridical entity?

A.

When the defendant is a foreign private juridical entity
which has transacted or is doing business in the
Philippines, service may be made on its resident
agent designated in accordance with law for that
purpose, or if there is no such agent, on the
government official designated by law to that effect, or
on any of its officers, agents, directors or trustees
within the Philippines.

419

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
If the foreign private juridical entity is not
registered in the Philippines or has no resident agent
but has transacted or is doing business in it,76 as
defined by law, such service may, with leave of court,
be effected out of the Philippines through any of the
following means:
a)

By personal service coursed through the
appropriate court in the foreign country with the
assistance of the department of foreign affairs;

b) By publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the country where the defendant
may be found and by serving a copy of the
summons and the court order by registered mail
at the last known address of the defendant;
c) By facsimile;
d) By electronic means with the prescribed proof of
service; or
e)
Q.

By such other means as the court, in its discretion,
may direct. (514 R14).

Who is the "government official designated by law."

A.
1)

Foreign insurance corporations: the Insurance
Commissioner pursuant to Section 190 of the
Insurance Code.

2) Foreign banks: the Bangko Sentral Deputy Govemor
in-charge of the supervising and examining
departments pursuant to Section 76 of the
General Banking Law of 2000.

76The italicized phrase was added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Court and
emphasizes that the foreign private juridical entity has transacted or is doing
business in the Philippines for it to be sued before the Philippine courts.

420

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
3) Issuer or any person liable under the Securities
Regulation Code: the Securities and Exchange
Commission pursuant to Section 65 of the
Securities Regulation Code.
4) Other corporations: the Securities and Exchange
Commission pursuant to Section 145 of the
Revised Corporation Code.77
Q.

P sued H.B. Zachry Company, Inc., a U.S.
corporation with which P had entered into a
contract to construct military housing in Subic
Military Base. The sheriff served summons upon
a staff of H. B. Zachry in its field office in Subic
although H.B. Zachry had appointed a resident
agent who held office in Manila. Was there valid
service of summons?

A.

No. When a foreign corporation has designated a
resident agent authorized to receive summons
pursuant to Section 123 of the Corporation Code (now
Section 145, Revised Corporation Code), such
designation is exclusive and service of summons on
any other person is inefficacious. (H.B. Zachry Company
v. Court of Appeals, 232 SCRA 329 [1994]; Poizat v.
Morgan, 28 Phil. 597). The two other modes of
service are allowed only when the foreign corporation
has neglected or refused to designate a resident
agent. (Poizat v. Morgan, supra). This is evident from
the phrase, "or, if there be no such agent."

"Whenever such service of summons or other process is made upon the
Commission, the Commission shall, within ten days thereafter, transmit by mail a
copy of such summons or other legal process to the corporation at its home or
principal office. The sending of such copy by the Commission shall be a
necessary part of and shall complete such service. All expenses incurred by the
Commission for such service shall be paid in advance by the party at whose
instance the service is made.

421

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Respondent sued Hongkong & Shanghai Banking
Corporation Limited (HSBC) and HSBC International
Trustee Ltd. In its complaint Respondent alleged
that Thomson had issued a HSBC check to her,
that HSBC unjustly refused to honor the check
despite directives for it to do so from the drawer
Thomson, that Thomson died and Respondent
thus forwarded her demand to HSBC Trustee but
the latter refused to pay the checks despite
receipt of the originals thereof. Summons was
served upon HSBC Trustee through the in-house
counsel of HSBC at its Enterprise Tower Office.
Was there a proper service of summons upon
HSBC Trustee?

A.

No. S14 R14 is the relevant provision. Firstly there
were no appropriate allegations in the complaint
showing that HSBC Trustee is doing business in the
Philippines. It is not enough to allege in a general way
that the defendant foreign corporation is doing
business in the Philippines. Secondly there is no
allegation in the complaint that HSBC is a domestic
agent of HSBC Trustee. Thus summons tendered to
the in-house counsel of HSBC for HSBC Trustee was
clearly improper. (HSBC Ltd. v. Catalan, G.R. 159590,
18 October 2004).

Q.

Sharp Corporation is a Filipino corporation doing
business in Japan through its four duly registered
branches. The Plaintiff filed in Japan a case for
sum of money against Sharp but summons could
not be served on Sharp in Japan. The Tokyo
District Court requested the Supreme Court of
Japan to cause the delivery of the summons to
the Philippines. The Japanese Supreme Court
delivered the summons to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs which forwarded the same to the Japanese
Embassy in Manila. The Japanese Embassy then
422

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
sent the summons to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs endorsed
the summons to the executive judge of the CFI.
The sheriff then served the summons at Sharp's
principal office in Manila. A judgment was
rendered by the Japanese court against Sharp.
Sharp filed an action for the enforcement of the
Japanese judgment before the Manila Regional
Trial Court. The RTC and the Court of Appeals
both dismissed the petition on the ground that the
action for collection is in personam and
extraterritorial service of summons is not allowed.
May the judgment of the Japanese court be
enforced in the Philippines?
A.

Yes. Applying the doctrine of processual presumption,
the Japanese procedural law on service of summons
upon a foreign private juridical entity is presumed to
be the same as 314 R14. The delivery of summons to
the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs is equivalent
to service "on the government official designated by
law to that effect" as provided in 314 R14. Hence it is
not a case of extraterritorial but territorial service of
summons. (Northwest Orient Airlines v. Court of
Appeals, 241 SCRA 192 [1995]).

Q.

What are the instances wherein service of summons
may be made by publication?

A.
1)

Service upon a foreign private juridical entity.
(514[b] R14).

2) Service upon defendant whose identity
whereabouts are unknown. (S16 R14).

423

or

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Q.

3)

Extraterritorial service upon a non-resident defendant.
(S17 R14).

4)

Service upon a resident temporarily out of the
Philippines. (S18 R14).

What are the requirements for the validity of
service of summons by publication?

A.
1)

It should only be made in the instances covered
by S14, 16, 17, and 18 of R14.

2) There must be an application for leave to effect
service of summons by publication which shall be
through a motion in writing, supported by the
affidavit of the plaintiff or some person on his
behalf, setting forth the grounds for the application.
(S19 R14).
3) Leave of court must be granted by way of the
order for publication.
4)

There should be a deposit of a copy of the
summons and the order for publication in the post
office, postage prepaid, directed to defendant by
registered mail to his last known address.

5) Publication should be made in a newspaper of
general circulation in such places and for such
time as the court may order.
6) There should be proof of service by publication, by
way of affidavits stating the matters set forth in
S22 R14.

424

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
SEC. 16. Service upon defendant whose identity or
whereabouts are unknown
Q.

How is service made upon a defendant whose
identity or whereabouts are unknown?

A.

In any action where the defendant is designated as an
unknown owner, or the like, or whenever his or her
whereabouts are unknown and cannot be ascertained
by diligent inquiry, within 90 days from the commencement
of the action,75 service may, by leave of court, be
effected upon him or her by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation and in such places and for such
time as the court may order.
Any order granting such leave shall specify a
reasonable time, which shall not be less than 60 days
after notice, within which the defendant must answer.
(S16 R14, as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).

Q.

Crispin has a due but unpaid promissory note
drawn in his favor by Tomas, whose present
whereabouts are unknown to him.
One day Crispin saw Tomas on Avenida Rizal,
Manila. Whereupon, Crispin filed suit against
Tomas in the Regional Trial Court of Manila.
Crispin subsequently moved for leave of court to
serve summons by publication upon Tomas, alleging
that Tomas is a resident defendant but whose
address is unknown and could not be ascertained
by diligent inquiry within 90 days from the filing of
the action. Should the Court grant the motion?

mThe phrase "within 90 calendar days from the commencement of the
action" refers to when the ascertainment by diligent inquiry should be made, not
when the service may be effected. .

425

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes, the Court should grant the motion.
Under S16 R14, summons may be served
through publication upon a resident defendant whose
whereabouts are unknown and cannot be ascertained
by diligent inquiry within 90 days from the commencement
of the action. The phrase, "any action" in S16 R14
includes actions in personam.
Here the suit for collection is an action in
personam which is covered by S16 R14. Hence
service of summons by publication may be effected
with leave of court.

Q.

Pantaleon filed an action to collect a sum of
money from Asuncion. Summons returned unserved
as Asuncion was no longer residing at the given
address. Pantaleon moved for service of summons
by publication. The court granted the motion and
summons was served by publication. However no
copy of the summons and order of publication
was sent to Asuncion at his last known address.
Judgment by default was rendered against
Asuncion. Subsequently Asuncion filed an action
to annul the judgment. Asuncion argued that a
copy of the summons and the order should have
been sent to his last known address and since
this was not done, the service of summons by
publication is ineffective. Pantaleon argues that
the requirement of sending a copy of the summons
and the order to the defendant's last known
address applies only to S17 R14. Is Pantaleon's
argument meritorious?

A.

No. The requirement of sending a copy of the
summons and order to the defendant's last known
address by registered mail applies to all instances
where service of summons by publication is made.
This may be gleaned from S22 R14 regarding proof of
426

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
service by publication which provides that the affidavit
shall aver that a copy of the summons and order for
publication shall be sent by registered mail to the
defendant's last known address. The judgment is null
and void ab in/ti . (Pantaleon v. Asuncion, 105 Phil.
761 [1959]).
Q.

A, a grocery owner, sued B before a regional trial
court for the payment of some merchandise.
When the sheriff failed to effect service of summons
on B at Morong, Rizal, the address stated in the
complaint, the court ordered the publication of the
summons and a copy of the complaint in a
newspaper of general circulation in Rizal.
As B was actually no longer residing in Rizal,
and consequently did not become aware of the
collection suit against him, he failed to file his
answer in court. He was therefore declared in
default and a judgment was indue time rendered
against him.
One year after the date of the judgment, a
levy of execution was made on B's properties.
a) Did the court acquire jurisdiction to render
judgment?
b) What remedies, including provisional ones, if
any, would be available to B, and to what
forum should he go for relief? (84 Bar Q3)

A.
a)

The court did not acquire jurisdiction to render
judgment.

The Supreme Court has held that in order for a
court to acquire jurisdiction to render judgment it must
acquire jurisdiction over the person of the defendant.
427

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Here there was no valid service of summons by
publication since there was no showing that diligent
efforts were exerted to ascertain the whereabouts of
B nor was the summons and order for publication sent
to B at his last known address. (516 R14; S22 R14;
Pantaleon v. Asuncion, 105 Phil. 761).
b)

B should file with the Court of Appeals an action
to annul the judgment of the regional trial court on
the ground of lack of jurisdiction. (Si & 2 R47). B
can incorporate in the annulment suit an application
for a temporary restraining order or preliminary
injunction to restrain the sheriff from proceeding
with the public auction of the levied properties.

SEC. 17. Extraterritorial service
Q.

When may extraterritorial service of summons be
availed of?

A.

Extraterritorial service of summons may be availed of:
A) When the defendant is a non-resident and is not
found in the Philippines; and
13)
1) The action affects the personal status of the
plaintiff.
2) The action relates to property within the
Philippines:
a) In which the defendant has or claims an
interest, or
b)

In which the relief demanded consists of excluding
the defendant from any interest therein.79

79A more concise wording of 2(a)(b) is "action affecting defendant's
property located in the Philippines." (See S3 R4).

428

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
3)

An action wherein the property of the defendant
has been attached within the Philippines.
(PPA)8°

Q.

In the foregoing instances, does the extraterritorial
service of summons confer jurisdiction over the
person of the non-resident defendant?

A.

No. The court acquires jurisdiction over the res (plaintiffs
status or defendant's property) which is situated in the
Philippines but not over the person of the defendant.
This is because a Philippine court cannot acquire
jurisdiction over the person of a defendant who does
not reside in and is not found in the Philippines.

Q.

Tristan filed a suit with the RTC of Pasay against
Arthur King and/or Estate of Arthur King for
reconveyance of a lot declared in the name of
Arthur King under TCT No. 1234. The complaint
alleged that "on account Arthur King's residence
abroad up to the present and the uncertainty of
whether he is still alive or dead, he or his estate
may be served with summons by publication."
Summons was published and nobody filed any
responsive pleading within sixty (60) days therefrom.
Upon motion, defendants were declared in default
and judgment was rendered declaring Tristan as
legal owner and ordering defendants to reconvey
said lot to Tristan.

801n strict point of law, the propriety of extraterritorial service is not
dependent on the technical characterization of the action as in rem or quasi in
rem, but on whether the action is any of those mentioned in 517 R14. (See
Baltazar v. Court of Appeals, 168 SCRA 354, 363). The Supreme Court however
has stated in several cases that 517 R14 applies to actions in rem or quasi in
rem and not to actions in personam. This test could lead to problems. For
example, an action to recover title to or possession of real property, which is
clearly covered by the terms of S17 R14, has been characterized by the
Supreme Court as an action in personam. (Republic v. Court of Appeals, 315
SCRA 600, 606). It is recommended that the test should be simply whether the
action is any of those mentioned in S17 R14.

429

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Jojo, the court-designated administrator of
Arthur King's estate, filed a petition for annulment
of judgment before the CA praying that the
decision in favor of Tristan be declared null and
void for lack of jurisdiction. He claims that the
action filed by Tristan is an action in personam and
that the court did not acquire jurisdiction over
defendants Arthur King and/or his estate. On the
other hand, Tristan claims that the suit is an
action in rem or at least an action quasi in rem. Is
the RTC judge correct in ordering service of
summons by publication? Explain. (16 Bar Q19)
A.

Yes, the RTC judge is correct in ordering service of
summons by publication.
Under 517 R14, extraterritorial service, which
includes service by publication, may be availed of in
actions the subject of which is property within the
Philippines in which the defendant has or claims a lien
or interest or in which the relief demanded consists in
excluding the defendant from any interest therein.
Here the action for reconveyance has for its
subject a real property in the Philippines in the
defendant's name and in which the relief sought is to
annul the defendant's title and vest it in the plaintiff.
While Jojo is not without legal basis in saying
that the action for reconveyance is in personam
(Republic v. CA, 315 SCRA 600, 606), the test of
whether an action is covered by 517 R14 is not its
technical characterization as in rem or quasi in rem
but whether it is among those mentioned in 517 R14.
(See Baltazar v. Court of Appeals, 168 SCRA
354, 363).8'

silt is submitted that an action for reconveyance is more properly
characterized as an action quasi In rem. See de Midgely v. Ferandos, 13 May
1975, where the issue was the applicability of 515 R14 and where the Court

430

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Q.

What is a long-arm statute?

A

A long-arm statute is a statute which allows a local
forum to obtain jurisdiction over a non-resident
defendant when the cause of action is generated
locally and affects a local plaintiff. Such statutes are
commonly employed to allow a local court to exercise
jurisdiction over non-resident motorists who cause
automobile accidents within the state. (STEVEN I-1.
GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 122 [1975]).

Q.

Is S17 R14 a long-arm statute?

A.

No since it does not provide for the acquisition of
personal jurisdicition over the non-resident defendant.
What is provides for is acquisition of jurisdiction over
the res (the plaintiff's status or the defendant's
property) which is situated in the Philippines or what
is termed as quasi-in-rem jurisdiction.

Q.

P filed a case to collect a loan from D, who is a
resident of the United States.
a) May extraterritorial service of summons be effected?
b) What would be the recourse, if any, of P in order
to run after D?

A.
a) No. The action is one in personam, hence
extraterritorial service cannot be effected in an
action against a non-resident defendant.
b) P should look for property of D in the Philippines
and have them attached. Prior or contemporaneous
service of summons is not required in order to
attach D's property. (S5 R57). The attachment
stated that the action for reconveyance of land was an action quasi in rem and
thus a case where extraterritorial service may be availed of.

431

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
would then convert P's action into one quasi in
rem. Extraterritorial service of summons may then
be effected. (S17 R14).
Q.

D, an American tourist in the Philippines,
negligently drove his car hitting and inflicting
serious injuries upon P. After the accident, D
forthwith went back to the United States. Can P
file a torts case in the Philippines against 13?

A.

No. An action for tort and damages is one in
personam. Since we do not have a long-arm statute
in the Philippines, P has no judicial recourse against
D, unless he can locate any property of D within the
Philippines and attach the same.

Q.

What are the modes of effecting extraterritorial
service? (Keyword: PIPO).

A.

Service may by leave of court be effected out of the
Philippines by:
1) Personal service as under 55.82
2) As provided for in international conventions to
which the Philippines is a party.83
3) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in such places and for such time as the court may
order, in which case a copy of the summons and
order for publication shall be sent by registered
mail to the last known address of the defendant.
4) Other manner the court may deem sufficient.

82"Section 6" in the text of S17 should be read as "Section 5."
83The second mode was added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure. An
example of an international convention on service is the Hague Service
Convenflon. While there are reports that the Philippines will join the convention,
as of the time of this writing the Philippines has not yet signed the convention.

432

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
NOTE: The court order granting leave to effect
extraterritorial service must specify a reasonable time,
not less than 60 days after notice, within which the
defendant must answer.
Q.

May summons be validly served by telefax or email?

A.

Yes. Extraterritorial service may be "in any other
manner the court may deem sufficient." (S17 R14).

Q.

What is the purpose of extraterritorial service of
summons?

A.

The purpose of extraterritorial service of summons is
not to vest the court with jurisdiction over the person
of the defendant but merely for satisfying the due
process requirement. In a proceeding in rem or quasi
in rem, jurisdiction over the person of the defendant is
not a prerequisite to confer jurisdiction on the court
provided that the court acquires jurisdiction over the
res. (Asiavest Limited v. Court ofAppeals, 296 SCRA 539).

Q.

Lani filed an action for partition and accounting in
the RTC of Manila against her sister, Mary Rose,
who is a resident of Singapore and is not found in
the Philippines. Upon motion, the court ordered
the publication of the summons for 3 weeks in a
local tabloid, Bulgar. Linda, an OFW vacationing
in the Philippines, saw the summons in Bulgar
and brought a copy of the tabloid when she
returned to Singapore. Linda showed the tabloid
and the page containing the summons to Mary
Rose who said, "Yes, I know, my kumare Anita
scanned and emailed that page of Bulgar to me!"
Did the court acquire jurisdiction over Mary
Rose? (08 Bar 01)

A.

No, the court did not acquire jurisdiction over Mary Rose.

433

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Under S17 R14 on extraterritorial service of
summons, it is required that a copy of the summons
and order be sent to the defendant's last known
address by registered mail.
Here no copy of the summons and the order was
sent to Mary Rose's last known address by registered
mail. The fact that Mary Rose read a copy of the
Bu[gar would not constitute a valid service of
summons in the absence of a specific court order
directing that the service upon Mary Rose of a copy of
Bulgar would constitute a sufficient service.
Even assuming that a valid extraterritorial service
was made in accordance with S17 R14, such would
not confer jurisdiction over the person of Mary Rose
but only over the res, that is the property in the
Philippines subject of partition.
Q.

In a petition for nullification of marriage, the court
issued an order for extraterritorial service to be
effected by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, without stating that there be service at
defendant's last known address. Was the
extraterritorial service valid?

A.

Yes. The service here was effected under the fourth
mode ("in any other manner the court may deem
sufficient') and not under the third mode (publication
in a newspaper of general circulation ... in which case
a copy of the summons and order of the court shall be
sent by registered mail to the last known address of
the defendant"). (Arrieta v Arrieta, 19 Nov 2018,
).84
Perlas-Bernabe, J.

min Sara! V. Diao, 9 December 2020, Carandang, J., the Court held that
extraterritorial service of summons by publication under S17 R14 requires that
copy of summons and order be sent to the defendant's last known address by
registered mail; otherwise, such service would be invalid. It is opined that
compared to Arrieta, it is Sarol which correctly applies the law.

434

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Q.

P filed an action to recover title over a parcel of
land in Laguna from D, who is a U.S. resident.
With leave of court, extraterritorial service of
summons by publication was made, with a copy
of the summons and order being sent by
registered mail to D's last known address. The
trial court rendered judgment by default declaring
P as the owner of the land and imposing
attorney's fees by way of damages upon D. Is the
judgment of the court valid?

A.

The judgment of the court is valid in part. The
judgment declaring P as the owner of the land is valid
since the court validly acquired jurisdiction over the
res. However the judgment ordering D to pay
attorney's fees to P is invalid since a claim for the
recovery of damages is one in personam and the
court never acquired jurisdiction over the person of D.

Q.

Petitioner left for the United States. Respondent
husband then filed an action to declare the nullity of
his marriage with the Petitioner. Upon leave of court,
summons was published in a newspaper of general
circulation once a week for 3 consecutive weeks and
a copy of the summons and the order was sent to the
Petitioner at her given address in California through
the Department of Foreign Affairs, Pasay City.
Petitioner contended that there was no valid extraterritorial
service of summons since a copy of the summons
and order was not sent directly to her but only through
the Department of Foreign Affairs at Pasay City. Was
there a valid service of summons?

A.

Yes there was valid extraterritorial service.

435

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Under S17 R14, extraterritorial service of
summons may be made where the action concerns
the personal status of the plaintiff. An action for
declaration of nullity concerns the plaintiffs personal
status and is an action in rem or quasi in rem.
Here the extraterritorial service as effected not
through the second but through the third mode, i.e., in
any other manner the court may deem sufficient,
since the sending of the summons and order to the
Petitioner at her last known address through the DFA
was made with leave of court and by virtue of a court
order. (Romualdez-Licaros v. Licaros, 401 SCRA 762
[2003]).
Q.

Cris and Melania were married in 1974. However,
sometime in November 1991, Melania left for the
U.S.A. due to her alleged "irreconcilable differences"
with Cris. In 1992, she obtained a divorce decree,
and subsequently, married a certain Zenon
Parnawski in San Diego, California in 1993.
In 2001, Cris filed a petition for the declaration of
nullity of his marriage with Melania on the ground
of psychological incapacity before the RTC. Cris
filed a Motion for Issuance of Summons by
Publication. The RTC granted the motion and
ordered the summons to be served upon Melania
by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation. Accordingly, the summons and copy
of the petition were published in the San Pedro
Express No answer was filed by Melania. The
RTC rendered a decision granting the petition.
After more than seven years from the decision's
finality, Melania filed a petition for annulment of
judgment before the CA, claiming that the RTC
decision was rendered without jurisdiction and
tainted with extrinsic fraud.
436

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
The CA granted the petition for annulment of
judgment, and consequently, declared null and
void the RTC Decision. The CA pointed out that
Cris did not send a copy of the summons to the
last known address of Melania and hence there
was no valid extraterritorial service. Was the ruling
of the CA correct?
A.

No. the RTC only ordered that the summons be
published in a newspaper of general circulation, which
mode of service falls under the third mode of
extraterritorial service of summons, i.e., "in any other
manner the court may deem sufficient," and hence,
should be differentiated from the second mode of
extraterritorial service of summons which requires
publication and service by registered mail to the
defendants last known address.
If the RTC intended to direct extraterritorial
service of summons under the second mode, then it
should have so indicated that the publication be
complemented by sending a copy thereof to the last
known address of Melania through registered mail.
Hence there was a valid extraterritorial service and
the RTC's decision should not have been nullified by
the CA. (Arrieta v. Arrieta, 19 November 2018, PerlasBernabe, J.).85

Q.

Private Respondent filed an action to revive a
judgment which held the Petitioner liable for the
return of a barge and for actual, moral and
exemplary damages to the Private Respondent.
The Petitioner at that time was already residing in
the United States. Sheriff served summons at the

85The ruling is arguable. It would render nugatory the requirement in 517
R14 and S23 R14 that in case of service by publication, a copy of the summons
and order for publication shall be sent by registered mail to the defendant at his
last known address.

437

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
house in Paranaque where the Petitioner's mother
resides. The Petitioner was declared in default
and judgment was rendered reviving the earlier
case. The Petitioner filed an action to annul the
judgment of revival. Should the judgment be
annulled?
A.

Yes. The action to revive judgment is one in personam.
Hence extraterritorial service of summons in an action
against a non-resident defendant cannot be validly
effected. The judgment is thus null and void. (Arcenas v.
Court of Appeals, 299 SCRA 733 [1998]).

Q

Paul Schenker, a Swiss citizen and resident,
through his wife and attorney-in-fact, Helen
Schenker, a Philippine resident, filed a suit in the
Philippines against Gemperle for the enforcement
of subscriptions to shares of stocks. Gemperle
then filed with the CFI an action for damages
against Paul Schenker, alleging that Paul had
caused the publication of malicious imputations
against the plaintiff which damages his business
reputation. Summons and copy of the complaint
was served upon Helen Schenker. Did the CFI
acquire jurisdiction over the person of Paul?

A.

Yes. Since Paul had appointed his wife as his
attorney-in-fact authorized to bring suits in his behalf,
she is also deemed authorized to receive summons in
a case filed against Paul, especially where the case is
an offshoot of the case filed at his behest and wherein
he had authorized Helen to be his attorney-in-fact.
(Gemperle v. Schenker, 19 SCRA 45 [1967]).

Q.

P filed an action for partition against the spouses
Valmonte, who both reside in the United States.
Mr. Valmonte however has a law office in Manila
and he travels between the USA and the Philippines.
The sheriff served summons on Mr. Valmonte at
438

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
his law office. Mr. Valmonte received summons
for himself but not for his wife on the ground that
he was not authorized to receive summons in her
behalf. Subsequently Mrs. Valmonte was declared
in default for not filing an answer.
a) What is the nature of an action for partition?
b) Was summons validly served on Mrs. Valmonte?

a) An action for partition is an action quasi in rem.
b) No. Since she is a non-resident, service could only
be made pursuant to S17 R14 and such service
must be outside of the country. Furthermore Mrs.
Valmonte did not appoint Mr. Valmonte as her
attorney-in-fact to represent her in litigations and
in court. Mr. Valmonte was merely acting as his
wife's counsel in negotiations with P but this
cannot be construed as an authorization to represent
her in court. (Valmonte v. Court of Appeals, 252
SCRA 93 [1996]). Compare with Gemperle v.
Schenker, 19 SCRA 45 (1967), where the nonresident husband had appointed the wife as his
attorney-in-fact to represent him in a suit against
the plaintiff. There the Supreme Court said that
service of summons and plaintiff's complaint upon
the wife validly conferred upon the court jurisdiction
over the husband.
Q.

Daniel Chan owns a house and lot at Forbes Park,
Makati, where his wife and children reside. He is
the Chief Executive Officer of various family
corporations where he owns 20% of the respective
capital stocks. These family corporations owe
several banks the total sum of P2.5 billion, with
Chan as a solidary co-debtor.
439

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
After Chan has carefully manipulated the
finances of the family corporations and diverted
their funds to his account in a Swiss bank, he
flees from the Philippines and now resides at 127
Rue Duphine, Zurich, Switzerland. The banks
concerned now retains the services of Atty. Ramon
Castillo for the purpose of filing a suit in the
Philippines against Daniel Chan on his obligation
as a soldary co-debtor on the loans of the family
corporations. One of the procedural problems
facing Atty. Castillo is the method of effecting a
valid service of summons upon Daniel Chan, now
residing in Switzerland, to enable the Philippine
court to acquire jurisdiction over his person.
Describe the remedies and procedures, and
the supporting grounds thereof that Atty. Castillo
should follow as would enable him to effect a valid
service of summons on Daniel Chan. (83 Bar Q14).
A.

First Atty. Castillo should file a collection suit against
Daniel Chan with application for the issuance of a writ
of preliminary attachment. A writ of preliminary
attachment may be applied for since Daniel Chan is a
non-resident. (S1[-I] R57).
Upon the issuance of the order and writ of
attachment, Atty. Castillo should coordinate with the
sheriff to attach the house and lot at Forbes Park.
The writ of attachment may be enforced even prior to
service of summons since Daniel Chan is a nonresident. (S5 R57).
Upon the attachment of the Forbes Park property,
Atty. Castillo should file a motion for leave to effect
extraterritorial service upon Daniel Chan. Extraterritorial
service may now be availed of since the property
of Chan has been attached within the Philippines.
(S17 R14).
440

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
Once the court grants leave and extraterritorial
service is effected upon Chan, the court acquires
jurisdiction over the res (the property attached) and
may render valid judgment enforcible against the
Forbes Park property.
There is no solution to the problem of how to
effect valid service of summons in order for the court
to acquire jurisdiction over the person of Chan. The
reason is that a Philippine court cannot acquire
jurisdiction over the person of a non-resident not
found in the Philippines. Extraterritorial service under
S17 R14 confers jurisdiction only over the res and not
the person of the defendant.
Hence Atty. Castillo should try to look for more
property of Chan to attach. The court's judgment can
be enforced only on the property of Chan which is
attached. The debt of P2.5 billion not covered by
attached property cannot be enforced against Chan
as the court has no jurisdiction over his person.
SEC. 18. Residents temporarily out of the Philippines
Q.

How is summons made upon a resident who is
temporarily out of the Philippines?

A.

When any action is commenced against a defendant
who ordinarily resides within the Philippines, but who
is temporarily out of it, service may, by leave of court,
be also effected out of the Philippines as under S17
R16. (S18 R16).

Q.

Does S18 R14 also cover actions in personam?

A.

Yes, since it uses the words, "any action," clearly
implying that it applies not only to actions in rem and
quasi in rem but also to actions in personam.

441

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P sued Father Maximo for damages arising from a
motorcycle accident The sheriff left the summons
and a copy of the complaint with Fr. Bautista at
the convent where he and Father Maximo reside.
At the time of the service of summons, Father
Maximo was temporarily out of the Philippines.
Judgment was rendered by default against Father
Maximo. He then sought to annul the judgment on
the ground that he was not validly served with
summons. Father Maximo contends that in the
case of a resident defendant who is temporarily
out of the Philippines, summons should be served
by extraterritorial service pursuant to 517 R14 and
not by substituted service under S6 R14. Father
Maximo also contends that he never received a
copy of the summons and complaint Should the
judgment be annulled?

A.

No. A perusal of S18 R14 reveals that extraterritorial
service is not the exclusive mode of serving summons
upon the resident defendant temporarily out of the
Philippines since the said provision uses the word
"may." Substituted service of summons upon such
defendant may be availed of. Even if we were to
assume that Fr. Maximo did not receive a copy of the
summons and complaint, that would not affect the
validity of the substituted service. A person who goes
abroad temporarily should take care of the affairs of
his residence such that there should be someone to
receive correspondence, documents, and court
issuances. (Montalban v. Maximo, 22 SCRA 1070, 15
March 1968).

Q.

P filed with the RTC a torts case against A, B, C,
and D. The sheriff went to D's residence and served
the summons and complaint on D's husband,
since D was temporarily out of the country in
Ireland. Subsequently D filed an answer raising
442

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
the affirmative defense of lack of personal
jurisdiction. D contends that she was not properly
served with summons since she was temporarily
out of the country and hence service of summons
on her should conform to 518 R14 which requires
extraterritorial service. Should the RTC grant the
affirmative defense?
A.

The RTC should not grant the affirmative defense.
The Supreme Court has held that in the case of
a resident temporarily out of the Philippines,
extraterritorial service is not mandatory since S18
R14 uses the word "may" and thus substituted service
of summons may be resorted to.
Here D was temporarily out of the country.
Hence extraterritorial service is not mandatory and
substituted service of summons may be resorted to.
(Palma v. Galvez, 10 March 2010).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for ejectment against the
defendant, alleging that a portion of defendant's
residence was built on top of the plaintiff's firewall.
The defendant raised the affirmative defense of lack
of personal jurisdiction. The defendant contends
that at the time of the filing of the complaint, she
was not in the Philippines as she is an American
citizen and a permanent resident of the U.S. Is her
affirmative defense meritorious?

A.

No. A US citizen who maintains a Philippine residence
is considered as a resident temporarily out of the
Philippines. Thus, substituted service of summons
may be effected against her. (Barber v. Chua, 12
January 2021, Zalameda, J.).

443

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
SEC. 23. Voluntary appearance
Q.

What is a "voluntary appearance" within the
meaning of 523 R14?

A.

Any appearance of the defendant in the court where
the action is pending provided he does not question
the court's jurisdiction over his person. The defendant's
voluntary appearance in the action shall be equivalent
to service of summons.86
Examples of voluntary appearance are the following:
1) Appearance of counsel in behalf of defendant.
2) Filing of pleadings or papers in court.
3) A telegraphic motion for postponement.
4) The filing of a motion for extension of time to file
answer.
5) The filing of a motion to take deposition and to
serve written interrogatories.

Q.

While the trial was ongoing, the lawyer of Mario
Reyes discovered that there was improper service
of summons, the summons having been sent by
registered mail. He filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that the court had not acquired
jurisdiction over the person of Mario Reyes.
Should the motion be granted? Explain your
answer. (90 Bar 08)

86The second sentence of 523 R14 states that "[t]he inclusion in a motion
to dismiss of other grounds aside from lack of jurisdiction over the person of the
defendant shall be deemed a voluntary appearance." This provision is
anachronistic since under the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure, a motion to dismiss
on the ground of lack of personal jurisdiction is a prohibited motion. (512[a] R15).

444

RULE 14
Service Of Summons
A.

No, the motion to dismiss should not be granted.
Under S20 R14 the defendant's voluntary appearance
in the action shall be equivalent to service of
summons.
Here it is clear that there was already voluntary
appearance since the trial was already ongoing and
Mario Reyes' lawyer had been appearing in his
behalf. Hence such voluntary appearance shall be
equivalent to service of summons and the court thus
acquired jurisdiction over Mario Reyes' person.

Q.

Tina Guerrero filed with the Regional Trial Court
of Binan, Laguna, a complaint for sum of money
amounting to P1 Milion against Carlos Corro. The
complaint alleges, among others, that Carlos
borrowed from Tina the said amount as evidenced
by a promissory note signed by Carlos and his
wife, jointly and severally. Carlos was served with
summons which was received by Linda, his
secretary. However Carlos failed to file an answer
to the complaint within the 15-day reglementary
period. Hence Tina filed with the court a motion
to declare Carlos in default and to allow her to
present evidence ex parte. Five days thereafter,
Carlos filed his verified answer to the complaint,
denying under oath the genuineness and due
execution of the promissory note; and contending
that he has fully paid his loan with interest at 12%
per annum.
1) Was the summons validly served on Carlos?
2) If you were the judge, will you grant Tina's
motion to declare Carlos in default? (06
Bar 012)

445

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.
1) Yes, the summons was validly served on Carlos.
Initially there was no valid service of summons,
since there was no showing that for justifiable causes
personal service could not be effected within a
reasonable time. (57 R14). However under S20 R14,
the defendant's voluntary appearance in the action
shall be equivalent to service of summons.
Here there was a voluntary appearance by
Carlos when he filed his verified answer and such
voluntary appearance is equivalent to service of summons.
Hence the summons was validly served on Carlos.
2) If I were the judge I would not grant Tina's motion
to declare Carlos in default.
The Supreme Court has held that the
defendant's answer should be admitted where it was
filed before he had been declared in default as default
judgments are generally disfavored. (Cathay Pacific
Airways v. Romillo, 141 SCRA 451).

446

RULE 15. MOTIONS
Q.

What is a motion?

A.

A motion is an application for relief other than by a
pleading. (Si R15).

Q.

Are motions required to be in writing?

A.

Yes, all motions shall be in writing except those made
in open court or in the course of a hearing or trial.
A motion made in open court or in the course of
a hearing or trial should immediately be resolved in
open court, after the adverse party is given the
opportunity to argue his or her opposition thereto.
When a motion is based on facts not appearing
on record, the court may hear the matter on affidavits
or depositions presented by the respective parties,
but the court may direct that the matter be heard
wholly or partly on oral testimony or depositions. (32
R15, as amended by the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).87

Q.

What are the kinds of motions?

A.

A motion may either be litigious or non-litigious.

Q.

What are non-litigious motions?

A.

Motions which the court may act upon without
prejudicing the rights of adverse parties are nonlitigious motions. These motions include:

87This provision is also taken from 87 R133 on evidence on motion.
be noted however that the Judicial Affidavit Rule applies also to heaits wit
respect to motions and incidents. (32 JAR). It is submitted that 82 R15 btrc te
more special provision prevails but the court may direct that the meal- be nen
on judicial affidavits instead of oral testimony or depositions.

447

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
i) Motion for the issuance of an alias summons;
ii) Motion for extension to file answer;
Hi) Motion for postponement;
iv) Motion for the issuance of a writ of execution;
v) Motion for the issuance of an alias writ of execution;88
vi) Motion for the issuance of a writ of possession;
vii) Motion for the issuance of an order directing the
sheriff to execute the final certificate of sale; and
viii) Other similar motions
These motions shall not be set for hearing and
shall be resolved by the court within five days from
receipt thereof. (S4 R15, as amended in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

Do non-litigious motions need to be served upon
the other party?

A. Yes. S5(b) R15 provides that all motions shall be served
by personal service, accredited private courier or
registered mail, or electronic means so as to ensure
their receipt by the other party. S7 R15 provides that no
written motion shall be acted upon by the court without
proof of service thereof, pursuant to S5(b) R15.89

88There is no such thing as an alias writ of execution under the 1997 and
2020 Rules. See Q&As under 56 R39.
88The requirement of service to the other party provided for in S5(b) R15
and 57 R15 does not apply to ex parte motions governed by specific provisions
and where the efficacy of the relief sought would be compromised if notice were
given, as in an ex pane motion for the issuance of a writ of preliminary
attachment (S2 R57), or a temporary restraining order (S5 R58).

448

RULE 15
Motions
Q.

What are litigious motions?

A.

Litigious motions are those which the court may not
act upon without prejudicing the rights of the adverse
party.
(a) Litigious motions include:
i)

Motion for bill of particulars;

H)

Motion to dismiss;

iii) Motion for new trial;
iv) Motion for reconsideration;
v)

Motion for execution pending appeal;

vi) Motion to amend after a responsive pleading
has been filed;
vii) Motion to cancel statutory lien;
viii) Motion for an order to break in or for a writ of
demolition;
ix) Motion for intervention;
x)

Motion for judgment on the pleadings;

xi) Motion for summary judgment;
xii) Demurrer to evidence;
xiii) Motion to declare defendant in default; and
xiv) Other similar motions.
(b) All motions shall be served by personal service,
accredited private courier or registered mail, or
electronic means so as to ensure their receipt by
the other party.

449

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(c) The opposing party shall file his or her opposition
to a litigious motion within five days from receipt
thereof No other submissions shall be considered
by the court in the resolution of the motion.
The motion shall be resolved by the court within 15
days from its receipt of the opposition thereto, or upon
expiration of the period to file such opposition.
(S5 R15, as amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).
Q.

Do litigious motions need to be set for hearing?

A.

No longer. Under the 1964 and 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure, a litigious motion has to be set for hearing.
Under the 2010 Rules, instead of a hearing, the court
shall resolve the motion after the opposing party has
been given the opportunity to file his opposition.°
The court however may, in the exercise of its
discretion, and if deemed necessary for its resolution,
call a hearing on the motion. The notice of hearing
shall be addressed to all parties concerned, and shall
specify the time and date of the hearing. (S6 R15).
Except for motions requiring immediate action, where
the court decides to conduct hearing on a litigious
motion, the same shall be set on a Friday. (S8 R15).

Q.

Give the requirements of a motion. (WaSSP)

A.
1) The motion must be in writing except those made
in open court or in the course of a hearing or trial.
(S2 R15).

90However in the case of a motion for execution pending appeal and a
motion for an order to break in or for a writ of demolition, a hearing is mandatory.
(S2 R39 and S1O[d] R39).

450

RULE 15
Motions
2) It should state the relief sought and the grounds
for it and where required by the Rules or
necessary to prove facts alleged therein, shall be
accompanied by supporting affidavits and papers.
(S3 R15).
3) It should be served by personal service, accredited
courier or registered mail, or electronic means so
as to ensure their receipt by the other party.
(S5[b] R15).
4) There must be proof of service upon the other
party. (S7 R15).
Non-compliance with the foregoing means that
the motion is but a "mere scrap of paper" which
produces no legal effect and should not be acted
upon by the court.
Q.

Jacob filed a complaint for annulment of loan and
mortgage contract against Petro Bank on the
ground of fraud. Petro Bank filed an answer denying
any fraud against Jacob. After the termination of
the pretrial, Jacob filed an ex parte motion for the
issuance of a subpoena duces tecum and ad
testificandum to the senior loan manager of Petro
Bank to appear and testify in the initial hearing for
the presentation of Jacob's evidence as Jacob's
first witness and to bring documents relative to
Jacob's loan. Is the motion a non-litigious or a
litigious motion?

A.

It is a litigious motion. The motion would prejudice the
rights of the adverse party Petro Bank since its officers
would be compelled to testify in support of Jacob's
case. (Sps. Afulugencia v. Metro Bank, 5 Feb 2014).

451

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect if a motion is without proof of
service?

A.

It shall not be acted upon by the court. (S7 R15).
Under the old S6 R15 of the 1964 Rules of Court, the
court nonetheless may act upon the motion "if it is
satisfied that the rights of the adverse party or parties
are not affected." It is submitted that the court retains
such discretion to act upon the motion, especially
where the adverse party did in fact receive the motion.

Q.

What is the omnibus motion rule?

A.

The rule that a motion attacking a pleading, order,
judgment, or proceeding shall include all objections
then available, and all objections not so included shall
be deemed waived. (S9 R15). Excepted from this rule
are objections based on subject-matter jurisdiction,
res judicata, lis pendens, and prescription as provided
for in Si R9.

Q.

Spouses See filed an action against HDMF to
compel it to surrender title over a lot to them. The
RTC rendered a decision in favor of the Spouses
See. HDMF filed a motion for reconsideration
raising the lone ground that it could not be
compelled to release the title to the Spouses See
because Arimado (a co-respondent) has yet to
deliver to it P270,000. The motion for reconsideration
was denied. In a subsequent certiorari case filed by
HDMF against the Spouses See seeking to set
aside the RTC decision, could the HDMF raise as
an argument that the RTC decision is null and
void for having been issued without a trial?

A.

No. As to the HDMF's argument that the February
21, 2002 Decision of the RTC is null and void for
having been issued without a trial, it is a mere
afterthought which deserves scant consideration. The
452

RULE 15
Motions
Court notes that the HDMF did not object to the
absence of a trial when it sought a reconsideration of
the February 21, 2002 Decision. Instead, the HDMF
raised the lone argument that it should not be
compelled to release the title to the Sees because
Arimado has yet to deliver to HDMF the sum
of P272,000.00. Under the Omnibus Motion Rule
embodied in Section 8 of Rule 15 of the Rules of
Court, all available objections that are not included in
a party's motion shall be deemed waived. (1-IDMF v.
Spouses See, G.R. No. 170292, 22 June 2011).
Q.

Is the omnibus motion rule applicable to a motion
to quash search warrant?

A.

Yes. Hence a motion to quash a search warrant
should include all grounds available; otherwise a
ground not included is deemed waived. (Pilipinas
Shell Petroleum Corp. v. Romars Intl Gases Corp.,
16 February 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a motion for leave to admit amended
complaint. Should the motion for leave be
accompanied already by the amended complaint?

A.

Yes. A motion for leave to file a pleading or motion
shall be accompanied by the pleading or motion
sought to be admitted. (S10 R15).

Q.

What are the prohibited motions under the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure?

A.

The following motions shall not be allowed:
(a) Motion to dismiss except on the following grounds:
) That the court has no jurisdiction over the
subject matter of the claim;
ii) That there is another action pending between
the same parties for the same cause; and
453

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Hi) That the cause of action is barred by a prior
judgment or by the statute of limitations;
(b) Motion to hear affirmative defenses;
(c) Motion for reconsideration of the court's action on
the affirmative defenses;91
(d) Motion to suspend proceedings without a
temporary restraining order or injunction issued
by a higher court;
(e) Motion for extension of time to file pleadings,
affidavits or any other papers, except a motion for
extension to file an answer as provided by S11
R11; and
(f)

Motion for postponement intended for delay,
except if it is based on acts of God, force majeure
or physical inability of the witness to appear and
testify. If the motion is granted based on such
exceptions, the moving party shall be warned that
the presentation of its evidence must still be
terminated on the dates previously agreed upon.

A motion for postponement, whether written or
oral, shall, at all times, be accompanied by the
original official receipt from the office of the clerk of
court evidencing payment of the postponement fee
under 321(b) R141, to be submitted either at the time
of the filing of said motion or not later than the next
hearing date. The clerk of court shall not accept the motion
unless accompanied by the original receipt. (312 R15,
as added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

91The provision does not distinguish whether the action is for the grant or
denial of the affirmative defense. Cf. S12(e) R8.

454

RULE 15
Motions
Q.

Will an order granting the motion to dismiss or an
affirmative defense bar the refiling of the same
action or claim?

A.

S13 R15, captioned "[d]ismissal with prejudice,"
provides that "subject to the right of appeal, an order
granting a motion to dismiss or an affirmative
defense that the cause of action is barred by a prior
judgment or by the statute of limitations; that the claim
or demand set forth in the plaintiffs pleading has been
paid, waived, abandoned or otherwise extinguished;
or that the claim on which the action is founded is
unenforceable under the provisions of the statute of
frauds, shall bar the refiling of the same action or
claim." (S13 R15, as amended by the 2020 Rules of
Civil Procedure).
The remedy of the plaintiff is to appeal the order.
Note that a motion for reconsideration of the order is
prohibited. (S12[c] R15).92

g2S13 R15 seems to imply that if the order granting a motion to dismiss or
an affirmative defense is on grounds other than those provided for in 513 R15,
the dismissal is without prejudice and thus the remedy of the plaintiff is not to
appeal but to refile the action or to file the appropriate special civil action under
R65. (Sig] R41; United Alloy PhiIs. Corp. v. United Coconut Planters Bank, 23
November 2015). It is opined that this should not be the case. The mere fact
that 513 R15 is captioned "dismissal with prejudice" should not be taken to mean
that the other dismissals are "without prejudice." See S8 R40 on dismissal on the
ground of lack of jurisdiction by the MTC in which the remedy is appeal. See also
Madrigal Transport Inc. v. Lapanday Holdings Corp., 11 August 2004, where the
Court held that the remedy from an order dismissing a case on the ground of
failure to state a cause of action is appeal and not certiorari; and Pfleider v. Court
of Appeals, 12 November 2018, wherein the remedy from an order dismissing a
case on the ground of us pendens is appeal under R45. It should be noted that
R65 places a greater burden on the plaintif for he has to show not only reversible
error but grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction.

455

RULE 16. MOTION TO DISMISS 93
Q.

Under the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure, is a
motion to dismiss a prohibited motion?

A.

Yes, a motion to dismiss is a prohibited motion except
if the ground thereof is lack of subject-matter jurisdiction,
res judicata, is pendens, or prescription. (S12[a] R15,
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).94

Q.

Within what time should a motion to dismiss be filed?

A.

Within the time for but before filing the answer. (Si
R16, 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure). However, if the
grounds of lack of jurisdiction, res judicata, us
pendens, and prescription appear from the pleadings
or the evidence on record, the motion to dismiss may
be filed even after an answer had been filed. (Si R9).

Q.

May the trial court dismiss a case motu proprio?

A

No, there should be a motion to dismiss or an answer
with affirmative defense filed by the defendant. The
exceptions are:
1) When it appears from the pleadings or the evidence
on record that the court has no jurisdiction over
the subject matter, or that the action is barred by
res judicata, or lis pendens, or prescription, the
court shall dismiss the claim. (S1 R9, Si R14).

° Under the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure, the provisions of R16 have
either been deleted or transposed to other rules.
“The other instances wherein a motion to dismiss is allowed are the
following: (1) on the ground of non-referral for conciliation in ejectment cases and
in cases covered by the Rule on Summary Produre; (2) failure to comply with the
requirements of S5 R7; (3) failure to pay the docket fee; (4) impropriety of the
interpleader action or on other appropriate grounds specified in R16. (34 R62);
(5) motion to dismiss under S3 R17; and (6) motion to dismiss on the ground of
lack of personal jurisdiction in legal separation, annulment, and nullification of
marriage cases.

456

RULE 16
Motion To Dismiss
2) In ejectment cases and in cases governed by the
Rule on Summary Procedure, the court may, from
an examination of the allegations in the complaint
and such evidence as may be attached thereto,
dismiss the case outright on any of the grounds
for the dismissal of a civil action which are
apparent therein. (Section 4, Rule on Summary
Procedure; S5 R70).
3) In cases covered by the Revised Rules of Procedure
for Small Claims Cases, the court may motu
proprio dismiss the statement of claims in the
instances proved for in Section 11 thereof.
Q.

May a complaint be dismissed on the ground that
the allegations therein are vague and indefinite?

A.

Provided that it states a cause of action, a complaint
may not be dismissed on the ground alone that its
allegations are vague and indefinite. The defendant's
remedy is to move for a bill of particulars or avail of
the proper mode of discovery. (Galeon v. Galeon, 49
SCRA 516).

Action on motion to dismiss
Q.

What action shall the court take on the motion to
dismiss?

A.

Being a litigious motion, the court shall observe the
procedure in 55 R15 and resolve the motion within 15
days from receipt of the opposition thereto or upon
expiration of the period to file the opposition.
The court may in its discretion call a hearing on
the motion. (S6 R15). In this hearing, when the motion
is based on facts not appearing on record, the court
may hear the matter on affidavits or depositions

457

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
presented by the respective parties, but the court may
direct that the matter be heard wholly or partly on oral
testimony or depositions. (S2 R15).95
The court may dismiss the action or claim, deny
the motion, or order the amendment of the pleading,
Q.

May the court defer resolution of the motion?

A.

No, the court must resolve the motion to dismiss. The
court cannot defer resolution of the ground for dismissal
until trial. (See S5 & 6, R15).

Time to plead
Q.

If the motion to dismiss is denied, within what
time shall the defendant file his answer?

A.

If the motion to dismiss is denied, the movant shall file
his answer within the balance of the period prescribed
by R11 to which he was entitled at the time of serving
his motion, but not less than five days in any event,
computed from receipt of the notice of the denial. If
the pleading is ordered to be amended, he shall file
his answer within the period prescribed by R11
counted from service of the amended pleading,
unless the court provides a longer period. (54 R16,
1997 Rules of Civil Procedure). 97

Q.

P filed a complaint against D for collection of
P500,000 before the RTC. Summons was received
by D on March 1. On March 25, D filed a motion to
dismiss on ground of res judicata. The trial court

95Compare with S2 R16 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure wherein
affidavits will not suffice to prove questions of fact. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997
RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 58(1997]; Capiral v. Robles, 660 SCRA 255).
965ee 53 R16, 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure.
g71t is submitted that this provision is still effective, since there is an
absence of any equivalent provision in the 2020 Rules and it is not inconsistent
with any provision of the 2020 Rules.

458

RULE 16
Motion To Dismiss
denied the motion to dismiss in an order received
by D on July 1. Up to what date may D file his
answer?
A.

July 8. The Defendant had until March 31 to file his
answer, so that when he filed his motion to dismiss on
March 25, he had 7 days remaining. The day of the
act causing the interruption (March 25) is excluded
from the computation, that is, defendant is not
deemed to have consumed the same.98 Thus the
allowable period after the interruption or the remaining
period is seven days (March 25 to March 31). When
the Defendant received notice of the cessation of the
cause of interruption on July 1, the allowable period
started to run on the next day (July 2 up to July 8).
One may simply add the remaining period to the day
of notice of cessation: July 1 + 7 days = July 8.

Q.

Same facts as the preceding question, but D filed
his motion to dismiss on March 31. Up to what
date may D file his answer?

A.

Up to July 6. S4 R16 (1997 Rules) states that the
movant is entitled to not less than 5 days in any event
computed from receipt of the notice of denial. Thus:
July 1 + 5 days = July 6.

Q.

P filed an action for specific performance of
contract against D. Summons was received by D
on March 1. On March 10, D filed a motion to
dismiss on ground of prescription. After hearing,
the trial court ordered P to amend the complaint
to cure the defect by alleging that P had made an
extrajudicial demand which interrupted the running
of the prescriptive period. P filed the amended

"See De las Alas v. Court of Appeals, 83 SCRA 200 (1978); JOSE Y.
FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 73-74.

459

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
complaint and a copy thereof was served on D on
July 1. Up to what date can D file his answer?
A.

Up to July 31. Under S4 R16 (1997 Rules) the movant
shall file his answer within the period prescribed by
R11 counted from service of the amended pleading.
D thus has 30 days from July 1 or up to July 31 within
which to file his answer. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997
RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 59 [1997]). Justice
Regalado writes that the movant only has the balance
but not less than 5 days within which to file his
answer. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 262 [7111 rev. ed., 3rd printing
1999]). It is submitted that the opinion of Justice Feria
is more in accord with the tenor of S4 R16.

Q.

In the prior question, what if on March 11, without
waiting for the resolution of the motion to
dismiss, P filed an amended complaint curing the
defect of failure to state a cause of action and
served a copy upon D. Should D wait for the
resolution of the MTD or file an answer within 30
days from March 11?

A.

D should file an answer within 30 days since the
amendment rendered moot and academic the
motion to dismiss.

SEC. 5. Effect of dismissal
Q.

If a motion to dismiss is granted, may the plaintiff
still re-file the complaint?

A.

Yes, except if the ground for the dismissal is
prescription, unenforceability of the claim, res judicata,
and extinguishment of the claim. (313 R15; keyword:
PURE).

460

RULE 16
Motion To Dismiss
Q.

P filed an action against D for recovery of
ownership of land. The RTC decided in favor of D
but on appeal the CA reversed and held that P is
entitled to the ownership of the land. The judgment
became final and executory. Later D filed an
action against P for recovery of the value of the
improvements it had introduced on the land. P
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of res
judicata. This was denied categorically by the trial
court. Subsequently P filed an answer in which he
raised the affirmative defense of res judicata.
May P still raise the defense of res judicata in
his answer?

A.

Yes, after all the order of denial of the motion to
dismiss is merely interlocutory and cannot amount to
res judicata. (Spouses Rasdas v. Estenor, G.R. No.
157605, 13 December 2005, Tinga, J.). Rasdas lays
to rest the obiter dictum in Clavano v. Genato, G.R.
No. L-45837, 28 October 1977, which states that if a
ground is raised in a motion to dismiss and categorically
denied, such ground Scan no longer be raised as an
affirmative defense in the answer.

Q.

What are the remedies of the Plaintiff in case the
motion to dismiss is granted?

A.
1) Re-file the complaint if the case dismissed on the
ground of lack of subject-matter jurisdiction or us
pendens.
2) Appeal from the order of dismissal.
3) File an amended complaint as a matter of right
curing the defect so long as the dismissal order
has not yet become final.

461

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the remedy of the Defendant in case the
motion to dismiss is denied?

A.

The remedy of the defendant is to proceed to trial and
if he loses, appeal and assign the failure to dismiss as
a reversible error.
It is submitted that the defendant cannot avail of
certiorari, prohibition, or mandamus under R65,
applying by analogy 312(e) R8.

Q.

What are the instances when a motion to dismiss
is prohibited or not allowed?

A.

The following (2020 SESELAN HA FIRE) are the
instances when a motion to dismiss is prohibited or
not allowed:
1)

Under the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure (except
where the ground is lack of subject-matter jurisdiction,
res judicata, lis pendens, and prescription).

2)

In cases governed by the Rule on Summary
Procedure (except where the ground is nonreferral to barangay conciliation or lack of subjectmatter jurisdiction).

3)

In ejectment cases (except where the ground is
non-referral for conciliation or lack of subjectmatter jurisdiction).

4) In cases covered by the Revised Rules of
Procedure for Small Claims Cases.
5) In expropriation cases. (Masikip v. City of Pasig,
23 January 2006).
6) In Writ of Habeas Data cases.
7) In Writ of Amparo cases.

462

RULE 16
Motion To Dismiss
8) In cases governed by the Financial Liquidation
and Suspension of Payments Rules of Procedure
for Insolvent Debtors (2015).
9) Under Section 8 of the Interim Rules for InfraCorporate Controversies.
10) In cases covered by the Financial Rehabilitation
Rules of Procedure (2013).
11) In cases covered by the Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases.
12) In cases covered by the Rules on Nullification
and Annulment of Marriages and on Legal
Separation (except on ground of lack of subjectmatter or personal jurisdiction).

463

RULE 17. DISMISSAL OF ACTIONS
Q.

May a plaintiff dismiss his complaint?

A.

Yes, either by filing a notice of dismissal or a motion
for dismissal.

Q.

When may a plaintiff dismiss a complaint by filing
a notice of dismissal?

A.

At any time before service of the answer or of a
motion for summary judgment. Upon such notice
being filed, the court shall issue an order confirming
the dismissal. (Si R17).

Q.

Is such a dismissal without prejudice?

A.

Yes. The exceptions would be: (1) if otherwise stated
in the notice of dismissal, and (2) under the twodismissal rule. In these two instances, the dismissal is
with prejudice.

Q.

What is the two-dismissal rule?

A.

The rule that the notice of dismissal would operate as
an adjudication on the merits if the plaintiff had once
dismissed in a competent court an action based on or
including the same claim. (51 R17). Hence if plaintiff
files a complaint based on the claim subject of the
second dismissal, the defendant may move to dismiss
on the ground of res judicata.
Note that the second dismissal is by notice while
the first may be by notice or by motion of the plaintiff.

Q.

Lawrence filed a complaint against Grace to
collect a loan of P50,000. Later, because of their
intimate relationship in th past, Lawrence filed a
notice of dismissal of his complaint. Subsequently,
the two had a serious misunderstanding so that
464

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
Lawrence again filed a complaint against Grace to
collect another loan of P100,000. Lawrence and
Grace reconciled after which, the former withdrew
his complaint before the latter could file her
answer or a motion for summary judgment. Was
the dismissal of the second complaint with or
without prejudice? Explain. (89 Bar Q2.2).
A.

The dismissal was without prejudice. Under the twodismissal rule, the notice of dismissal would operate
as an adjudication on the merits if the plaintiff had
once dismissed in a competent court an action based
on or including the same claim.
Here the first dismissal was for an action not
based on or including the claim in the second action.
Hence the dismissal is without prejudice.

Q.

Agatha filed a complaint against Yana in the RTC
in Makati City to collect P350,000.00, an amount
representing the unpaid balance on the price of
the car Yana had bought from Agatha. Realizing a
jurisdictional error in filing the complaint in the
RTC, Agatha filed a notice of dismissal before she
was served with the answer of Yana. The RTC
issued an order confirming the dismissal.
Three months later, Agatha filed another
complaint against Yana based on the same cause
of action this time in the MeTC of Makati City.
However, for reasons personal to her, Agatha
decided to have the complaint dismissed without
prejudice by filing a notice of dismissal prior to
the service of the answer of Yana. Hence, the case
was dismissed by the MeTC.
A month later, Agatha refiled the complaint
against Yana in the same MeTC.

465

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
May Yana successfully invoke the Two-Dismissal
Rule to bar Agatha's third complaint? Explain
your answer. (17 Bar Q7b)
A.

No, Yana may not successfully invoke the TwoDismissal Rule to bar Agatha's third complaint
Under the Two-Dismissal Rule, the notice of
dismissal operates as an adjudication upon the merits
provided it is filed by a plaintiff who has once
dismissed in a competent court an action based on or
including the same claim. [Si R17]
Here the first dismissal by the plaintiff was not in
a competent court as the RTC in Makati City did not
have subject-matter jurisdiction over an action
seeking to recover P350,000. Hence Agatha's third
complaint is not barred by the Two-Dismissal Rule.

Q.

P filed a complaint against D to collect on
P300,000. P filed a notice of dismissal which was
confirmed by the court. Subsequently P filed a
second case against D involving the P300,000
claim. D filed his answer. P filed a motion for dismissal
which was granted by the trial court. The court
order granting the motion did not state whether the
dismissal was with or without prejudice. After three
months, P filed another case involving the same
P300,000. D filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground of res judicata, invoking the two-dismissal
rule. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. The two-dismissal rule would apply only if the
second dismissal was by notice. Here the second
dismissal was by motion and hence the dismissal
would be governed by S2 R17 and not Si R17. Since
the trial court did not provide in its order that the
second dismissal was with prejudice, then the dismissal
would be without prejudice.
466

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
Q.

When may a plaintiff dismiss a complaint by filing
a motion for dismissal?

A.

After the service upon the plaintiff of the answer or of
a motion for summary judgment. In such a case, the
complaint shall not be dismissed save upon approval
of the court and upon such terms and conditions as
the court deems proper. (82 R17)

Q.

If a complaint is dismissed upon Plaintiff's
motion, what happens to the counterclaim
pleaded by the Defendant?

A.

If the counterclaim was pleaded by the Defendant
after service upon him of the Plaintiff's motion for
dismissa1,99 the dismissal of the complaint shall
likewise result in the dismissal of the counterclaim.
If the counterclaim was pleaded by the
Defendant before service upon him of the Plaintiffs
motion for dismissal, the dismissal shall be limited to
the complaint, that is to say, the dismissal shall be
without prejudice to the Defendant's right to prosecute
his counterclaim in the same or in a separate action.
(S2 R17)
If the Defendant within 15 days from notice of the
Plaintiffs motion for dismissal manifests his preference to
have his counterclaim resolved in the same action,
the court shall resolve the counterclaim even if it
dismisses the Plaintiffs complaint. (Id.). If the
Defendant fails to make such manifestation, he can
prosecute his counterclaim only in a separate action.
(Pinga v. Santiago, 30 June 2006).

99This could happen say for instance, if the defendant files an answer, the
plaintiff files a motion for dismissal, and then the defendant files an amended or
supplemental answer with counterclaims. The grant of the plaintiffs motion for
dismissal will also result in the dismissal of the counterclaims pleaded in the
amended or supplemental answer.

467

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioner filed with the RTC a petition for
declaration of nullity of his marriage to respondent
pursuant to Art. 36 of the Family Code. Respondent
filed her answer with compulsory counterclaim.
However petitioner lost interest in the case and
filed a motion to withdraw his petition. In her
comment/opposition thereto, respondent invoked
$2 R17 and prayed that her counterclaims be
declared as remaining for the court's independent
adjudication. In tun', petitioner filed his reply
averring that respondent's counterclaims are
barred from being prosecuted in the same action
due to her failure to file a manifestation therefor
within 15 days from notice of the motion to
withdraw, which petitioner argued was required
under S2 R17.
The RTC granted petitioner's motion to
withdraw petition. Further, it declared respondent's
counterclaim "as remaining for independent
adjudication" and as such, gave petitioner fifteen
(15) days to file his answer thereto. Did the RTC act
correctly in declaring the respondent's counterclaim
"as remaining for independent adjudication"?

A.

No. As may be clearly inferred from S2 R17, should
the defendant desire to prosecute his counterclaim,
he is required to manifest his preference therefor
within 15 days from notice of the plaintiffs motion to
dismiss. Failing in which, the counterclaim may be
prosecuted only in a separate action.
The rationale behind this rule is not difficult to
discern: the passing of the 15-day period triggers the
finality of the court's dismissal of the complaint and
hence, bars the conduct of further proceedings, i.e.,
the prosecution of respondent's counterclaim, in the
same action. Thus, in order to obviate this finality, the
468

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
defendant is required to file the required manifestation
within the aforesaid period; otherwise, the counterclaim
may be prosecuted only in a separate action. (Blay v.
Balla, 7 March 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

Is a dismissal upon the Plaintiffs motion with
prejudice?

A.

It shall be without prejudice unless otherwise specified
in the order of dismissal. (Id.). Compare this with
dismissal upon Plaintiffs notice.

Q.

What is the special rule on dismissal of actions in
respect of a class suit?

A.

A class suit shall not be dismissed or compromised
without the approval of the court. (Id.) The reason is
for the court to protect the interests of the members of
the class.

SEC. 3. Dismissal due to fault of plaintiff
Q.

Discuss dismissal of complaint due to plaintiffs
fault as provided in S3 R17.

A.

Upon defendant's motion or upon the court's own
motion, a complaint may be dismissed if, for no
justifiable cause, the plaintiff (CAP):
1) Fails to appear on the date of the presentation of
his evidence.
2) Fails to prosecute his action within a reasonable
length of time.
3) Fails to comply with the Rules of Court or any
order of the court.

469

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect of a dismissal under S3 R17?

A.

The dismissal shall have the effect of an adjudication
upon the merits, unless otherwise declared by the
court. (S3 R17).

Q.

Will the dismissal under S3 R17 also result in the
dismissal of the defendant's counterclaims?

A.

No. The dismissal is without prejudice to the right of
the defendant to prosecute his counterclaim in the
same or in a separate action (S3 R17).

Q.

For failure to follow up the service of summons on
the Defendant despite the lapse of a considerable
length of time, the trial court dismissed the
Plaintiff's suit for failure to prosecute.
a) Was the dismissal proper?
b) Assuming it was, may the Plaintiff re-file the
complaint?

A.
a) Yes, while it is the sheriffs duty to serve summons,
the plaintiff should also see to it that the sheriff
complies with his duty. If he neglects to follow up
the matter with the sheriff or the court, the action
may be dismissed for failure to prosecute. (BAC
Mfg. & Sales Corp. v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
101
96784, 2 August 1991).

1°°Unlike in S2 R17, there is no requirement that the defendant make a
manifestation if he wants to prosecute his counterclaims in the same case.
1011t is submitted that this ruling should be deemed superseded by 51 R14
of the 2020 Rules which provides that upon receipt of the initiatory pleading and
proof of payment of the requisite legal fees, the court shall direct the clerk of
court to issue the corresponding summons to the defendants.

470

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
b)

Yes. The dismissal has no res judicata effect
because the court did not acquire jurisdiction over
the Defendant's person. Hence, the trial court had
no competence to dispose of the case on the
merits and to render a binding judgment. (Republic
Planters Bank v. Molina, 166 SCRA 39).

Q.

Plaintiff presented his evidence in chief. During
the date for the presentation of Defendant's
witness, the Plaintiff and his counsel were not
present despite notice. May the Court dismiss the
Plaintiffs complaint for failure to prosecute?

A.

No. The ground for dismissal under S3 R17 is the
plaintiff's failure to appear on the date of the
presentation of his evidence in chief, not his failure to
appear on defendant's turn to present his evidence.
The Court should simply consider the Plaintiff to have
waived his right to object to and/or cross-examine the
witness presented.

Q.

Plaintiff presented two witnesses. On the date
scheduled for the presentation of the third
witness, the Plaintiff and counsel were absent
despite due notice. May the court dismiss the
complaint for failure to prosecute?

A.

No. After all the Plaintiff had already presented two
witnesses. The Court should just order that the
Plaintiff is deemed to have waived further presentation
of evidence and to have rested his case.

Q.

Wanting to unclog his docket and coming across
the records of Special Proceedings No. 501, a
guardianship case involving a minor with properties
worth more than a million pesos, and finding the
said case to have been pending way back in 1981,
after petitioner had presented but only 3 witnesses,
following the appointment of Dizon as guardian,
471

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Judge Jurado of Nueva Ecija Regional Trial Court
dismissed the case for failure to prosecute.
Discuss with reasons the validity of said order of
dismissal. (85 Bar Q18).
A.

The order of dismissal was not valid. The provisions
of 33 R17, which apply to actions, should not be
unqualifiedly applied to special proceedings, especially
a guardianship proceeding over a minor, wherein the
court should observe the "best interests of the minor"
standard. The court should conduct a clarificatory
hearing to determine why the case had been pending
for so long and order the parties to proceed with dispatch.

Q.

X filed an action for reconveyance against Y. Y
forthwith filed his answer and served it on X. A
week later, X filed a motion to withdraw the action
since he could not avail of the services of counsel.
The court dismissed the complaint based on failure
to prosecute. A month after, X instituted the very
same action against Y. Y moved to dismiss the
case invoking res judicata. He alleged that the
dismissal of the first case had the effect of an
adjudication upon the merits since the court's
order had no condition that it was without prejudice.
The court dismissed the subsequent case on the
ground of res judicata. Was the trial court
correct? Explain. (96 Bar Q8.2)

A.

The trial court was not correct in dismissing the
subsequent case on the ground of res judicata.
Dismissal for failure to prosecute under 33 R17
would have the effect of an adjudication upon the
merits only if the failure to prosecute was for an
unreasonable length of time.

472

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
Here there was no failure to prosecute for an
unreasonable length of time because X filed the
motion to withdraw the action just a week after Y had
served the answer on him. The court's characterization
of the dismissal as one "for failure to prosecute" was
erroneous. Hence the court's dismissal should be
considered simply as a dismissal upon plaintiffs
motion under S2 R17 which dismissal is without prejudice,
unless otherwise specified in the order of dismissal.
Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for annulment of rescission of
deed of sale and damages against PNB before the
RTC. Due to plaintiffs failure to appear at a
hearing, the RTC provisionally dismissed the case
without prejudice. After four years, the RTC motu
proprio dismissed the case on the ground of
plaintiffs failure to prosecute in view of his failure
to reinstate or revive the case despite the lapse of
more than four years from the first dismissal. The
plaintiff then filed another action for annulment of
rescission and damages against PNB involving
the same deed of sale subject of the first case.
PNB moved to dismiss on the ground of res
judicata which was granted. On appeal, the CA
reversed stating that the first order of dismissal
dismissing the first case operated to divest the
trial court of jurisdiction over the case; thus, the
second order issued by the trial court four years
later, which purportedly dismissed the first action
with prejudice, is null and void for lack of
jurisdiction. Thus, the CA ruled that there was no
res judicata which would bar the second case for
annulment of rescission. Did the CA correctly rule
that there was no res judicata?

473

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. The concept of a provisional dismissal in our
jurisdiction contemplates the temporary dismissal of
a criminal action that may be revived within the period
set by the Rules of Court upon compliance with
certain requisites. There is nothing in the Rules of
Civil Procedure which provides for a provisional
dismissal of a civil case. Hence, the order of
"provisional dismissal" of the first case is void and did
not operate to divest the RTC of jurisdiction. The trial
court accordingly acted within its jurisdiction in issuing
the second order and in motu proprio dismissing the
case for plaintiffs failure to prosecute under S3 R17.
Such a dismissal is with prejudice and would bar the
second action on the ground of res judicata. (PNB V.
Daradar, 28 June 2021, Hernando, J.).

Q.

Petitioners and Respondents are siblings. Respondents
filed an action for partition against Petitioners.
The action was dismissed for failure to prosecute
per 83 R17. The dismissal became final and
unappealable. Subsequently the Petitioners filed
an action for quieting of title against the
Respondents over the same lot subject of the
partition suit The court denied the action for
quieting of title but granted the Respondents'
counterclaim for partition. The Petitioners contend
that the trial court should not have granted the
counterclaim for partition as the same was barred
by res judicata. Is the counterclaim for partition
barred by res judicata?

A.

No. Dismissal with prejudice under S3 R17 cannot
defeat the right of a co-owner to ask for partition at
any time, provided that there is no actual adjudication
of ownership of shares yet. Between dismissal with
prejudice under S3 R17 and the right granted to coowners under Art. 494 of the Civil Code, the latter
must prevail. To construe otherwise would diminish
474

RULE 17
Dismissal Of Actions
the substantive right of a co-owner through the
promulgation of procedural rules. Such a construction
is not sanctioned by the principle that a substantive
law cannot be amended by a procedural rule. This
finds further support from Art. 496 of the Civil Code
which provides that Iplartition shall be governed by
the Rules of Court insofar as they are consistent with
this Code." (Quintos v. Nicolas, 16 June 2014).
Non-exercise of a right is not a failure to comply with a
court order
Q.

Respondents filed a complaint for declaration of
nullity of titles against Petitioner before the RTC
Manila which was raffled to Branch 6. Petitioner
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction which was granted.
Upon motion the Respondents were given 15 days
to file the appropriate pleading or motion. They
did not do so. Respondents then filed a complaint
for annulment of extrajudicial settlement and titles
with RTC Manila which was raffled to Branch 20.
When Branch 20 was made aware of the first case,
it issued an order transferring the case to Branch
6, considering that the case before it involved
substantially the same parties and causes of
action. In November 2002, before the service of
any responsive pleading upon them, the Respondents
filed a motion to dismiss their complaint in the
second case, praying that it be dismissed without
prejudice. The motion was granted and the case
dismissed without prejudice. Subsequently the
Respondents filed with the RTC Manila a complaint
for annulment of extrajudicial settlement and
titles. All 3 complaints are based on the same
claim. Petitioner filed a motion to dismiss on the

475

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
ground of res judicata invoking the two-dismissal
rule and also 53 R17. The Petitioner argues that
when Respondents failed to file the appropriate
pleading or motion in the first case, they violated
the order of the court thereby making the dismissal
with prejudice pursuant to S3 R17. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

No. In order for the two-dismissal rule to apply, both
dismissals must be at the instance of the plaintiff.
Here the first dismissal was at the instance not of the
plaintiff (Respondents) but of the defendant (Petitioner).
What governs therefore is S2 R17 which provides that
the dismissal shall be without prejudice.
Nor does S3 R17 apply. The trial court dismissed
the first case by granting the motion to dismiss filed
by the defendant. When the trial court allowed
Respondents a period of 15 days to file an
appropriate pleading, it was merely acquiescing to a
request made by the Respondents' counsel that had
no bearing on the dismissal of the case and which
after all was a right of the Respondents. The nonexercise of a right will not amount to a violation of a
court order. (Ching v. Cheng, 8 October 2014).

476

RULE 18. PRE-TRIAL
Q.

When should the pre-trial be conducted?

A.

After the last responsive pleading has been served
and filed, the branch clerk of court shall issue, within
five days from filing, a notice of pre-trial which shall be
set not later than 60 days from the filing of the last
responsive pleading. (Si R18, as amended in the
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure). Note that it is no
longer the duty of the plaintiff to move that the case
be set for pre-trial.

Q.

During the initial pre-trial hearing, both parties
moved that the pre-trial be terminated and that the
case be set for trial. The judge granted the joint
motion. Was the action of the judge proper?

A.

No. Pretrial is mandatory. Of course in case of an
adverse decision against one of the parties, he cannot
move for the setting aside of the judgment since the
termination of the pre-trial was made with his consent.
The judge however may be subjected to disciplinary
action.

Q.

What are the matters that the court shall consider
during the pre-trial?

A.
(a) The possibility of an amicable settlement or of a
submission to alternative modes of dispute resolution;
(b) The simplification of the issues;
(c) The possibility of obtaining stipulations or
admissions of facts and of documents to avoid
unnecessary proof;

477

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(d) The limitation of the number and identification of
witnesses and the setting of trial dates;102
(e) The advisability of a preliminary reference of
issues to a commissioner;
(f) The propriety of rendering judgment on the
pleadings, or summary judgment, or of dismissing
the action should a valid ground therefor be found
to exist;
(g) The requirement for the parties to:
i) Mark their respective evidence if not yet
marked in the judicial affidavits of their witnesses;
ii) Examine and make comparisons of the
adverse parties' evidence vis-a-vis the copies
to be marked;
Hi) Manifest for the record stipulations regarding the
faithfulness of the reproductions and the
genuineness and due execution of the
adverse parties' evidence;
iv) Reserve evidence not available at the pretrial, but only in the following manner:
1) For testimonial evidence, by giving the
name or position and the nature of the
testimony of the proposed witness;
2) For documentary evidence and other
object evidence, by giving a particular
description of the evidence.

luSubject to the rule under 36(b) R7 that only witnesses whose judicial
affidavits are attached to the pleading shall be presented by the parties during
the trial, except if there are meritorious reasons for the admission of additional
witnesses.

478

RULE 18
Pre-Trial
No reservation shall be allowed if not made in
the manner described above.
(h) Such other matters as may aid in the prompt
disposition of the action. (S2 R18, as amended in
the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

May testimonial evidence not available at the pretrial be presented during the trial?

A.

As a rule no since the judicial affidavit should have
been attached to the party's pleading. (S6[b] R7).
However such presentation would be allowed
provided that there are meritorious reasons for the
non-availability and provided that the party intending
to present such evidence has reserved the same
during the pre-trial by giving the name or position and
the nature of the testimony of the proposed witness.
(S2 R18).

Q.

May documentary and object evidence not available
at the pre-trial be presented during the trial?

A.

As a rule no. The failure without just cause of a party
and/or counsel to bring the evidence required shall be
deemed a waiver of the presentation of such
evidence. (S2 R18). However if there is a just cause,
the party may be allowed to do so provided he has
reserved the documentary evidence during the pretrial by giving a particular description of the evidence.
(S2 R18).

Q.

On whom shall the notice of pre-trial be served?

A.

The notice of pre-trial shall be served on counsel, or
on the party who has no counsel. The counsel served
with such notice is charged with the duty of notifying
the party represented by him or her. (S3 R18).

479

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What shall the notice of pre-trial include?

A.

The notice of pre-trial shall include the dates respectively
set for:
(a) Pre-Trial;
(b) Court-Annexed Mediation; and
(c) Judicial Dispute Resolution, if necessary.
Non-appearance at any of the foregoing settings
shall be deemed non-compliance at the Pre-Trial and
shall merit the same sanctions under S5 R18.

Q.

Is it the duty of the parties and their counsel to
appear at the pre-trial?

A.

Yes. It shall be the duty of the parties and their
counsel to appear at the pre-trial, court-annexed
mediation, and judicial dispute resolution, if necessary. The non-appearance of a party and counsel
may be excused only for acts of God, force majeure,
or duly substantiated physical inability. (S3 R18, as
amended in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
A representative may appear on behalf of a
party, but he shall be fully authorized in writing to:
1) Enter into an amicable settlement;
2) Submit to alternative modes of dispute resolution; and
3)

Enter into stipulations or admissions of facts and
of documents. (Id.)

Q.

What are the requirements for the validity of the
authorization?

A.

1) It must be in writing.

480

RULE 18
Pre-Trial
2) It must be a special power of attorney. (Art. 1878[c],
Civil Code). There is no express requirement that the
same be notarized but in practice the courts
require that the SPA be notarized.
3) In the case of a corporation, there must be a board
resolution specifically authorizing the representative
to enter into the matters stated in 34 R18.
Q.

What is the effect of the failure of a party and
counsel to appear at the pre-trial, court-annexed
mediation, or judicial dispute resolution, if necessary?

A.

When duly notified, the failure of the plaintiff and
counsel' to appear without valid cause when so required,
pursuant to 34 R18, shall cause the dismissal of the
action. The dismissal shall be with prejudice, unless
otherwise ordered by the court. A similar failure on the
part of the defendant and counsel shall be cause to
allow the plaintiff to present his evidence ex-parte within
ten days from termination of pre-trial, and the court to
render judgment on the basis of the evidence offered.
The failure without just cause of a party and
counsel to appear during pre-trial, despite notice,
shall result in a waiver of any objections to the
faithfulness of the reproductions marked, or their
genuineness and due execution 1°4

103There is some ambiguity in the phrase the failure of the plaintiff and
counsel to appear ... shall cause the dismissal of the action." Does it mean that
the failure of either the plaintiff and counsel to appear shall cause the dismissal
of the action? Or does it mean the failure of both the plaintiff and counsel to
appear shall cause the dismissal of the action? It is submitted that the latter
meaning is the proper one. It would be harsh to dismiss the case where the
plaintiff was present but his counsel was not around. A show-cause order to the
absent counsel is appropriate and proper. (See Paredes V. Verano, 12 October
2006). A similar interpretation applies to the failure of the defendant's counsel to
appear. However if only the counsel is present, the punitive sanctions shall apply
if the counsel was not armed with the authorization under 84 R18.
104The situation covered by this paragraph is where the party and counsel
fail without just cause to appear during pre-trial but the court does not choose to
impose the penalty of dismissal or ex parte presentation of evidence.

481

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

During the pretrial, plaintiff and his counsel were
present. On the other hand while the defendant
was present his counsel was absent. The court
issued an order allowing the plaintiff to present
his evidence ex parte. Was the action of the court
proper?

A.

No. The absence of counsel for defendants at pre-trial
does not ipso facto authorize the judge to declare the
defendant as in default and order the presentation of
evidence ex parte. It bears stressing that nothing in
the Rules of Court sanctions the presentation of
evidence ex parte upon instances when counsel for
the defendant is absent during pre-trial. A show-cause
order to the absent counsel would have been the
more cautious and reasonable course of action under
the circumstances. (Paredes v. Verano, G.R. No.
164375, 12 October 2006).

Q.

The plaintiff failed to appear at the pre-trial. May
the court aside from dismissing the case allow the
defendant to present evidence ex parte on his
counterclaim?

A.

Yes. If the plaintiff fails to appear at the pre-trial, the
court may upon motion dismiss the complaint and
allow the defendant to present evidence ex parte on
his counterclaim. (See Absolute Management Corp. v.
Metro Bank, 23 July 2014) The provision of S3 R17
may be applied by analogy to supplement 35 R18.

Q.

What is a pre-trial brief? What shall it contain?

A.

A pre-trial brief is a brief required to be filed by the
parties before the pre-trial and containing, among others:
The parties shall file with the court and serve on
the adverse party, in such manner as shall ensure
their receipt thereof at least three (3) calendar days
482

RULE 18
Pre-Trial
before the date of the pre-trial, their respective pretrial briefs which shall contain, among others:
(a) A concise statement of the case and the reliefs
prayed for;
(b) A summary of admitted facts and proposed
stipulation of facts;

(c) The main factual and legal issues to be tried or
resolved;

(d) The propriety of referral of factual issues to
commissioners;
(e) The documents or other object evidence to be
marked, stating the purpose thereof;
(f) The names of the witnesses, and the summary of
their respective testimonies; and

(g) Brief statement of points of law and citation of
authorities.

Q.

How is a pre-trial brief filed and served?

A.

It should be filed with the court and served on the
adverse party, in such manner as shall ensure their
receipt thereof at least 3 days before the date of the
pre-trial. (S6 R18).

Q.

What is the effect of the failure to file the pre-trial
brief?

A.

It shall have the same effect as failure to appear at
the pre-trial. (Id.).

Q.

What is a pre-trial order? What is its function?

A

A pre-trial order is the order issued by the court
within ten days from the termination of the pre-trial
which shall recite in detail the matters taken up. The
order shall include:
483

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(a) An enumeration of the admitted facts;
(b) The minutes of the pre-trial conference;
(c) The legal and factual issue/s to be tried;
(d) The applicable law, rules, and jurisprudence;
(e) The evidence marked;
(f) The specific trial dates for continuous trial, which
shall be within the period provided by the Rules;
(g) The case flowchart to be determined by the court,
which shall contain the different stages of the
proceedings up to the promulgation of the
decision and the use of time frames for each
stage in setting the trial dates;
(h) A statement that the one-day examination of
witness rule and most important witness rule
under A.M. No. 03-1-09-SC (Guidelines for PreTrial) shall be strictly followed; and

(I) A statement that the court shall render judgment
on the pleadings or summary judgment, as the
case may be.

The direct testimony of witnesses for the plaintiff
shall be in the form of judicial affidavits. After the
identification of such affidavits, cross-examination
shall proceed immediately.
Postponement of presentation of the parties'
witnesses at a scheduled date is prohibited, except if
it is based on acts of God, force majeure or duly
substantiated physical inability of the witness to
appear and testify. The party who caused the
postponement is warned that the presentation of its
evidence must still be terminated within the remaining
dates previously agreed upon.
484

RULE 18
Pre-Trial
Should the opposing party fail to appear without
valid cause stated in the next preceding paragraph,
the presentation of the scheduled witness will proceed
with the absent party being deemed to have waived
the right to interpose objection and conduct crossexamination.
The contents of the pre-trial order shall control
the subsequent proceedings, unless modified before
trial to prevent manifest injustice. (37 R18 as amended
in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).
Q.

When shall court-annexed mediation be conducted?

A.

After pre-trial and, after issues are joined, the court
shall refer the parties for mandatory court-annexed
mediation.
The period for court-annexed mediation shall not
exceed 30 days without further extension. (39 R18,
as added in the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

When shall judicial dispute resolution be conducted?

A.

Only if the judge of the court to which the case was
originally raffled is convinced that settlement is still
possible, the case may be referred to another court
for judicial dispute resolution. The judicial dispute
resolution shall be conducted within a non-extendible
period of 15 days from notice of failure of the courtannexed mediation.
If judicial dispute resolution fails, trial before the
original court shall proceed on the dates agreed upon.
(S9 R18, as added in the 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure).

485

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Are proceedings during the court-annexed mediation
and the judicial dispute resolution confidential?

A.

Yes. (S9 R18).

Q.

May a court motu proprio submit the case for
summary judgment or judgment on the pleadings
in its pre-trial order?

A.

Yes. Should there be no more controverted facts, or no
more genuine issue as to any material fact, or an
absence of any issue, or should the answer fail to
tender an issue, the court shall, without prejudice to a
party moving for judgment on the pleadings under R34
or summary judgment under R35, motu proprio include
in the pre-trial order that the case be submitted for
summary judgment or judgment on the pleadings,
without need of position papers or memoranda. In
such cases, judgment shall be rendered within ninety
90 days from termination of the pre-trial.
The order of the court to submit the case for
judgment pursuant to this Rule shall not be subject to
appeal or certiorari. (510 R18, as added in the 2020
Rule of Civil Procedure).105

105This paragraph refers only to the order of the court to submit the case
for judgment, not the summary judgment or judgment on the pleadings itself
which is appealable to the first paragraph of S1 R41.

486

RULE 19. INTERVENTION
Q.

Define intervention.

A.

It is a proceeding in a suit by which a third person with
a legal interest therein is allowed, with leave of court,
to make himself a party thereto.

Q.

P filed an action for recovery of possession of a
parcel of land located in Cavite against D and E.
The action was filed in the RTC of Las Pinas City
where P resides. D and E filed their answers in
which they alleged that the action had already
prescribed. Subsequently the court granted X's
motion for leave to intervene on his allegation that
the land had been sold to him by D and E. X then
filed an answer wherein he raised the affirmative
defense of improper venue. Should the court dismiss
the action on the ground of improper venue?

A.

No. D and E had waived the ground of improper
venue when they did not raise the same in their
answer. The court having legally acquired authority to
hear and decide the case, it cannot be divested of
that authority by the intervenors. An intervention
cannot legally alter the nature of the action and the
issues joined by the original parties. (See Claridades
v. Mercader, 17 SCRA 1 [1966]).

Q.

Who may intervene in an action?

A.
1) A person who has a legal interest in the matter in
litigation or in the success of either of the parties,
or an interest against both parties.

487

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2)

A person who is so situated as to be adversely
affected by a distribution or other disposition of
the property in the custody of the court or of an
officer thereof.

Leave of court is necessary in order that the third
person may be allowed to intervene in the action.
Note that in actions for annulment or declaration
of nullity of marriage or for legal separation where the
defending party fails to answer, the court shall order
the prosecuting attorney to investigate whether or not
a collusion between the parties exists, and if there is
no collusion, to intervene for the State in order to see
to it that that evidence submitted is not fabricated or
suppressed. (S3[e] R9; Articles 48 and 60, Family Code).
Q.

Illustrate the foregoing cases:

A.
1)

Legal interest in the matter in litigation. In an
action involving the estate of a decedent, the
heirs may intervene when they believe that the
administrator's actions are prejudicial to their
interests. In the probate proceedings involving the
settlement of the executor's or administrator's
accounts, a person liable as surety on such
account may, upon application, be admitted as
party to such accounting. (S11 R85). In a
guardianship proceeding, the social worker may
intervene on behalf of the minor if he finds that
the petition should be denied. (S9 SC Rule on
Guardianship over Minors).

2) Legal interest in the success of either party. In a
suit by the creditor against the surety, the
principal debtor may intervene and unite with the
defendant to resist the claim of the plaintiff creditor.
488

RULE 19
Intervention

Q.

3)

Legal interest against both parties. In a suit for
recovery of possession of land by P against D, 0
who claims to be the real owner of the subject
land may intervene.

4)

A person who is so situated as to be adversely
affected by a distribution or other disposition of
the property in custody of the court or of an officer
thereof. P files an action to recover a sum of
money from D who had issued a bouncing check.
P is able to attach what appears to be D's
property. X who is the real owner of the property
attached may intervene in the suit to set aside the
writ of attachment. (See S14 R57).

Give other examples of intervention.

A.
1) If the defending party in an action for annulment or
declaration of nullity of marriage or for legal
separation fails to answer, the court shall order
the prosecuting attorney to investigate whether or
not a collusion between the parties exists, and if
there is no collusion, to intervene for the State in
order to see to it that the evidence submitted is
not fabricated. (53[e] R9).
2)

Where the civil action for recovery of civil liability
is instituted in the criminal action pursuant to Rule
111, the offended party may intervene by counsel
in the prosecution of the offense. (S16 R110).

3) In a class suit, any party in interest shall have the
right to intervene to protect his individual interest.
(S12 R3).

489

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the procedure if a third person wants to
intervene in a suit?

A.

He shall file a motion for leave of court to intervene at
any time before rendition of judgment by the trial
court. A copy of the pleading-in-intervention shall be
attached to the motion and served on the original
parties. (S2 R19).
Note that a motion for intervention is a litigious
motion. (S5[ix] R15).

Q.

May intervention be allowed after rendition of
judgment?

A.

No, since intervention may be allowed only before
rendition of judgment. The exception would be the
intervention of an indispensable party. (PacanaContreras v. Roy/la Water Supply, Inc., G.R. No.
168979, 2 December 2013).

Q.

Respondent was found guilty of grave misconduct
by the Ombudsman and meted the penalty of
dismissal. Respondent appealed the Ombudsman's
decision to the Court of Appeals by a petition for
review under R43. The CA granted the petition,
and accordingly, modified the Ombudsman's
decision, finding Bongais guilty of simple neglect
of duty only and imposing on him the penalty of
suspension for six months. Dissatisfied with the
CA decision, the Ombudsman filed a motion for
leave to intervene, which the CA denied on the
ground that the Ombudsman has no legal interest
in the case. Was the denial proper?

A.

Yes, but not on the ground of lack of legal interest but
for having been filed out of time.

490

RULE 19
Intervention
The Ombudsman has legal standing to intervene
on appeal in administrative cases resolved by it.
Even if not impleaded as a party in the proceedings,
the Ombudsman has legal interest to intervene and
defend its ruling in administrative cases before the
CA, its interest proceeding, as it is, from its duty to act
as a champion of the people and to preserve the
integrity of the public service.
However the motion for leave to intervene was
filed out of time since it was filed after rendition of
judgment in contravention of S2 R19. (Ombudsman v.
Bongais, 23 July 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)
Q.

May a third party whose property has been levied
upon pursuant to a final and executory judgment
move to intervene in the case?

A.

No. A motion to intervene may not be filed after a
judgment had been rendered by the trial court. The
third party may file a third-party claim.

Q.

May the stockholders of a corporation intervene in
a litigation involving the corporation's property?

A.

No. Absent a showing that the corporation has been
dissolved and is in the process of liquidation, its
stockholders have no personality or interest to
intervene in a litigation involving corporate property.
(PNB v. Aznar, G.R. 171805, 30 May 2011).

Q.

May a lawyer intervene in a case in order to protect
his rights under a contingent fee agreement?

A.

Yes. The lawyer has a right to protect his interests
pursuant to S26 R138. (Malvar v. Kraft Foods Phi/s.
Inc., 9 September 2013, Bersamin, J.). In this case,
a client, after entering into a compromise with the
adverse party, filed a motion to withdraw its case and
terminated the services of the law firm.
491

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Ruben and Nene, Filipino citizens, were married in
Manila in 1968. The marriage encountered problems
and the two decided to obtain a divorce in the
Dominican Republic in 1984. The next month,
Ruben and Maria contracted marriage in Virginia,
United States. The union of Ruben and Maria
produced one offspring. Ruben subsequently filed
a petition for declaration of nullity of his marriage
to Nene with the RTC of Quezon City in 2001.
Maria filed a motion for leave to intervene in
the marriage nullity case citing her long marriage
to Ruben. May the RTC grant leave to Maria
to intervene?

A.

No. Maria has no interest in the marriage nullity case
since she is not the legal wife of Ruben. Under the
Civil Code, a divorce obtained abroad by Filipino
citizens is not recognized. Hence Nene was still the
legal wife of Ruben and thus Maria did not acquire the
legal interest of a wife upon which her motion for
leave to intervene was based. (Perez v. Court of
Appeals, 480 SCRA 411 [2006]).

Q.

What are the pleadings to be filed by the intervenor
in relation to his intervention?

A.

A complaint-in-intervention if the intervenor asserts a
claim against either or all of the original parties, or an
answer-in-intervention if he unites with the defending
party in resisting a claim against the latter.

Q.

Is the allowance of intervention compulsory with
the court?

A.

No, the allowance is discretionary, that is why leave of
court should be sought. In exercising its discretion,
the court shall consider whether or not the intervention
will unduly delay or prejudice the adjudication of the

492

RULE 19
Intervention
rights of the original parties, and whether or not the
intervenor's rights may be fully protected in a
separate proceeding.
However, where the intervenor is an indispensable
party, the court must allow the intervention. (Peyer v.
Martinez, 88 Phil. 72).
It is submitted also that under 512 R3, 53(e) R9,
and 816 R110, the court must allow the intervention
of the party-in-interest, the State, and the offended
party, respectively.
Q.

P filed an action for unlawful detainer against D in
order to recover possession of a parcel of land. X
filed a motion to intervene on the ground that D
had assigned the leasehold rights to him and
that hence he has a right to the possession of
the land. Should the court grant the motion
to intervene?

A.

No. Intervention is a prohibited pleading under S13 R70.

Q.

When should an answer to a complaint-inintervention be filed?

A.

Within 15 days from notice of the order admitting the
complaint-in-intervention, unless a different period is
fixed by the court. (S4 R19).1°6

Q.

If an original party fails to file an answer to the
complaint-in-intervention, can he be declared in
default with respect to such complaint?

A.

Yes. Under the 1997 Rules, the filing of an answer to
the complaint in intervention is no longer optional but
mandatory. S4 R19 states that "[t]he answer to the

welt appears that a shorter period may be fixed. In Lim v. NAPOCOR,
G.R. No. 178789, 14 November 2012, a 10-day period was fixed by the trial court
and the default order arising therefrom was upheld by the Supreme Court.

493

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
complaint-in-intervention shall be filed within 15 days
from notice of the order admitting the same, unless a
different period is fixed by the court." (Lim v. National
Power Corporation, 685 SCRA 477, 480 [2012]).
Q.

Is an order denying a motion for leave to
intervene appealable? If so what is the period for
appealing the order?

A.

Yes, an order denying a motion for leave to intervene
may be appealed. The appeal period would be 30
days from notice of the order, taken by filing a notice
of appeal and a record on appeal. This is because the
appeal from the order denying intervention is a
separate appeal. However, if at the time it denied the
motion for leave, the court had already rendered judgment
and has thus disposed of the case, the appeal period
would be 15 days taken by filing a notice of appeal
alone. (See Foster-Gallego v. Spouses Galang, G.R.
No. 130228, 27 July 2004).

Q.

Quezon Power Ltd. filed with the Regional Trial
Court of Mauban, Quezon, an action for consignation
and damages against the Province of Quezon for
its refusal to accept payment of realty taxes.
Petitioner filed a motion for intervention alleging
that as a resident and taxpayer of Quezon, he has
an interest in the aggressive collection of realty
taxes. The RTC dismissed the action for lack of
jurisdiction stating that it is the Local Board of
Assessment Appeals which has jurisdiction over
the complaint The RTC also dismissed Petitioners
motion for intervention. The issue is whether or
not the RTC erred in dismissing Petitioner's
motion for intervention as a consequence of the
dismissal of the main case. While acknowledging
the RTC's lack of jurisdiction, Petitioner nonetheless

494

RULE 19
Intervention
prayed that the Court pass upon the correctness
of the Municipal Assessor's assessment of QPL's
realty taxes, among others. Did the RTC err in
dismissing Petitioner's motion for intervention?
A.

No. Jurisdiction over an intervention is governed by
jurisdiction over the main action. Accordingly, an
intervention presupposes the pendency of a suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Here, Petitioner did not contest the RTC's
dismissal for lack of jurisdiction, but oddly maintains
his intervention by asking in this appeal a review of
the correctness of the subject realty tax assessment.
This recourse is improper since the RTC's lack of
jurisdiction over the main case necessarily resulted in
the dismissal of his intervention. In other words, the
cessation of the principal litigation - on jurisdictional
grounds at that - means that Petitioner had, as a
matter of course, lost his right to intervene. Verily, it
must be borne in mind that: [I]ntervention is never an
independent action, but is ancillary and supplemental
to the existing litigation. Otherwise stated, the right of
an intervenor should only be in aid of the right of the
original party. Where the right of the latter has ceased
to exist, there is nothing to aid or fight for; hence, the
right of intervention ceases. (Pulgar v. RTC of
Mauban, Quezon, 10 September 2014).

Q.

Peter filed an action for recovery of a parcel of
land against David. David filed his answer. Before
trial, Ian filed a motion for leave to intervene to
which he attached a complaint-in-intervention
against Peter and David, alleging that he was the
true owner of the land, and serving a copy of the
motion and complaint against Peter and David.
The court issued an order granting Ian's motion
for leave to intervene and admitting his complaintin-intervention.
495

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) Within what period should Peter and David
answer the complaint-in-intervention?
b) May Peter and David be declared in default
upon motion of Ian if they fail to timely answer
the complaint-in-intervention?
c) Assume that Ian was unable to file a motion
for intervention because he did not learn
about the case. Subsequently a judgment was
rendered in favor of Peter, which judgment
became final and executory. It was at that
point that Ian learned about the judgment. If
you were the lawyer for Ian, what recourse, if
any, would you take in his behalf?
A.
a)

Peter and David should answer the complaint-inintervention within 15 days from notice of the
order admitting the complaint-in-intervention pursuant
to the Rules of Civil Procedure.

b) Yes, Peter and David may be declared in default
upon motion of Ian if they fail to timely answer the
complaint-in-intervention.
The Supreme Court has held that an original
party which does not timely file an answer to a
complaint-in-intervention may be declared in default in
respect of the same, since the filing of such an answer
is mandatory under the 1997 and 2010 Rules of Civil
Procedure. (Lim v. NAPOCOR, 14 November 2012).
c)

If I were the lawyer for Ian, the recourse I would
take in his behalf is to file an action for annulment
of the judgment under R47.

496

RULE 19
Intervention
The Supreme Court has held that a judgment
rendered without impleading an indispensable party is
void. A void judgment may be annulled at any time by
filing an action for annulment of judgment under R47.
Here Ian alleges that he is the true owner of the
land. Ian was not impleaded in the suit for recovery of
the land filed by Peter against David.
Hence Ian is an indispensable party since his
interest as owner would be directly affected by the
judgment in the case. Thus the judgment is void since
Ian was not impleaded and hence it may be annulled
at any time by an action for annulment of judgment.

497

RULE 20. CALENDAR OF CASES
Q.

The presiding judge of a multi-sala court designed
a system of assigning cases wherein he would
personally assign the cases in order to assure an
equal case distribution among the branches. Is
this proper?

A.

No such a system would not be proper.
Under S2 R20, the assignment of cases to the
different branches shall be done exclusively by raffle.
(Note: This is different from the 1964 Rules
which provided that the assignment of cases may be
"by raffle or otherwise." [S7 R22]).

Q.

What would be an exception regarding the rule on
assignment of cases by raffle?

A.

Cases falling within the jurisdiction of the special
commercial court or family court would be assigned to
these courts without need of raffle, unless two or
more branches have been designated as special
courts, in which case it shall be raffled only among
them. This is called a limited raffle as opposed to a
general raffle.

498

RULE 21. SUBPOENA
Q. What is a subpoena?
A.

Subpoena is a process directed to a person requiring
him to attend and to testify at the hearing or the trial of
an action, or at any investigation conducted by
competent authority, or for the taking of his deposition. In
this case it is called a subpoena ad testificandum.
The subpoena may also require the person to bring
with him any books, documents, or other things under
his control, in which case it is called a subpoena
duces tecum.

Q.

Who may issue subpoena?

A.

The subpoena may be issued by:
a) The court before which the witness is required to
attend.
b) The court of the place where the deposition is to
be taken.
c) The officer or body authorized by law to do so in
connection with investigations conducted by said
officer or body.
d) Any Justice of the Supreme Court or of the Court
of Appeals in any case or investigation pending
within the Philippines.

Q.

Give examples of an officer or body authorized by
law to issue subpoenas in connection with
investigations conducted by said officer or body.

A.
1) An investigating prosecutor for purposes of
preliminary investigation. (S3[a] R112).
499

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) Commissioner. (53 R32).
3) The NBI has the power to issue subpoena for the
appearance of any person for investigation or
production of documents, through its officers from
the ranks of Regional Director to Director. (Sec.
4[b], R.A. 10867).
Q.

What are the rules when application for a subpoena
to a prisoner is made?

A.

When application for a subpoena to a prisoner is
made, the judge or officer shall examine and study
carefully such application to determine whether the
same is made for a valid purpose.
No prisoner sentenced to death, reclusion petpetua
or life imprisonment and who is confined in any penal
institution shall be brought outside the said penal
institution for appearance or attendance in any court
unless authorized by the Supreme Court. (32 R21).
A detention prisoner is not compelled to attend
under a subpoena if no permission of the court in
which his case is pending was obtained. (310 R21)

Q.

Give the form and contents of a subpoena.

A.

A subpoena shall state the name of the court and the
title of the action or investigation, shall be directed to
the person whose attendance is required, and in the
case of a subpoena duces tecum, it shall also contain
a reasonable description of the books, documents or
things demanded which must appear to the court
prima fade relevant.

500

RULE 21
Subpoena
Q.

What are the grounds for quashing a subpoena
duces tecum?

A.

The court may quash a subpoena duces tecum upon
motion promptly made and, in any event, at or before
the time specified therein if:
1) It is unreasonable and oppressive,
2) The relevancy of the books, documents or things
does not appear,
3)

The person in whose behalf the subpoena is
issued fails to advance the reasonable cost of the
production thereof, or

4) The witness fees and kilometrage allowed by the
Rules of Court were not tendered when the
subpoena was served.
Q.

What is the ground for quashing a subpoena ad
testificandum?

A.
1) The court may quash a subpoena ad testificandum
on the ground that the witness is not bound
thereby. Under 510 R21 a witness is not
compelled to attend by virtue of the service of a
subpoena if he resides more than 100 kilometers
from the place where he is to testify by the
ordinary course of travel.
2) The witness fees and kilometrage allowed by the
Rules of Court were not tendered when the
subpoena was served.
Q.

How is a subpoena served?

A.

Service of a subpoena shall be made in the same
manner as personal or substituted service of summons.
501

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The original shall be exhibited and a copy thereof
delivered to the person on whom it is served. The
service must be made so as to allow the witness a
reasonable time for preparation and travel to the
place of attendance.
Costs for court attendance and the production of
documents and other materials subject of the
subpoena shall be tendered or charged accordingly.
(S6 R21 as amended in the 2020 Rules).
Note that a person present in court before a
judicial officer may be required to testify as if he were
in attendance upon a subpoena issued by such court
or officer. (S7 R21).
Q.

May a subpoena be served by registered mail or
by electronic means?

A.

S14 R13 provides that "the following orders,
pleadings, and other documents must be served or
filed personally or by registered mail when allowed,
and shall not be served or filed electronically, unless
express permission is granted by the Court." One of
the documents mentioned is a subpoena. S14(b) R13
thus gives the impression that a subpoena may be
served by registered mail or by electronic means if
express permission is granted by the court.
S14(b) R13 should however be read in conjunction
with S6 R21 which provides that service of a
subpoena shall be made in the same manner as
personal or substituted service of summons and that
costs for court attendance and the production of
documents and other materials subject of the
subpoena shall be tendered or charged accordingly.

502

RULE 21
Subpoena
Perusing the two provisions, it appears that a
subpoena cannot be served by registered mail or by
electronic means. Service by registered mail is
qualified by the phrase "when allowed" and from a
reading of 86 R21 such is not allowed in the case of a
subpoena. Moreover it is difficult to conceive how the
costs for court attendance and production of documents
and materials may be tendered or charged in case of
service by registered mail or by electronic means.
In case of failure to serve personally a subpoena,
service may be made by emailing it to the defendant's
email address, if allowed by the court, but this is really
subsumed under substituted service under 86(e) R14.
Q.

How may the court compel the attendance of a
witness?

A.

In case of failure of a witness to attend, the court or
judge issuing the subpoena, upon proof of the service
thereof and of the failure of the witness, may issue a
warrant to the sheriff of the province, or his deputy, to
arrest the witness and bring him before the court or
officer where his attendance is required. (88 R21).
This is also known as a bench warrant (STEVEN
GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 21 [1975]). The court also
has the power to punish for indirect contempt any
person who fails to obey without adequate cause a
subpoena served upon him. (S9 R21, 53[f] R71).

Q.

What is the viatory right of a witness?

A.

It is the right of a witness not to be compelled to
attend in court under a subpoena if the witness
resides more than 100 kilometers from his residence
to the place where he is to testify by the ordinary
course of travel. (810 R21; 1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 300
[7th rev. ed., 3'd printing, 1999]).
503

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the remedy of a party in case he wants to
present in evidence the testimony of a reluctant
witness who resides more than 100 kilometers
from his residence to the place where he is to
testify by the ordinary course of travel?

A.

The remedy of the party is to take the deposition of
the witness. He should serve to every other party to
the action a notice to take the deposition of the
witness pursuant to S15 or 325 R23.
Under S4(c) R23, the deposition of a witness,
whether or not a party, may be used by any party for
any purpose if the court finds that the witness resides
at a distance more than 100 kilometers from the place
of trial or hearing.
Proof of service of a notice to take a deposition,
as provided in 315 and 25 of R23, shall constitute
sufficient authorization for the issuance of a subpoena
for the persons named in said notice by the clerk of
court of the place in which the deposition is to be
taken. The clerk shall not, however, issue a subpoena
duces tecum to any person without an order of the
court. (S2[b] & 35 R21).

Q.

Is the viatory right available in criminal cases?

A.

No. (People v. Montejo, G.R. L-24154, 31 October 1967).

504

RULE 21
Subpoena
Q.

May the viatory right be invoked against a
subpoena duces tecum?

A.

It is submitted that the viatory right may not be
invoked against a subpoena duces tecum. S10 of
R21 speaks of a witness who resides more than one
hundred kilometers from his residence to the place
where he is to testify, evidently referring to a
subpoena ad testificandum. The first paragraph of 34
R21 which provides for the grounds of quashing a
subpoena duces tecum does not mention the viatory
right unlike the second paragraph which provides for
the grounds of quashing a subpoena ad testificandum.

505

RULE 22. COMPUTATION OF TIME
Q.

How is any period of time prescribed and allowed
by the Rules of Court, or by order of the court, or
by any applicable statute computed?

A.

The day of the act or event from which the designated
period of time begins to run is to be excluded and the
date of performance included. lithe last day of the
period, as thus computed, falls on a Saturday, a
Sunday, or a legal holiday in the place where the
court sits, the time shall not run until the next working
day. (Si R22).
Thus if a defendant is served with summons on
July 1, he has until July 31 (July 1 + 30 = July 31)
within which to file his answer. If the defendant receives
a copy of the adverse decision on October 1, he has
until October 16 within which to file a notice of appeal.

Q.

In a habeas corpus case, the respondent Director
of the Bureau of Corrections received a copy of
the RTC's decision on October 1 at 10:00 am. Up
to when may the Director appeal the decision?

A.

Up to 3 October, even if beyond 10:00 am. Under Si
R22, in computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by the Rules of Court or by order of court, or
by any applicable statute, the day of the act or event
from which the designated period of time begins to
run is to be excluded and the date of performance
included. Hence the 48-hour period starts to run on 2
October. (See Kabigting v. Director of Prisons, G.R.
No. L-15548, 30 October 1962; 1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 303
[4111 rev. ed., 2 nd printing]).

506

RULE 22
Computation Of Time
Q.

The MCTC declared the spouses Leynes in default
for their failure to file their answer to the spouses
Superales' Complaint within the reglementary
period for doing so. According to the MCTC, the
spouses Leynes only had until 20 May 2000 to file
an answer; and although 20 May 2000 was a
Saturday, the court was open and court personnel
Benedicta and Anastacia were present at that time
to receive cases and motions filed with the court
in accordance with S.C. Administrative Circular
No. 2-99. The spouses Leynes contended that
they had until 22 May 2000, the next working day,
to file their answer. Was the MCTC correct?

A.

No. Administrative Circular No. 2-99 should not affect
the manner by which periods set by the rules or the
courts are computed under Rule 22, Section 1 of the
Rules of Court. Administrative Circular No. 2-99 is an
administrative issuance signed by then Chief Justice
Hilario G. Davide to govern the attendance of judiciary
officials and employees. It cannot amend or take
precedence over the Rules of Court, duly approved by
the Court en banc and published for the information of
and compliance by the public. In fact, Administrative
Circular No. 2-99 itself states that it supersedes and
modifies accordingly any previous Orders or Circulars
on the matter," but not the Rules of Court. (Leynes v.
Court of Appeals, 19 January 2011).

Q.

What is the effect of interruption on the period
of time?

A.

Should an act be done which effectively interrupts the
running of the period, the allowable period after such
interruption shall start to run on the day after notice of
the cessation of the cause thereof The day of the act
that caused the interruption shall be excluded in the

507

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
computation of the period. (52 R22). In other words,
the day of the act that caused the interruption is not
deemed to have been used by the movant and thus
forms part of the remaining period counted from
notice of denial thereof. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1997
RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 73 [1997]).
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for sum of money before
the RTC against the Defendant Summons and a
copy of the complaint was served upon the Defendant
on July 1. On July 25, the Defendant filed a motion
to dismiss and he received the order denying the
motion to dismiss on August 1. What is the last
day for the Defendant to file his answer?

A.

August 8. On July 25, the Defendant had six days left
to file his answer on July 31. When he filed his
motion to dismiss on July 25, that day is excluded
from the computation and thus forms part of the
remaining period. The day of the act causing the
interruption (July 25) is excluded from the computation,
that is, defendant is not deemed to have consumed
the same.107 Hence the Defendant had all in all seven
days from August 1 or until August 8 to file his answer.

l'see De las Alas v. Court of Appeals, 83 SCRA 200 (1978); JOSE Y.
1 FLORENZ D.
FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 73-74 (1997);
th
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 193-194 (7 rev. ed.). 52 R22
adopts the method of computation used in Lloren V. De Veyra, 4 SCRA 637
(1962), and in De las Alas while abandoning that used in Federal Films, Inc. V.
David, 78 Phil, 472.
508

RULE 22
Computation Of Time
Q.

P lent P500,000 to D payable on 23 June 1994
without need of notice or demand. The last day of
the 10-year prescriptive period fell on 19 June
2004 which is a Saturday. If P files his complaint
on 21 June 2004, may his complaint be dismissed
on the ground of prescription?

A.

Yes. The rule on pretermission of holidays under R22
while applicable to reglementary periods is not
applicable to prescriptive periods set under the Civil
Code, Revised Penal Code, or other applicable statutes.
P should have filed his complaint at the latest on 18
June 2004. The action to enforce a written contract
under Article 1144 of the Civil Code prescribes in 10
years from the accrual of the right of action. (See
Yapdiangco v. Buencamino, 122 SCRA 713).

509

DISCOVERY (RULES 23-29)
Q.

What is discovery?

A.

The modern pre-trial procedure by which one party
gains vital information concerning the case in order to
aid him in his litigation. (STEVEN GIFIS, LAW
DICTIONARY 61 [1975]).

Q.

What is the primary purpose of discovery?

A.

The primary purpose of discovery is to enable the
parties to obtain the fullest possible knowledge of the
issues and facts before trial and thus prevent the
situation where trials are carried on in the dark. It
makes the parties lay down their cards on the table so
that justice can be rendered on the merits of the case.
(Koh v. Intermediate Appellate Court, 144 SCRA 259).

Q.

May one validly object to discovery on the ground
that it is a "fishing expedition"?

A.

No. Precisely the purpose of discovery is to enable a
party to obtain relevant facts from the other party in
advance of trial so as to facilitate settlement or to
expedite the trial. (Ong v. Mazo, 4 June 2004).
Discovery is in effect a legally sanctioned "fishing
expedition" designed to unveil probative facts and
evidence. (THOMAS A. MAUET, FUNDAMENTALS
OF PRETRIAL TECHNIQUES 158 [1988]).

Q.

What are the three principal characteristics of
discovery?

A.

First it is largely a self-executing process. For the
most part, lawyers conduct discovery without judicial
approval, participation, or regulation.

510

Rules 23-29
Discovery
Second, the discovery rules are flexible and
permit any order, and repeated use, of the various
discovery methods subject only to court protection
against abuse.
Third, orders regulating discovery are usually not
final appealable orders. Since discovery issues will
often be moot by the time a final judgment is entered
in the case, appeals are relatively infrequent. This
means that issues concerning discovery are principally
resolved at the trial court level. (THOMAS A. MAUET,
FUNDAMENTALS OF PRETRIAL TECHNIQUES
157 [1988]).
Q.

What are the modes or methods of discovery
provided for by the Rules of Court? (PRIDE)

A.
1) Depositions pending action (R23) or before action
or pending appeal. (R24).
2) Interrogatories to parties. (R25).
3) Request for admission by adverse party. (R26).
4) Motion for production or inspection of documents
or things. (R27).
5) Motion for physical or mental examination of a
party. (R28).
Q.

May the modes of discovery be resorted to against
non-parties?

A.

Only deposition may be resorted to against nonparties. The other modes must only be resorted to
against parties.

511

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is the availment of the modes of discovery, like a
motion for production, limited to the pre-trial stage?

A.

No. The availment of a motion for production, as one
of the modes of discovery, is not limited to the pre-trial
stage. Rule 27 does not provide for any time frame
within which the discovery mode of production or
inspection of documents can be utilized. The rule only
requires leave of court "upon due application and a
showing of due cause. (Eagle Ridge Dev't Corp v.
Cameron Granville Asset Mgt Inc., 24 Nov 2014,
Leonen, J.).

512

RULE 23. DEPOSITIONS
PENDING ACTIONS
Q.

What is a deposition?

A.

Deposition is a method of pre-trial discovery which
consists in taking the testimony of a person under
oath upon oral examination (oral deposition) or upon
written interrogatories. The term deposition also refers
to the testimony or statement so taken.

Q.

What are the kinds of depositions?

A.

Depositions may either be taken upon oral
examination, it which case it is also known as an oral
deposition or it may be taken upon written interrogatories.
Deposition upon written interrogatories should not be
confused with written interrogatories to parties under
R25 which is a separate method of discovery
altogether.
Depositions pending actions are those taken
during the pendency of a case before the court a quo.
(R23) Depositions may be taken even before the filing
of an action or during the pendency of an appeal.
(R24).

Q.

Distinguish deposition from affidavit.

A.

While an affidavit is also under oath, it is distinguished
from a deposition in that it is executed ex parte
without any opportunity for the other parties to attend
and cross-examine the affiant. Hence an affidavit is
hearsay and inadmissible in evidence while a
deposition although also hearsay may be admitted in
evidence under the conditions and situations set forth
in S4 R23.

513

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When may a deposition be taken?

A.

Upon ex parte motion108 of a party, the testimony of
any person, whether a party or not, may be taken, at
the instance of any party, by deposition upon oral
examination or written interrogatories. The attendance
of witnesses may be compelled by the use of a
subpoena as provided in R21. Depositions shall be
taken only in accordance with these Rules. The
deposition of a person confined in prison may be
taken only by leave of court on such terms as the
court prescribes. (Si R23, as amended in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint against the defendant
The defendant filed a motion to dismiss. The
plaintiff, without prior leave, filed and served a
notice to take deposition upon the defendant and
the person to be deposed, and the deposition was
subsequently taken. May such deposition be
given probative value?

A.

No. A deposition which did not comply with Si R23
may not be given probative value. Here the deposition
should have been taken with leave of court since the
defendant has not yet served an answer. (Georg v.
Holy Trinity College, 20 July 2016, Perez, J.).

Q.

What is the scope of examination of a deponent?

A.

Unless otherwise provided by the court in a protective
or limiting order, the deponent may be examined
regarding any matter, not privileged, which is relevant
to the subject of the pending action, whether relating
to the claim or defense of any party, including the

lasUnder the 1997 Rules, a motion was not required in order to take the
deposition of a person after the answer had been served. The party simply had
to serve a notice to take deposition to every other party to the action. (51 & 815 R23).

514

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and
location of any books, documents, or other tangible
things and the identity and location of persons having
knowledge of relevant facts. (52 R23).
Q.

May deponents be examined and cross-examined?

A.

Yes. Examination and cross-examination of deponents
may proceed as permitted at the trial under S3-18
R132. (S3 R23).

Q.

In what proceedings may a deposition be used?

A.

At the trial or upon the hearing of a motion or an
interlocutory proceeding. (54 R24)

Q.

Against whom may a deposition be used?

A.

Against any party who was present or represented at
the taking of the deposition or who had due notice
thereof.

Q.

For what purposes may a deposition be used?

A.

The purpose for which a deposition may be used
depends on who the deponent is and on who will be
using the deposition. Section 4 of Rule 23 lays down
the relevant rules:
a) Any deposition may be used by any party for the
purpose of contradicting or impeaching the testimony
of the deponent as a witness. This is a common
use of a deposition, to impeach a witness who is
under cross-examination.1"
b) The deposition of a party or of any one who at the
time of the taking the deposition was an officer,
director, or managing agent of a public or private

109Under 537(a) of Rule 130, the deposition may also be used as
substantive evidence, i.e., to prove the truth of the fact asserted therein

515

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
corporation, partnership, or association which is
a party may be used by an adverse party for
any purpose.
C)

The deposition of a witness, whether or not a
party, may be used by any party for any purpose
if the court finds (DOSUE): (1) that the witness is
dead; or (2) that the witness resides at a
distance more than 100 kilometers from the place
of trial or hearing, or is out of the Philippines,
unless it appears that his absence was procured
by the party offering the deposition; (3) that the
witness is is unable to attend or testify because of
age, sickness, infirmity, or imprisonment; or (4)
that the party offering the deposition has been
unable to procure the attendance of the witness
by subpoena; or (5) upon application and notice,
that such exceptional circumstances exist as to
make it desirable, in the interest of justice and
with due regard to the importance of presenting
the testimony of witnesses orally in open court, to
allow the deposition to be used.11° (S4 R23).
The deposition in such a case is admissible in
evidence as an exception to the hearsay rule.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE
124 [2003 ed.]; United States Federal Rules of
Evidence, Sec. 804[b][1]). If the deposition is
taken not in the same case but in a former case
or proceeding, it is governed not by S4(c) R23 but
by S47 R130.

1101he determination of whether "exceptional circumstances" exist is very
fact sensitive and different for each case. An example given in an American case
is the need to protect deponents from harassment and threats in case they
testified in open court. (Lozano v. City of Hazleton, US District Court for Middle
District of Pennsylvania, No. 3:06cv1856).

516

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
The rules under S4 R23 may be encapsulated in the matrix
below:
DEPOSITION OF

MAY BE
USED BY

PURPOSE

Any deponent

Any party

Impeaching or
contradicting the
testimony of the
deponent as a
witness

A party or DOM of a
CPA party
A witness, w/on a
party, if court finds
DOSUE

Adverse
party
Any party

Any purpose

Q.

Any purpose

Cleary, a U.S. citizen residing in California, filed
before the RTC of Cebu an action for specific
performance with damages against the Respondents.
Respondents filed their answers. Prior to trial,
Cleary moved for court authorization to take
deposition. Invoking 84(c)(2) R23, Cleary prayed
that the deposition be taken before the ConsulateGeneral of the Philippines in Los Angeles, California,
and that the same be used as his direct testimony
as he "is out of the Philippines." Respondents
opposed the motion on the following grounds (1)
Cleary was the plaintiff himself and therefore the
deposition was not for discovery purposes since
Cleary cannot discover anything from his own
testimony, (2) Respondents would be deprived of
the opportunity to cross-examine Cleary, and (3)
Cleary was not suffering from any impairment
which would prevent him from testifying in the

517

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Philippines. May Cleary's deposition be taken in
L.A. and be used by him in the Philippines against
Respondents for any purpose pursuant to
S4(c) R23?
A.

Yes. The argument that the deposition may not be
allowed since Cleary is the plaintiff himself is erroneous
since under Si R23, the testimony of a person,
whether a party or not, may be taken by deposition.
This provision does not make any distinction or
restriction as to who can avail of a deposition.
The argument that Respondents would be
deprived of the opportunity to cross-examine Cleary is
without merit. Depositions may be used without the
deponent being actually called to the witness stand by
the proponent under the conditions and instances
mentioned in S4 R23. One instance is when the
deponent "is out of the Philippines" as stated in
S4(c)(2) R23, in which case the deposition "may be
used by any party for any purpose."
The argument that Cleary was not suffering from
any impairment also does not hold water. 34(c)(2)
R23 does not qualify as to the condition of the
deponent who is outside of the Philippines. (Santamatia
v. Cleary, 15 June 2016, Leonen, J.).

Q.

May only part of a deposition be offered in evidence
by a party?

A.

Yes. In such a case, the adverse party may require
him to introduce all of it which is relevant to the part
introduced, and any party may introduce any other
parts. (S4[d] R23).

518

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

May a deposition be offered to prove the truth of
the facts set forth therein, in lieu of the actual oral
testimony of the deponent in open court?

A.

No. The deposition may be opposed by the adverse
party and excluded under the hearsay rule — i.e., that
the adverse party had or has no opportunity to crossexamine the deponent at the time that his testimony is
offered. That opportunity for cross-examination was
afforded during the taking of the deposition alone is
no argument, as the opportunity for cross-examination
must normally be accorded a party at the time that the
testimonial evidence is actually presented against him
during the trial or hearing of a case. (Republic v.
Sandiganbayan, 16 December 2011).
However, under certain conditions and for certain
limited purposes laid down in Section 4, Rule 23 of
the Rules of Court, the deposition may be used
without the deponent being actually called to the
witness stand. Thus: (IPD)
1) Under S4(a) R23 the deposition may be used by
any party for the purpose of impeaching or
contradicting the testimony of the deponent as a
witness. This is not covered by the hearsay rule
since the purpose is not to prove the truth of the
facts in the deposition but only to impeach or
contradict the deponent's testimony in court.
2) The deposition of a party or of any one who at the
time of taking the deposition was an officer, director,
or managing agent of a public or private corporation,
partnership, or association which is a party may
be used by an adverse party for any purpose,
including to prove the truth of the matter stated in
the deposition. The reason for this is that the
depositions are in the nature of party-admissions
which are excluded from the hearsay rule.
519

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3)

The deposition of a witness, whether or not a
party, may be used by any party for any purpose
if the court finds that any of the circumstances in
S4(c) R23 (DOSUE) is present. This is in effect
an exception to the hearsay rule. (ANTONIO R.
BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE 124
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE
124 [2003 ed.]; FRE 804[b][1]).

Q.

Pedro files a tort case against Dencio. Before the
trial, Pedro with prior notice to Dencio, took the
deposition of Weng, wherein Weng stated that
Dencio entered the intersection when the stoplight
was red against him. Since he had already taken
the deposition of Weng, Pedro no longer presents
Weng as a witness during the trial and instead
offers in evidence her deposition to prove that
Dencio entered the intersection when the stoplight
was red. Dencio objects to the offer of the deposition
on the ground that the same is hearsay. Should
the objection be sustained?

A.

Yes. The deposition may be objected to by the
adverse party on the ground that it is hearsay — Le.,
that the adverse party had or has no opportunity to
cross-examine the deponent at the time that his
testimony is offered. That opportunity for crossexamination was afforded during the taking of the
deposition alone is no argument, as the opportunity
for cross-examination must normally be accorded a
party at the time that the testimonial evidence is
actually presented against him during the trial or
hearing of a case. (Republic v. Sandiganbayan, 16
December 2011).

520

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

Pedro files a tort case against Dencio. Before the
trial, Pedro with prior notice to Dencio, took the
deposition of Weng, wherein Weng stated that
Dencio entered the intersection when the stoplight
was red against him. After Weng's deposition was
taken, she went to the United States and became
a permanent resident therein. Pedro offers in
evidence her deposition to prove that Dencio
entered the intersection when the stoplight was
red. Dencio objects to the offer of the deposition
on the ground that the same is hearsay. Should
the objection be sustained?

A.

No the objection should be overruled. Under 54(c)
R23 the deposition of a witness may be used by any
party for any purpose if the court finds that the witness is
out of the Philippines. In such a case Weng's
deposition may be used without actually calling her to
the witness stand. (Republic v. Sandiganbayan, id.)
In effect S4(c) R23 provides for a hearsay exception.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE
124(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE
124 [2003 ed.]; FRE 804[b][1]).

Q.

F sues his brother G to recover ownership of a
parcel of land but the latter, within the period for
pleading, moves to dismiss based on two grounds,
to wit: first, the suit being between members of
the same family, the complaint fails to aver that
earnest efforts towards a compromise have been
made, and second, the action is barred by
extinctive prescription.
Pending resolution of the motion to dismiss,
F serves notice to take G's deposition, which the
latter opposes, claiming that at this stage of the
proceeding no deposition can be obtained without
leave of court.
521

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Meanwhile, obviously to meet G's objections
in the motion to dismiss still unresolved, F files
an amended complaint seeking this time the
partition of the land between him and his brother
and alleging that earnest efforts at amicable
settlement have been exerted and have failed.
1) xxx
2) Is G's objection to the taking of the deposition
legally tenable?
3)

A.

Assuming that the trial court grants leave
and G's deposition is duly taken upon oral
examination, may such deposition be admissible
as independent evidence if offered by F
during the trial to partly prove his cause of
action although G is available and present at
the trial? Reasons. (79 Bar 05)

1) xxx
2)

Yes, G's objection to the taking of his deposition
is legally tenable. Under S1 R23 a deposition
may be taken with leave of court after jurisdiction
has been obtained over any defendant and
without leave after an answer has been served.

Here no answer has yet been served. Hence
leave of court is still required.'"
3)

Yes G's deposition is admissible as independent
evidence. Under Section 4(b) R23, the deposition
of a party may be used by an adverse party for
any purpose.

111Under the 2020 Rules, leave of court is no longer required unless it is
the deposition of a person confined in prison which will be taken. (Si R23).

522

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Here the deposition was of G, a party, Hence it
may be used by F the adverse party for any purpose
including as independent evidence to prove the truth
of the matters stated in the deposition.
Q.

Respondent filed a case against the Petitioner for
damages arising from a vehicular accident which
killed Respondent's son. Respondent then took
the deposition of Corral before the Clerk of Court
of the Pasig RTC. During the deposition, the
Petitioner's counsel extensively cross-examined
the deponent At the conclusion of Respondent's
testimonial evidence, he offered in evidence the
deposition of Corral and a certification from the
BID that Corral had departed for abroad on a
plane. Petitioner opposed the admission of the
deposition on the ground that the same did not
meet any of the conditions provided for in 54(c)
R23. Petitioner contended that the BID certification
is not proof that Corral was still out of the
country. Is the deposition admissible in evidence?

A.

Yes. The BID certification is adequate proof that Corral
was out of the country. The onus was on Petitioner to
prove his allegation that the deponent had returned to
the Philippines. (Sales v. Sabine, 9 December 2005).

Q.

In 1987, the Republic, through the PCGG, filed
Civil Case No. 0009, an action for reconveyance and
reversion, against Jose Africa, Ferdinand Marcos,
Imelda Marcos, Juan Ponce Enrile, et al. The complaint
alleges that shares in Eastern Telecommunications
Philippines Inc. (ETPI) were illegally acquired for
the beneficial interest of the Marcoses. Subsequently
Victor Africa, the son of Jose Africa who had died,
filed Civil Case No. 0130 with the Sandiganbayan
against the PCGG seeking to nullify the PCGG

523

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
orders asking him to surrender the ETPI shares
and to desist from acting as an ETPI director and
shareholder.
Subsequently the SB ordered the consolidation
of CC No. 0009 with several incident cases
including CC No. 0130. The PCGG in CC No. 0130
took the deposition of Maurice Bain, a former officer
• of ETPI, in London. The deposition was sought to
be introduced by the PCGG in CC No. 0009. The
Respondents objected on the ground that the
deposition did not comply with 547 R130 which
requires identity of parties, they not having been
parties to CC No. 0130. The PCGG on the other
hand argues that since CC No. 0009 and CC No.
0130 were consolidated, the actions were merged
into one and hence it is S4(c) R23 and not 547
R130 which applies. Under S4(c) R23 the deposition
may be introduced in evidence for any purpose if
the deponent is outside of the Philippines. Is the
deposition admissible in CC No. 0009?
A.

No. The consolidation here was merely for purposes
of joint trial but each case retained its separate
character and required the entry of a separate judgment.
The consolidation did not merge CC No. 0009 and CC
No. 0130 into a single action and cause the parties in
one to be the parties to another. Thus the deposition
was not taken in CC No. 0009 but in a separate or
former proceeding, CC No. 0130, in which case the
requirements of S47 R130 requiring identity of parties
applies. Since the Respondents were not parties to
CC No. 0130, the deposition taken therein was hearsay
as against them and inadmissible upon proper and
timely objection. (Republic v. Sandiganbayan, G.R.
152375, 16 December 2011).

524

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

P filed an action for collection against D (Case 1)
with the deposition of X being taken therein. The
court dismissed Case 1 and the order of dismissal
became final and executory. P filed Case 2 against
D. Case 2 involves the same subject matter. May P
introduce in Case 2 the deposition of X if any of
the circumstances in Section 4(c)(1) to (5) of R23
are present?

A.

Yes. Under S5 R23, when an action has been dismissed
and another action involving the same subject is
afterward brought between the same parties or their
representatives or successors in interest, all depositions
lawfully taken and duly filed in the former action may
be used in the latter as if originally taken therefor.112

Q.

Is a party deemed to have made a person his own
witness by taking his deposition?

A.

No. A party shall not be deemed to make a person his
own witness for any purpose by taking his deposition.
(S7 R23). This is why under S4(a) R23 any deposition
may be used by any party for the purpose of contradicting
or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as
a witness.

Q.

What is the effect of using depositions?

A.

The rule is that the introduction in evidence of the
deposition or any part thereof makes the deponent
the witness of the party introducing the deposition.
(S8 R23). Hence the party may not impeach the
deponent. (S12 R132).

112The requirement that the prior action must have been dismissed before
depositions taken for use in it can be used in a subsequent action was
considered an oversight by U.S. courts who have ignored this requirement. See
Wright & Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil §2150. What is important
is that the second action involves the same parties and subject matter.

525

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The exceptions to the foregoing rule are:
1)

When the deposition is introduced in evidence
precisely for the purpose of contradicting or
impeaching the testimony of deponent as a
witness. (S8 R23; S4[a] R23).

2) The use by a party of the deposition of an adverse
party or of an officer, director, or managing agent
of a corporation, partnership, or association which
is an adverse party. (S8 R23; S4[b] R23).
Q.

Plaintiff filed a tort case against Defendant arising
out of a vehicular collision. Plaintiff took the
deposition of Juan who stated therein that Defendant
entered the intersection when the light was red
against him. During the trial, the Plaintiff presented
Juan as a witness but was surprised when Juan
testified that the light was green in Defendant's
favor when he entered the intersection. May
Plaintiff use the deposition of Juan to impeach his
testimony as a witness?

A.

Yes but he should first have the court declare Juan
as a hostile witness who misled the Plaintiff into
calling Juan to the witness stand. (S12 R132).

Q.

Before whom may a deposition be taken in the
Philippines?

A.

Within the Philippines, depositions may be taken
before: (JuNA)
1) A judge.
2) A notary public.
3)

A person authorized to administer oaths if the
parties so stipulate in writing. (S10 R23; S14 R23).

526

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

Before whom may a deposition be taken in foreign
countries?

A.

In a foreign state or country, depositions may be
taken: (LACE)
1) On notice before a secretary of embassy or legation,
consul general, consul, vice-consul, or consular
agent of the Republic of the Philippines.
2)

Before such person as may be appointed by
commission or under jetters rogatory.

3)

A person authorized to administer oaths if the
parties so stipulate in writing. (S11 R23; S14 R23).

Q.

Distinguish a commission from a letters rogatory.

A.

Letters rogatory and commission are both devices for
taking the deposition of a person in a foreign state or
country. (512 R23). A commission is an instrument
issued by a court or tribunal directed to a magistrate
or an individual authorizing him to take the deposition
of the witness named therein, while a letters rogatory
is a request to a foreign court to give its aid, backed
by its power, to secure desired information. They are
distinguished in that commissions are taken down in
accordance with the rules laid down by the court
issuing the commission, while in letters rogatory, the
methods of procedure are under the control of the
foreign tribunal. (Dulay v. Dulay, 11 Nov 2005).

Q.

In a pending case with the RTC, Rodrigo filed a
petition for issuance of letters rogatory in order to
get the depositions of several witnesses living
abroad. The RTC granted the petition and issued
letters rogatory requesting the Clerk of Court of
Boston to take the depositions but the latter simply
ignored the request Hence the depositions were
instead taken before a notary public in New York.
527

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The RTC then ordered the depositions authenticated
by the Philippine consulate. The Defendant objected
to the admissibility of the depositions on the
ground that they were not in accordance with the
terms of the letters rogatory issued by the Court.
Are the depositions admissible?
A.

Yes. The authentication made by the consul was a
ratification of the authority of the notary public who
took the questioned depositions. The deposition was,
in effect, obtained through a commission and no longer
through letters rogatory. (Dulay v. Dulay, 11 Nov 2005).

Q.

How does a party take the deposition of a person
upon oral examination?

A.

A party desiring to take the deposition of any person
upon oral examination shall give reasonable notice in
writing to every other party to the action. The notice
shall state the time and place for taking the deposition
and the name and address of each person to
be examined, if known, and if the name is not known,
a general description sufficient to identify him or
the particular class or group to which he belongs.
(S15 R23).
Proof of service of a notice to take deposition
shall constitute sufficient authorization for the issuance
of subpoenas for the persons named in said notice by
the clerk of court of the place in which the deposition is
to be taken. The clerk shall not, however, issue a
subpoena duces tecum to any such person without an
order of the court. (S5 R21).

528

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

Is there a requirement that the specific purpose of
the deposition be stated to ensure that the
matters sought to be discovered are relevant and
not privileged?

A.

No. There is no provision in R23 that requires the
party requesting for an oral deposition to state the
purpose or purposes of the deposition. The only
matters that have to be stated in the notice under 315
R23 are the time and place for taking the deposition,
the name and address of each person to be examined, if
known, or if unknown, a general description sufficient
to identify the person to be examined or the class or
group to which he belongs. The trial court cannot
expand the requirements under R23. (Malonzo v.
Sucere Foods Corp., 5 February 2020, Inting, J.).

Q.

How shall an oral deposition be taken?

A.
1) The officer before whom the deposition is to be
taken shall put the witness on oath and shall
personally, or by some one acting under his
direction and presence, record the testimony of
the witness.
2) The testimony shall be taken stenographically unless
the parties agree otherwise.
3) Examination and cross-examination of deponents
may proceed as permitted at the trial under S3-18
R132. (33 R23).
4) All objections made at the time of the examination
to the qualifications of the officer taking the
deposition, or to the manner of taking it, or to the
evidence presented, or to the conduct of any
party, and any other objection to the proceedings
(OMECO), shall be noted by the officer upon the
529

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
deposition. Evidence objected to shall be taken
subject to the objections. Note that the officer has
no power to rule on the objections.
5)

In lieu of participating in the oral examination,
parties served with notice of taking a deposition
may transmit written interrogatories to the officers,
who shall propound them to the witness and
record the answers verbatim. (S17 R23).

Q.

What is the sanction if a party or an officer or
managing agent of a party willfully fails to appear
before the officer who is to take his deposition,
after being served with a proper notice?

A.

Aside from contempt, the court on motion and notice
may strike out all or any part of any pleading of that
party, or dismiss the action or proceeding or any part
thereof, or enter a judgment by default against that
party, and in its discretion, order him to pay
reasonable expenses incurred by the other, including
attorney's fees. (S5 R29).

Q.

E, the chairman of one of the plaintiff corporations
was the deponent in a complaint against ALI. Upon
termination of the oral deposition, ALI objected to
the propriety, admissibility and conformity of the
deposition proceedings. Later, E died and his
deposition was introduced in evidence. Can a
deposition which was not completed, signed and
certified, or filed before the trial court be used in
evidence?

A.

Yes. An unsigned deposition does not preclude its
use during the trial. A deponent's signature only goes
to the form and the signature is required only to
ensure that the deponent is afforded the opportunity
to correct any errors therein and ensure its accuracy.
(Ayala Land Inc. vs Tagle 11 August 2005)
530

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
Q.

When should the objections to a deposition be made?

A.
1)

As to competency or relevancy of testimony.
Objections should be made when the deposition
is being offered in evidence. (S6 R23). Objections
to the competency of a witness or the competency,
relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not
waived by failure to make them before or during
the taking of the deposition, unless the ground of
the objection is one which might have been
obviated or removed if presented at that time.

The test to determine whether "the ground of the
objection might have been obviated or removed if
presented at that time" is whether the objection will
give the other party an opportunity to cure the
deficiency of his proof. An example would be the lack
of qualification of an expert, which may be cured by
objecting at the time of the taking of the deposition.
2) As to form of notice and as to disqualification of
officer. All errors and irregularities in the notice
for taking a deposition are waived unless written
objection is promptly served upon the party giving
the notice. Objections to taking a deposition
because of disqualification of the officer before
whom it is to be taken is waived unless made before
the taking of the deposition begins or as soon
thereafter as the disqualification becomes known
or could be discovered with reasonable diligence.
Q.

Plaintiff versus Defendant. Plaintiff took the
deposition of W, Defendants former lawyer, concerning
W's advice to Defendant on the anticipated
litigation between Plaintiff and Defendant Defendants
lawyer X who was present did not object. At the
conclusion of Plaintiffs testimonial evidence,
531

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Plaintiff offered in evidence the deposition of W
for the purpose of proving the communication
between Defendant and W. Defendant objected to
the admission of the deposition on the ground
that it violates the attorney-client privilege. Plaintiff
retorted that Defendant waived the privilege when
he failed to object during the deposition taking.
How would you rule on the objection?
A.

I would sustain the objection.
Objections to the competency or relevancy of the
testimony of the deponent should be made when the
deposition is being offered in evidence. Such
objections are not waived by failure to make them
before or during the taking of the deposition, unless
the ground of the objection is one which might have
been obviated or removed if presented at that time.
(S6 R23).
Here the objection relates to the competency of
W's testimony. The ground for the objection (violation of
the attomey-client privilege) would not have been obviated
or removed even if presented during the depositiontaking. Hence the same is not waived even if Defendant
failed to object during the deposition taking.

Q.

Plaintiff versus Defendant. Plaintiff took the
deposition of W. W testified about the contents of
a letter but without laying the predicate for his oral
testimony. Defendant's lawyer who was present did
not object At the conclusion of Plaintiffs testimonial
evidence, Plaintiff offered in evidence the deposition
of W for the purpose of proving the contents of
the letter. Defendant objected to the admission of
the deposition on the ground that it violates the
best evidence rule. How would you rule on the
objection?
532

Rule 23
Depositions Pending Actions
A.

I would overrule the objection.
Objections to the competency of a witness or the
competency, relevancy, or materiality of testimony are
not waived by failure to make them before or during
the taking of the deposition, unless the ground of the
objection is one which might have been obviated or
removed if presented at that time. (S6 R23).
Here the ground of the objection, that is, the
failure to comply with the best evidence rule might
have been obviated or removed if presented during
the deposition taking: W could have laid the foundation
for his oral testimony by testifying as to the unavailability
of the original. Hence the objection should be
overruled. (2 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON
THE RULES OF COURT 73 [1979 ed.]).

533

RULE 24. DEPOSITIONS BEFORE
ACTION OR PENDING APPEAL
Q.

Pedro intends to file a tort case against Dencio.
He intends to use the testimony of Winnie as a
key witness but the latter will shortly be going to
the United States to work as a nurse. What is the
remedy of Pedro?

A.

Pedro should avail of S1 R24 which states that a
person who desires to perpetuate his own testimony
or that of another person regarding any matter that
may be cognizable in any court of the Philippines,
may file a verified petition in the court of the place of
the residence of any expected adverse party.

Q.

Give the rule regarding depositions pending appeal.

A.

If an appeal has been taken from a judgment of a
court, including the Court of Appeals in proper cases,
or before the taking of an appeal if the time therefore
has not expired, the court in which the judgment was
rendered may allow the taking of depositions of
witnesses to perpetuate their testimony for use in the
event of further proceedings in the said court. In such
case the party who desires to perpetuate the
testimony may make a motion in the said court for
leave to take the depositions, upon the same notice
and service thereof as if the action was pending
therein. (Si R24).

534

RULE 25. INTERROGATORIES
TO PARTIES
Q.

What are interrogatories? What is their use?

A.

A pretrial discovery method in which written questions
are propounded by one party and served on the
adverse party, who must serve written replies thereto
under oath. (STEVEN GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 109
[1975]). It is used by a party desiring to elicit material
and relevant facts from an adverse party. (Si R25).
The terms "interrogatories" and "written interrogatories"
are synonymous.

Q.

How and when may a party serve interrogatories
upon an adverse party?

A.

Upon ex parte motion,113 any party desiring to elicit
material and relevant facts from any adverse parties
shall file and serve upon the latter written interrogatories
to be answered by the party served or, if the party
served is a public or private corporation or a partnership
or association, by any officer thereof competent to
testify in its behalf. (Si R25, as amended in the 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

Who shall answer interrogatories?

A.

Interrogatories shall be answered by the party served
or, if the party served is a public or private corporation
or a partnership or association, by any officer thereof
competent to testify in its behalf. (Si R25).

113Under the 1997 Rules, a motion was not required in order to file and
serve written interrogatories upon a party after the answer had been served.

535

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

How and when are interrogatories answered?

A.

The interrogatories shall be answered fully in writing
and shall be signed and sworn to by the person
making them. The party upon whom the interrogatories
have been served shall file and serve a copy of the
answers on the party submitting the interrogatories
within 15 days after service thereof, unless the court
on motion and for good cause shown, extends or
shortens the period. (S2 R25).

Q.

What is the consequence if a party fails to serve
answers to interrogatories?

A.

The court on motion and notice may strike out all or
any part of any pleading of that party, or dismiss the
action or proceeding or any part thereof, or enter a
judgment by default against that party, and in its discretion,
order him to pay reasonable expenses incurred by the
other, including attorney's fees. (S5 R29).

Q.

What is the effect of failure to serve written
interrogatories?

A.

Unless thereafter allowed by the court for good cause
shown and to prevent a failure of iustice, a party not
served with written interrogatories may not be
compelled by the adverse party to: (1) give testimony
in open court, or (2) to give a deposition pending
appeal. (S6 R25). Thus a party not served with
interrogatories may not be called as an adverse party
witness by the other side.

Q.

Jacob filed a complaint for annulment of loan and
mortgage contract against Petro Bank on the
ground of fraud. Petro Bank filed an answer denying
any fraud against Jacob. After the termination of
the pretrial, Jacob filed an ex parte motion for the
issuance of a subpoena duces tecum and ad
testificandum to the senior loan manager of Petro
536

Rule 25
Interrogatories To Parties
Bank to appear and testify in the initial hearing for
the presentation of Jacob's evidence as Jacob's
first witness and to bring documents relative to
Jacob's loan. Counsel of Petro Bank opposed the
motion the ground that under the Rules of Civil
Procedure, a party not served with written
interrogatories may not be compelled by the
adverse party to give testimony in open court.
Jacob argued that it is Petro Bank not the employees
who is the party and hence he could compel the
employees to testify in court. How should the
court rule on Jacob's motion?
A.

The court should deny Jacob's motion. Under S6 R25
a party not served with written interrogatories may not
be compelled by the adverse party to give testimony
in open court. The Supreme Court has held that if the
party not served with written interrogatories is a
corporation, its officers are the ones who cannot be
so compelled to give testimony.
Here Petro Bank was not served with written
interrogatories by Jacob. Hence Petro Bank's senior
loan manager, an officer, cannot be compelled by
Jacob to give testimony in open court. (Afulugencia v.
Metro Bank, 5 Feb 2014).

Q.

China Bank filed with the RTC a loan collection
case against Ever Electrical Mfg. Co. and Ng Meng
Tam, a surety to Ever's loan. Ng filed an answer
with affirmative defense of the nullity of the
suretyship contract. Ng moved for a preliminary
hearing on his affirmative defense which was granted.
After serving written interrogatories on George
Yap, China Bank's account officer, and receiving
Yap's answers thereto, Ng applied for the issuance
of a subpoena duces tecum and ad testificandum
against George Yap. China Bank objected, arguing
537

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
that Yap cannot be compelled to testify in court
because Ng did not obtain and present Yap's
judicial affidavit pursuant to Section 5 of the
Judicial Affidavit Rule (JAR). Should China Bank's
objection be sustained?
A.

No. Section 5 of the JAR expressly excludes from its
application adverse party and hostile witnesses. For
the presentation of these types of witnesses, the
provisions on the Rules of Court under the Revised
Rules of Evidence and all other correlative rules
including the modes of deposition and discovery rules
shall apply. Here it is enough for the party calling the
adverse party witness to serve beforehand written
interrogatories pursuant to S6 R25 and the case of
Afulugencia v. Metropolitan Bank & Trust Co., 715
SCRA 399 (2014), which was done in this case. (Ng
Meng Tam v. China Banking Corp., 5 August 2015).

Q.

Is it proper to object to written interrogatories on
the ground that they constitute a "fishing expedition"?

A.

No. The refusal to answer written interrogatories on
the ground that they constitute a "fishing expedition" is
not a meritorious ground. Precisely the purpose of
discovery is to enable a party to obtain relevant facts
from the other party in advance of trial so as to
facilitate settlement or to expedite the trial. (Ong v.
Mazo, 4 June 2004).

538

RULE 26. ADMISSION BY
ADVERSE PARTY
Q. When and how may a request for admission
be made?
A.

At any time after issues have been joined, a party
may file and serve upon any other party a written
request for the admission by the latter of:
1)

The genuineness of any material and relevant
document described in and exhibited with the
request; or

2) The truth of any material and relevant matter of
fact set forth in the request.114
Copies of the documents shall be delivered with
the request unless copies have already been furnished.
(Si R26).
Q.

Is R26 available in criminal cases?

A.

No. R26 is not applicable in criminal cases, either
against the prosecution (since the prosecution is not
the adverse party but the People) or against the
accused (since it would be violative of his right
against self-incrimination). (People v. Ang, 6 October
2020, e.b., Carandang, J.).

Q.

When are issues deemed to have been joined?

A.

Issues are considered to have been joined when the
parties have become aware of what issues in the
case are in dispute. Issues are deemed to have been
joined after the defendant has filed his answer and
the plaintiff has filed his reply thereto or the period for

114Unike the taking of depositions and the filing and service of written
interrogatories, an ex parte motion is not required under R26.

539

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
filing the reply has expired. Under the 1964 Rules the
forerunner of the phrase "issues have been joined"
was "the pleadings are closed," which has the same
import. (2 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON
THE RULES OF COURT 88 [1979 ed.]).
Q.

P filed a complaint against D. D filed a motion to
dismiss. May P served a request for admission on D?

A.

No, since issues have not yet been joined. (See Si
R26).

Q.

P filed a complaint against D. D failed to file his
answer and was declared in default upon P's motion.
The court directed P to present evidence ex parte.
May P serve requests for admission upon D?

A.

No, since issues were not joined.

Q.

On whom must the request for admission be served?

A.

A request for admission must be served directly upon
the party requested. Otherwise, that party cannot be
deemed to have admitted the genuineness of any
relevant matters of fact set forth therein on account of
failure to answer the request for admission. (Lanada
v. CA, G.R. 102390, 1 February 2002).

Q.

May a party on whom the request for admission is
served engage the services of counsel to make
the response in his behalf?

A.

Yes. When R26 states that a party shall respond to
the request for admission, it should not be restrictively
construed to mean that a party may not engage the
services of counsel to make the response in his
behalf. This is especially so where the request for
admission was served not directly upon the party

540

Rule 26
Admission By Adverse Party
requested but upon his lawyer. It is unfair for the private
respondents to expect the petitioners to answer the
requests for admission that they did not personally
receive. (Latiada v. CA, G.R. No. 102390, 1 February 2002).
Q.

Through his lawyer plaintiff A sent to defendant B,
through B's counsel, a request for admission of
certain facts stated therein material to the case
pending between them. B did not reply at all.
On appeal from an adverse decision, A
assigned as error the trial court's disregard of the
facts, the admission of which was the subject of
his unanswered request. A contended that as his
request for admission forms part of the records of
the case, although not formally submitted in
evidence, and the records do not show that the
defendant ever replied thereto, there was a clear
judicial admission by the defendant of all the
material facts stated in the request, and that had
the trial court considered said admissions, it
would have made contrary findings of facts.ls the
plaintiff correct? Why? (84 Bar 010).

A.

No, the plaintiff is not correct.
The Supreme Court has held that a request for
admission must be served directly upon the party
requested. Otherwise, that party cannot be deemed to
have admitted the genuineness of any relevant
matters of fact set forth therein on account of failure to
answer the request for admission.
Here the request for admission was not served
directly upon defendant B but upon B's counsel.
Hence the failure of B to answer the request for
admission did not amount to an implied admission of
the matters stated in the request. (Lanada v. CA, G.R.
102390, 1 February 2002).
541

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a party be requested to admit facts which he
had already denied in his answer?

A.

No. A request for admission is not proper where the
subject matters thereof are the same as the ultimate
facts alleged in the requesting party's complaint for
which the requested party had already denied in his
answer. A party should not be required to make a
second denial of those already denied in his answer
to the complaint. (Lai:hada v. CA, G.R. No. 102390, 1
February 2002).

Q.

The petitioners spouses Duque allegedly executed a
deed of donation of a parcel of land in favor of
their daughter who in turn sold a portion thereof
to Yu. Spouses Duque lodged a Verified Complaint
for Declaration of Non-Existence and Nullity of a
Deed of Donation and Deed of Absolute Sale and
Cancellation of Tax Declaration (Complaint) against
their daughter and Yu before the Regional Trial
Court (RTC) of Barili, Cebu, alleging that the
signature in the Deed of Donation was forged. Yu
served a request for admission on the petitioners
regarding the genuineness of the deed of donation.
The petitioners failed to answer the request for
admission. Are they deemed to have admitted the
genuineness of the deed of donation?

A.

No. The implied admission rule under R26 admits of
an exception, that is, when the party to whom such
request for admission is served had already controverted
the matters subject of such request in an earlier
pleading. Here, as pointed out by petitioners, the
genuineness of the deed of donation being requested
to be admitted has already been denied and
controverted in the Verified Complaint for Declaration
of Non-Existence and Nullity of a Deed of Donation

542

Rule 26
Admission By Adverse Party
and Deed of Absolute Sale and Cancellation of Tax
Declaration. In fact, the forgery committed in the Deed
of Donation was the very essence of that Complaint,
where it was alleged that being a forged document,
the same is invalid and without force and legal effect.
Petitioners, therefore, need not reply to the request
for admission. Consequently, they cannot be deemed
to have admitted the Deed of Donation's genuineness
and authenticity for their failure to respond thereto.
(Duque v. Yap, 19 February 2018, Velasco, J.).
Q.

When and how shall an answer to a request for
admission be made?

A.

Within a period designated in the request, which shall
not be less than 15 days after service thereof or
within such further time as the court may allow on
motion, the party to whom the request is directed may
file and serve upon the party requesting the admission a
sworn statement either: (1) denying specifically the
matters of which an admission is requested or (2) setting
forth in detail the reasons why he cannot truthfully
either admit or deny those matters. (52 R26).

Q.

What is the effect if a request for admission is not
answered in accordance with S2 R26?

A.

Each of the mailers of which an admission is
requested shall be deemed admitted. (S2 R26). Any
admission, whether express or implied, is for the
purpose of the pending action only and shall not
constitute an admission by him for any other purpose
nor may the same be used against him in any other
proceeding. (S3 R26).

543

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

At the close of the trial, A's counsel marked for
identification and offered in evidence certified
copies of a Request for Admission and the Reply
thereto in a previous case between the opposing
party in the instant case, B, and a third party, C.
He offered the documents as evidence that in the
previous case, B had made a judicial admission of
a certain fact material to the present case, the
two-fold purpose thereof being to impeach B's
testimony in the present case and to establish
that certain fact Should the court admit the
documents in evidence? Explain. (84 Bar 011).

A.

The court should not admit the document for the
purpose of proving the certain fact nor for impeaching
B's testimony.
Any admission under R26, whether express or
implied, is for the purpose of the pending action only
and shall not constitute an admission by him for any
other purpose nor may the same be used against him
in any other proceeding. Hence even if A would lay
the predicate for impeachment using an inconsistent
statement, the prior admission cannot be used
against B for S3 R26 states that "the same [may not]
be used against him in any other proceeding."

Q.

May an admission under Rule 26 be withdrawn or
amended?

A.

Yes, the court may allow a party making an admission,
whether express or implied, to withdraw or amend it
upon such terms as may be just. (S4 R26).

Rule 26
Admission By Adverse Party
Q.

What is the effect if a party after being served with
a request for admission serves a sworn denial
thereof and the party requesting the admission
thereafter proves the genuineness of a document
or the truth of any matter of fact subject of the
request for admission?

A.

The party serving the request for admission may
apply to the court for an order requiring the other
party to pay him the reasonable expenses incurred in
making such proof, including attorney's fees. Unless
the court finds that there were good reasons for the
denial or that admissions sought were of no substantial
importance, such order shall be issued. (S4 R29).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action to collect P1 million from
the Defendant Defendant filed an answer in which
he raised the defense that Plaintiff had condoned
or remitted the P1 million debt of the Defendant.
The parties did not avail of any of the modes of
discovery. During the trial, the defense offers the
testimony of Defendant to show that Plaintiff had
condoned the debt. If you were the lawyer for the
Plaintiff, how will you respond?

A.

I will object to the offer of the testimony on the ground
that it is excluded by the rules.
Unless otherwise allowed by the court for good
cause shown and to prevent a failure of justice, a
party who fails to file and serve a request for admission
on the adverse party of material and relevant facts at
issue which are, or ought to be, within the personal
knowledge of the latter, shall not be permitted to
present evidence on such facts. (S5 R26).

545

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Here the fact of condonation is a material and
relevant fact at issue which is, or ought to be, within
the personal knowledge of the Plaintiff. However
since the Defendant failed to file and to serve a
request for admission of payment on the Plaintiff, he
is not permitted to present evidence regarding the
condonation.
Q.

What is the reason behind S5 R26?

A.

The rule aims to make the parties avail of a request
for admission in order to expedite the trial of the case.
A request for admission expedites the trial of the case
since a fact or a document admitted need no longer
be the subject of proof.

Q.

Respondent obtained on credit from Petitioner
various construction materials which the latter
delivered to the Respondent. Petitioner sued for
the collection of the value of the delivered materials.
The parties agree that there was delivery but they
disagree as to the value of the delivered materials
and the Respondent's total payments. After the
pre-trial, the judge issued his pre-trial order wherein
it was stipulated that the parties agreed that the
Petitioner shall submit an offer to stipulate showing
an itemized list of construction materials delivered to
the Respondent together with the cost claimed by
Petitioner and the Respondent shall comment/
object thereto. Instead of submitting an offer to
stipulate, the Petitioner filed a request for admission
with the court asking Respondent to admit receipt
of the items mentioned therein and that the total
amount of the goods was P315,000 of which
Respondent has only paid P130,000. The Respondent
did not answer the requests for admission under
oath although it submitted a comment admitting

546

Rule 26
Admission By Adverse Party
certain deliveries and denying others. Thus the
trial court deemed the Respondent to have admitted
the matters stated in the request for admission.
The CA held otherwise saying that the pre-trial
order stated that the Respondent should only
comment/object to the itemized list. Was there an
implied admission by the Respondent?
A.

Yes. The pre-trial order stating that the parties have
agreed that the Petitioner shall submit an offer to
stipulate showing an itemized list of construction
materials delivered to the Respondent together with
the cost claimed by Petitioner and that the Respondent
shall comment/object thereto cannot preclude the
Petitioner from availing of Rule 26. Said Rule cannot
be disregarded since it is a remedy afforded any party
after issues have been joined. Since the Respondent
failed to answer under oath the requests for admission,
he is deemed to have impliedly admitted the matters
stated therein. (Manzano v. Despabiladeras, G.R. No.
148786, 16 December 2004).

547

RULE 27. PRODUCTION OR INSPECTION
OF DOCUMENTS OR THINGS
Q.
A.

Q.
A.

n
Discuss briefly the discovery device of productio
or inspection of documents or things.
cause
Upon motion of any party showing good
may
ing
pend
is
n
actio
the
therefor, the court in which
ction,
inspe
the
it
perm
and
(a) order any party to produce
ments
copying, or photographing of any designated docu
in
conta
or
or things, not privileged, which constitute
action
evidence material to any matter involved in the
such
and which are in the possession or control of
upon
entry
it
perm
to
party
party; or (b) order any
n or
designated land or other property in his possessio
land
such
of
party
control for inspection by the other
or property which is relevant to the case.
.
Distinguish Rule 27 from subpoena duces tecum
a preA motion for a production or inspection order is
or
facts
n
obtai
to
ded
inten
e
trial discovery devic
nt
mova
the
trial;
for
re
documents in order to prepa
a
while
s,
ment
may opt not to use such facts or docu
r
prope
trial
subpoena is a process used during the
its
for
and contemplates that the party applying
or
issuance intends to present in evidence the witness
the things subject thereof.
A motion and a showing of good cause is
ction
required for an order for the production or inspe
s
duce
oena
subp
a
of documents or things, while
s
unles
n,
catio
tecum may issue upon an ex parte appli
ss.
the purpose is to call the adverse party as a witne
s
An order for production or inspection of document
a
while
,
or things can be directed only to a party
subpoena duces tecum may be directed to a nonparty.
548

Rule 27
Production Or Inspection of
Documents Or Things
Q.

Air Philippines Corporation (APC) purchased
chemical lubricants from Pennswell, a company
that manufactures and sells aviation lubricants.
Pennswell sued APC for unpaid purchases. In its
answer, APC alleged that Pennswell had undertaken
to deliver lubricants of the type belonging to a
new line, but that the second batch of lubricants
delivered turned out to be of the same type as the
first batch. APC wanted to prove fraud by showing
the court the chemical composition of Pennswell's
lubricants. During trial, it filed a motion under
Rule 27 to compel Pennswell to give a detailed list
of the chemical ingredients and composition of
their lubricants. Pennswell objected, claiming that
the list constitutes trade secrets which it could
not be forced to divulge. It argued that its
products are specialized lubricants, and if their
components were revealed, its business competitors
could easily imitate and market the same types of
products. May Pennswell be compelled under
Rule 27 to disclose the chemical ingredients and
composition of its lubricants?

A.

No. While under Rule 27, a party may move for an
order requiring the production or inspection of objects
or tangible things, such objects or things must not be
privileged. Here the chemical composition and ingredients
of the lubricants are trade secrets. A trade secret is "a
secret formula or process not patented, but known
only to certain individuals using it in compounding
some article of trade having a commercial value."
Trade secrets are privileged matter whose disclosure
is proscribed and penalized under the Securities
Regulation Code and under the Revised Penal Code.
The chemical ingredients and composition of the
aviation lubricants of Pennswell clearly fall within the

549

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
definition of trade secrets and are thus privileged. (Air
Philippines Corp. v. Pennswell Inc., G.R. No. 172835,
13 December 2007).
Q.

Petitioner wife filed a petition with the Family
Couit for the declaration of the nullity of her marriage
to her Respondent husband on the ground of the
latter's psychological incapacity. During the pretrial, Petitioner filed a request for the issuance of
a subpoena duces tecum addressed to the
hospital covering the Respondent's records for
alleged drug-addiction treatment and rehabilitation.
Respondent's lawyer objects to the motion invoking
the physician-patient privilege. Petitioner's lawyer
retorts that the objection is premature as the
records are not yet being offered in evidence and,
assuming that the objection is not premature, that
the physician-patient privilege bars only testimonial
evidence since it refers only to the disqualification of
the physician to testify on a matter learned in
confidence but does not otherwise bar the production
of documentary evidence. How should the court
rule on Respondent's objection? Explain.

A.

The court should sustain Respondent's objection.
The Petitioner's application for issuance of
subpoena is premature. She should wait for the trial
before making a request for the issuance of subpoena
duces tecum.
It is of course possible to treat Petitioner's motion
for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum covering
the hospital records as a motion for production of
documents under R27, a discovery procedure available
to a litigant prior to tria1.115 In such a case, the

1I51his statement of the court is incorrect. A motion for production under
R27 can be directed only against a party. The hospital and/or the physicians
were not party to the marriage nullification case. The appropriate procedure for

550

Rule 27
Production Or Inspection of
Documents Or Things
argument of Petitioner's lawyer that the objection is
premature would be without merit.
Under Si R27, documents which are privileged
may not be the subject of a motion for production.
Here the documents subject of a motion for
production were covered by the physician-patient
privilege. Hence the adverse party (Respondent) may
object to the motion on the ground that the documents
sought to be produced are privileged and may not be
the subject of a motion for production.
The argument of Petitioner's lawyer that the
physician-patient privilege bars only testimonial evidence
is without merit. The physician-patient privilege bars
not only the physician's testimony on the confidential
information but also the documents embodying such
confidential information. To compel the physician to
disclose such records would in effect be to compel
him to testify against the patient.
Here the documents embody the confidential
information on Respondent's drug rehabilitation
obtained by the physician. Hence the same are also
barred under the physician-patient privilege. (Chan v.
Chan, 24 July 2013).
Q.

Petitioners filed a complaint against Respondents
Abra Valley Colleges, Inc. and its officers for inspection
of corporate books and records. Respondents
filed an answer raising the affirmative defense
that Petitioners are not stockholders-of-record of
Abra Valley. Petitioners filed a motion for Production/

Petitioner to follow is to depose the physicians, ask them regarding the existence
of documents, and then move for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum
against the physicians or hospital. (See Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495, 504).
Of course in such a case, the physicians could invoke the physician-patient
privilege with respect to privileged documents.

551

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Inspection of Documents to compel the respondents
to produce the stock-and-transfer book (STB), but
the RTC denied the same on the ground that STB
may be examined only by a stockholder-of-record.
Was the denial proper?
A.

No. The rules of discovery, including Si R27, are to
be accorded broad and liberal interpretation. The RTC
should have favorably acted on the Petitioners'
Motion for Production/Inspection of Documents in
order to enable the Petitioners to obtain the fullest
possible knowledge of the issues and facts to be
determined in the case and thereby prevent the trial
from being carried on in the dark. Doing so would not
have caused any prejudice to the Respondents, for,
after all, even had the Petitioners not filed the Motion
for Production/Inspection of Documents, the Respondents
would themselves also be expected to produce the
STB in court in order to substantiate their affirmative
defense that the Petitioners were not stockholders-ofrecord of Abra Valley. Verily, that there was no entry
or record in the STB showing the Petitioners to be
stockholders of Abra Valley was no valid justification
for the Respondents not to produce the same.
Otherwise, the disputable presumption under S3(e)
R131 that "evidence willfully suppressed would be
adverse if produced" could arise against them.
(Insigne v. Abra Valley Colleges, Inc., 29 July 2015,
Bersamin, J.)

Q.

May a motion for production of documents under
R27 be properly denied if made after rendition
of judgment?

A.

Yes. While there is no specific time limit within which
the modes of discovery may be resorted to, it should
be remembered that their primordial purpose is to

552

Rule 27
Production Or Inspection of
Documents Or Things
expedite the resolution of the case and avoid delay.
Here the motion would only result in delay. (C/R v
SMC, 25 January 2017, Leonen, J.)
Q.

In an administrative proceeding before the Office
of the Government Counsel Legal Services-BSP,
may a party avail of service of written interrogatories
and a motion for production of documents?

A.

No. It bears stressing that the proceeding involved is
administrative in nature. Although trial courts are
enjoined to observe strict enforcement of the rules on
evidence, the same does not hold true for administrative
bodies. The Court has consistently held that technical
rules applicable to judicial proceedings are not exact
replicas of those in administrative investigations.
Recourse to discovery procedures as sanctioned by
the Rules of Court is then not mandatory for the
OGCLS-BSP. Hence, We cannot subscribe to Norlina's
tenacious insistence for the OGCLS-BSP to strictly
adhere to the Rules of Court so as not to purportedly
defeat her rights. (Sibayan v. Ada, 17 January 2018,
Velasco, J.).

553

RULE 28. PHYSICAL AND MENTAL
EXAMINATION OF PERSONS
Q.

What are the requirements for the issuance of
an order for the physical and mental examination
of a party?

A.
1) There should be a motion for good cause shown
and upon notice to the party to be examined and
to all other parties.
2)

Such motion shall specify the time, place, manner,
conditions and scope of the examination and the
person or persons by whom it is to be made.

3) The action in which the motion is made is one in
which the mental or physical condition of a party
is in controversy. (Si & 2, R28).
Q.

A court issued an order requiring a party to
submit to a physical or mental examination. The
party refused to do so. May the court order the
arrest of the disobedient party?

A.

No. The court may impose other penalties such as
rendering a judgment by default or issuing an order
that the physical or mental condition of the disobedient
party shall be taken to be established for the purposes
of the action in accordance with the claim of the party
obtaining the order but the court cannot order his
arrest. (S3[d] R29).

Q.

Wife filed a marriage nullification case against her
husband. The wife's psychologist sent a letter to
the husband requesting that he submit to a
psychological examination to be undertaken by
554

Rule 28
Physical And Mental
Examination Of Persons
the psychologist. The husband denied the request
If you were the lawyer for the wife, what legal step
would you take?
A.

If I were the wife's lawyer, I would file a motion for the
mental examination of the husband. This is allowed
since the husband's mental or psychological examination
is in controversy in the marriage nullification case.

Q.

Same facts as in the preceding question. The
court issued the order requiring the husband to
submit to a psychological examination but the
husband refused to do so. May the court order the
arrest of the husband?

A.

No. The court may issue an order that the mental
condition of the disobedient party shall be taken to be
established for the purposes of the action in
accordance with the claim of the party obtaining the
order but the court cannot order his arrest. (S3[d]
R29). Thus the court may issue an order that the wife
is suffering from narcissistic personality disorder
incapacitating her to comply with the essential marital
obligations, as contended by the husband.
Take note however that the court cannot render
a default judgment against the husband since default
judgments are prohibited in marriage nullification
cases. (S3[e] R9; Articles 48 and 60, Family Code).

Q.

What is the effect if the party examined requests
and obtains a report of the examination so ordered
or takes the deposition of the examiner?

A

.He waives any privilege he may have in that action or
any other involving the same controversy regarding
the testimony of every other person who has examined
or may thereafter examine him in respect of the same
mental or physical examination.
555

RULE 30. TRIAL
Q.

Define trial

A.

An examination, usually involving the offering of
testimony before a competent tribunal according to
established procedures, of facts or law put in issue in
a cause for the purpose of determining such issue.
(STEVEN GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 212 [1975]). In
its narrow sense, trial refers to the stage of a case
when the parties present their evidence before the
court up to the point when the case is deemed
submitted for decision.

Q.

Distinguish trial from hearing.

A.

The two terms are often used interchangeably. A
hearing however is also used in referring to interlocutory
motions, while trial usually refers to the stage where
the parties present their evidence.

Q.

What is the order of trial in civil actions?

A.
1) The plaintiff shall adduce evidence in support of
his complaint.
2)

The defendant shall then adduce evidence in
support of his defense, counterclaim, cross-claim
and third-party complaint.

3)

The third-party defendant, if any, shall adduce
evidence of his defense, counterclaim, crossclaim and fourth-party complaint.

4) The fourth-party, and so forth, if any, shall adduce
evidence of the material facts pleaded by them.

556

Rule 30
Trial
5)

The parties against whom any counterclaim or
cross-claim has been pleaded, shall adduce
evidence in support of their defense, in the order
to be prescribed by the court.

6) The parties may then respectively adduce rebutting
evidence only, unless the court, for good reasons
and in furtherance of justice, permits them to
adduce evidence upon their original case.
7)

Upon admission of the evidence, the case shall
be deemed submitted for decision, unless the
court directs the parties to argue or to submit their
respective memoranda or any further pleadings.
Note that memoranda are prohibited under the
Rule on Summary Procedure.

If several defendants or third-party defendants,
and so forth, having separate defenses appear by
different counsel, the court shall determine the relative
order of presentation of their evidence.
The trial shall be limited to the issues stated in
the pre-trial order. (S5 R30).
Q.

How is the offer of evidence, the comment or
objection thereo, and the court ruling made?

A.

The offer of evidence, the comment or objection
thereto, and the court ruling shall be made orally in
accordance with S35 to 40 R132. (56 R30 as added
in the 2020 Rules).

Q.

What is rebuttal evidence?

A.

Evidence given to explain, repel, counteract, or
disprove facts given in evidence by the adverse party.
(Black's Law Dictionary, Abridged 5th ed., 1983). For
instance the defendant presents evidence of an
expert's finding that his signature to the promissory
557

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
note was forged. In rebuttal, the plaintiff may present
his own expert witness to prove that the defendant's
signature on the note is genuine.
Q.

What is reverse trial and when may it be resorted
to? Explain briefly. (07 Bar 05b)

A.

Reverse trial is a trial in which it is the defendant or
accused who presents his evidence ahead of the
plaintiff or the prosecution, who may then present
rebutting evidence. It is called a reverse trial since it
is the reverse of the usual order of trial in which it is
the plaintiff or prosecution who first presents evidence.
In a civil case, a reverse trial may be resorted to
if the defendant admits the material allegations of the
complaint but interposes a lawful defense. (Yu v.
Mapayo, 29 March 1972). In a criminal case, a reverse
trial may be resorted to if the accused admits the act
or omission charged in the complaint or information
but interposes a lawful defense. (S11[e] R119).
The reason for conducting a reverse trial is that
the plaintiff or prosecution no longer needs to adduce
evidence to prove a judicial admission.

Q.

May judgment be rendered upon a stipulation
of facts?

A.

Yes. The parties to any action may agree, in writing,
upon the facts involved in the litigation, and submit
the case for judgment on the facts agreed upon,
without the introduction of evidence. If the parties
agree only on some of the facts in issue, the trial shall
be held as to the disputed facts in such order as the
court shall prescribe. (S6 R30). Take note however
that a judgment upon a stipulation of facts is not allowed
in actions for declaration of nullity or annulment of
marriage and legal separation. (Articles 48 and 60,
Family Code).
558

Rule 30
Trial
Q.

Give the rule regarding reception of evidence.

A.

The judge of the court where the case is pending shall
personally receive the evidence to be adduced by the
parties. (S9 R30).

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that it is
the presiding judge who shall personally receive
the evidence?

A.

The court may delegate the reception of evidence to
its clerk of court who is a member of the bar: (DEW)
1) In default or ex parte hearings, or
2) Where the parties agree in writing (89 R30).

Q.

Does the clerk of court have the power to rule
on objections to any question or to the admission
of exhibits?

A.

No. Such objections shall be resolved by the court
upon submission of the clerk of court's report and the
transcripts within 10 days from the termination of the
hearing. (89 R30).

Q.

In a hearing on a motion to dismiss, may the
judge delegate the reception of evidence to the
clerk of court?

A.

No, since this is not an ex parte motion, unless the
parties agree in writing to the delegation.

559

RULE 31. CONSOLIDATION
OR SEVERANCE
Q.

Define consolidation of actions.

A.

The act or process of uniting several actions into one
trial and judgment, by order of court; or the court may
order that one of the actions be tried, and the others
decided without trial according to the judgment in the
one selected. (BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 162, 5th
abridged ed., [1983]). The term "consolidation of actions"
is used interchangeably with the term "joint trial,"
although the former includes the situation wherein some
of the consolidated cases are decided without trial but
according to the result of the one selected.
Consolidation is a procedural device granted to
the court as an aid in deciding how cases in its docket
are to be tried so that the business of the court may
be dispatched expeditiously and with economy while
providing justice to the parties. To promote this end,
the rule permits the consolidation and a single trial of
several cases in the court's docket, or the consolidation
of issues within those cases. (Republic v. Sandiganbayan,
16 December 2011).

Q.

When may a court order the joint hearing, trial, or
consolidation of cases?

A.

When actions involving a common question of law or
fact are pending before the court, it may order a joint
hearing or trial of any or all the matters in issue in the
actions; it may order all the actions consolidated • and
it may make such orders concerning proceedings
therein as may tend to avoid unnecessary costs or
delay. (Si R31).

560

Rule 31
Consolidation Or Severance
Q.

In what senses is the term "consolidation" used?

A.

In the context of legal procedure, the term "consolidation"
is used in three different senses: (QAT)
1) QUASI-CONSOLIDATION. Where all except one
of several actions are stayed until one is tried, in
which case the judgment in the one trial is
conclusive as to the others. This is not actually
consolidation but is referred to as such.
2) ACTUAL CONSOLIDATION. Where several actions
are combined into one, lose their separate
identity, and become a single action in which a
single judgment is rendered. This is illustrated by
a situation where several actions are pending
between the same parties stating claims which
might have been set out originally in one complaint.
3)

CONSOLIDATION FOR TRIAL. Where several
actions are ordered to be tried together but each
retains its separate character and requires the
entry of a separate judgment. This type of consolidation
does not merge the suits into a single action, or
cause the parties to one action to be parties to
the other. (See Republic v. Sandiganbayan, 16
December 2011).

Q.

When may a court order a separate trial?

A.

The court, in furtherance of convenience or to avoid
prejudice may order a separate trial of any claim,
cross-claim, counterclaim, or third-party complaint, or
of any separate issue or of any number of claims,
cross-claims, counterclaims, third-party complaints
or issues.

561

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

On different dates in January 1986, three radio
commentators announced on radio that the plaintiff
was a drug lord. The plaintiff wanted to sue the
radio commentators for libel.
a) May the plaintiff file a complaint wherein he
joins his causes of action for libel against the
three radio commentators?
b) Assume that the plaintiff decides to file separate
cases for libel against the radio commentators.
May the plaintiff subsequently move for a joint
trial or for the consolidation of the cases?

A.
a) No. The joinder of causes of action did not comply
with the rule on joinder of parties which requires
that the right to relief arises from the same
transaction or series of transactions.
b) Yes P may move for a joint trial or for consolidation
of the cases since there is a common question of
law or fact, i.e., whether P is a drug lord or not
and whether the radio broadcasts are libelous.

562

RULE 32. TRIAL BY COMMISSIONER
Q.

When may a case be referred by the court to a
commissioner?

A.

By order of the court, a case may be referred to a
commissioner: (WMPE)
a) By written consent of both parties;
b) By motion of either party or on the court's initiative
in the following cases: (LAF)
1) When the trial of an issue of fact requires the
examination of a long account on either side;
2) When the taking of an account is necessary
for the information of the court before
judgment, or for carrying a judgment or order
into effect; or
3) When a question of fact other than upon the
pleadings, arises upon motion or otherwise, in
any stage of a case, or for carrying a judgment
or order into effect.
c) In expropriation cases for the purpose of determining
just compensation. (S5 R67).
d) In partition cases, where the parties are unable to
agree upon a partition. (83 R69).

Q.

What are the powers of the commissioner?

A.

Subject to the limitations and specifications stated in
the order of reference the commissioner has and
shall exercise the power to regulate the proceedings
in every hearing before him and to do all acts and
take all measures necessary or proper for the efficient
performance of his duties under the order. He may
563

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, swear
witnesses, and unless provided otherwise in the order
of reference, he may rule upon the admissibility of
evidence. The trial or hearing before him shall
proceed in all respects as it would if held before the
court. (S3 R32).
Q.

What is the effect if a witness refuses to obey a
subpoena issued by the commissioner or to give
evidence before him?

A.

The witness shall be deemed in contempt of the court
which appointed the commissioner. (S7 R32). The
commissioner himself has no power to cite the witness
in contempt. Such refusal constitutes an indirect
contempt under S3 R71.

Q.

Upon the completion of the trial or hearing or
proceeding before the commissioner, what shall
he do?

A.

He shall file with the court his report in writing upon
the matters submitted to him by the order of reference.
When his powers are not specified or limited, he shall
set forth his findings of fact and conclusions of law in
his report. He shall attach thereto all exhibits, affidavits,
depositions, papers and the transcript, if any, of the
testimonial evidence presented before him.

Q.

What shall the court do with the report?

A.

The court shall set the report for hearing, after which
the court shall issue an order adopting, modifying, or
rejecting the report in whole or in part, or recommitting
it with instructions, or requiring the parties to present
further evidence before the commissioner or the
court. (S11 R32). If the parties had stipulated that the
commissioner's factual findings shall be final, the
court may only consider questions of law arising from
the report. (311 R32).
564

RULE 33. DEMURRER TO EVIDENCE
Q.

What is a demurrer to evidence?

A.

A motion to dismiss filed by the defendant after the
plaintiff has completed the presentation of his evidence
on the ground that upon the facts and the law the
plaintiff has shown no right to relief. (Si R33).

Q.

What action shall be taken on a demurrer to
evidence?

A.

A demurrer to evidence shall be subject to the
provisions of R15. (82 R33, 2020 Rules of Civil
Procedure). The opposing party shall file his opposition to
the demurrer to evidence within five days from receipt
thereof. No other submissions shall be considered by
the court in the resolution of the demurrer. The
demurrer shall be resolved by the court within 15 days
from its receipt of the opposition thereto, or the
expiration of the period to file such opposition. (55[c]
R15). The court may call a hearing on the demurrer to
evidence. (86 R15).

Q.

May the order denying the demurrer to evidence
be the subject of an appeal or a petition under R65?

A.

No. The order denying the demurrer to evidence shall
not be subject of an appeal or petition for certiorari,
prohibition or mandamus before judgment. (S2 R33,
2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

What risk does the defendant take when he files a
demurrer to evidence?

A.

If the defendant's demurrer is granted but on appeal
the order of dismissal is reversed, he shall be deemed
to have waived the right to present evidence. In
practical terms, this means that the plaintiff already
565

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
wins the case since the appellate court should
forthwith render judgment for the plaintiff on the basis
of his evidence alone. On the other hand if the
demurrer is denied, the defendant still has the right to
present evidence. (Id.).
Q.

Carlos filed a complaint against Pedro in the
Regional Trial Court of Ozamis City for the
recovery of the ownership of a car. Pedro filed his
answer within the reglementary period. After the
pre-trial and actual trial, and after Carlos has
completed the presentation of his evidence, Pedro
moved for the dismissal of the complaint on the
ground that under the facts proven and the law
applicable to the case, Carlos is not entitled to the
ownership of the car. The Regional Trial Court
granted the motion for dismissal. Carlos appealed
the order of dismissal and the appellate court
reversed the order of the trial court. Thereafter,
Pedro filed a motion with the Regional Trial Court
asking the latter to allow him to present his
evidene. Carlos objected to the presentation of evidence
by Pedro. Should the Regional Trial Court grant
Pedro's motion to present his evidence? Why?

A.

No. Under Si R33, if a demurrer to evidence is
granted and on appeal the order of dismissal is
reversed, the movant shall be deemed to have waived
the right to present evidence.
Here Pedro filed a demurrer to evidence by
moving for dismissal, after Carlos had completed the
presentation of is evidence, on the ground that under
the facts and law Carlos is not entitled to relief
Hence when the order of dismissal was reversed on
appeal, Pedro is deemed to have waived his right to
present evidence and thus the Regional Trial Court
should not grant Pedros' motion to present evidence.
566

Rule 33
Demurrer To Evidence
Q.

Distinguish the effects of the filing of a demurrer
to evidence in a criminal case and its filing in a
civil case. (07 Bar Q5a).

A.

In a criminal case the filing of a demurrer to evidence
results in the waiver of the accused to adduce
evidence if the filing was without leave and the same
is denied, while in a civil case the filing of a demurrer
to evidence does not need leave of court and its
denial will not result in a waiver of the defendant to
present evidence.
In a criminal case the grant of the demurrer to
evidence results in the acquittal of the accused and
hence the dismissal cannot be appealed, while in a
civil case, the grant of the demurrer to evidence may
be appealed and if on appeal the dismissal of the case
is reversed by the appellate court, the defendant is
deemed to have waived the presentation of evidence.

Q.

Plaintiff finance company filed case against
defendant The defendant filed a demurrer to evidence.
The trial court granted the demurrer and dismissed
the complaint. On appeal, the Court of Appeals
reversed the trial court's order granting the demurrer.
The Court of Appeals ordered the remand of the
case to the trial court for further proceedings.
Was the Court of Appeal's remand order proper?

A.

No. The Supreme Court held that the remand was
improper since the Court of Appeals had enough
evidence on record to decide the case. To remand the
case for the defendant to present evidence before the
court a quo would be to circumvent the provisions of
Si R33 which provide that the defendant is deemed to
have waived the right to present evidence. (Radiowealth
Finance Company v. Del Rosario, 6 July 2000).

567

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In a demurrer to evidence, may the movant present
evidence in support of his motion?

A.

No. What should be resolved in a motion to dismiss
based on a demurrer to evidence is whether the
plaintiff is entitled to the relief based on the facts and
the law. The "facts" referred to should include all the
means sanctioned by the Rules of Court in ascertaining
matters in judicial proceedings. These include judicial
admissions, matters of judicial notice, stipulations
made during the pre-trial and trial, admissions, and
presumptions, the only exclusion being the defendant's
evidence. (GMA Network Inc. v. Central CA TV, Inc.,
18 July 2014).

Q.

May a demurrer to evidence be filed after the court
has rendered judgment?

A.

No. Being considered a motion to dismiss, a demurrer
to evidence must clearly be filed before the court
renders its judgment. (Gonzales v. Bugaay, 22
February 2012). In this case, the defendant's motion
for new trial was granted. However instead of presenting
new evidence, the defendant filed a demurrer to
evidence. The SC held that the defendant is deemed
to have abandoned his motion for new trial and thus
the judgment of the trial court stands.

568

RULE 34. JUDGMENT ON
THE PLEADINGS
Q.

What is a judgment on the pleadings?

A.

It is a judgment based solely on the relief prayed for in
the complaint without plaintiff adducing any evidence.

Q.

When may the court render judgment on the
pleadings?

A.

The court may motu proprio or on motion render
judgment on the pleadings if it is apparent that the
answer fails to tender an issue, or otherwise admits
the material allegations of the adverse party's pleadings.
The motion shall be subject to the provisions of R15.
(S2 R34, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure). Note that
unlike in the 1997 Rules, the court may motu proprio
render judgment on the pleadings.
The court may moth proprio include in the pretrial order that the case be submitted for judgment on
the pleadings. (S10 R18, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

Capitol Motors filed a complaint for sum of money
against Yabut. A copy of the promissory note
upon which the action was based was attached to
the complaint The complaint alleges that Yabut
defaulted in the payment of the note. Yabut filed
an answer in which he admits the paragraph regarding
his personal circumstances but "specifically denies"
the rest of the allegations for want of knowledge
or information sufficient to form a belief as to the
truth thereof. Capitol Motors moved for a judgment
on the pleadings in its favor. Should the trial court
grant the motion?

569

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. The third mode of specific denial may not be
availed of when the fact as to which want of
knowledge or information is claimed is so plainly and
necessarily within the defendant's knowledge that his
averment of ignorance must be palpably untrue. The
defendant must aver positively or state how it is that
he is ignorant of the fact alleged. Since there is an
implied admission of the material averments of the
complaint, a judgment on the pleadings may be rendered.
(Capitol Motors v. '(abut, 32 SCRA 1).

Q.

In a complaint for recovery of real property, the
plaintiff averred, among others, that he is the
owner of the said property by virtue of a deed of
sale executed by the defendant in his favor. Copy
of the deed of sale was appended to the complaint
as Annex "A" thereof.
In his unverified answer, the defendant denied
the allegation concerning the sale of the property
in question, as well as the appended deed of sale,
for lack of knowledge or information sufficient to
form a belief as to the truth thereof. Is it proper
for the court to render judgment without trial?
Explain. (05 Bar Q8).

A.

Yes, it is proper for the court to render judgment
without trial.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, a judgment
on the pleadings without trial may be rendered by the
trial court if the defendant's answer admits the material
allegations of the complaint.
Here the defendant's answer admitted the
material allegations of the complaint since the same
were not specifically denied. Defendant's denial for
lack of knowledge or information did not amount to a
specific denial whether or not he executed the deed of
570

Rule 34
Judgment On The Pleadings
sale was a matter which was plainly within his
knowledge. Furthermore, defendant impliedly admitted
the genuineness and due execution of the deed of
sale, an actionable document, when he failed to
specifically deny it under oath.
Hence a judgment on the pleadings without trial
may be rendered by the court in favor of the plaintiff.
Q. In 2000 Comglasco Corporation entered into a
five-year lease contract with Santos Car Check
Center. One year into the lease, Comglasco sent a
pretermination notice to Santos Car. Santos Car
filed a case for breach of contract and damages
against Comglasco. In its answer, Comglasco raised
the following defenses (a) rebus sic stantibus under
Article 1267 of the Civil Code, invoking financial
difficulties as a result of the 1997 Asian Financial
Crisis, and (b) legal or physical impossibility to
perform the prestation under Article 1266 of the
Civil Code. Article 1267 provides that "[w]hen the
service has become so difficult as to be manifestly
beyond the contemplation of the parties, the
obligor may also be released therefrom, in whole
or in part." Article 1266 states that "[t]he debtor
in obligations to do shall also be released when
the prestation becomes legally or physically impossible
without the fault of the obligor." Santos Car filed a
motion to render judgment on the pleadings. May
the court grant the motion?
A.

Yes. Comglasco's defenses of rebus sic stantibus
and legal or physical impossibility failed to tender an
issue. An obligation to pay rentals is not the "service"
contemplated of in Article 1267 nor is it a prestation
"to do" envisaged in Article 1266. Hence such defenses
are sham defenses which failed to tender an issue
and thus a judgment on the pleadings was proper.
571

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(Comglasco Corp. v. Santos Car Check Center, 25
March 2015).
Q.

What are the instances wherein a judgment on the
pleadings is not allowed?

A.

In actions for declaration of nullity or annulment of
marriage or for legal separation. (Si R34; 53[e] R9).

Q.

D promised to sell a parcel of land to P for P1
million and P accepted D's promise. Later on D
advised P that he was no longer interested in
selling the land to P. P filed a complaint for specific
performance against D to compel the latter to sell
the land. D filed an answer in which he admits that
he promised to sell the land to P and that P had
accepted his promise but alleges that the promise
was not supported by any consideration. P and D
jointly moved for a judgment on the pleadings.
The trial court rendered judgment dismissing the
complaint stating that the accepted unilateral
promise to sell is not binding upon the promissor
since it was not supported by any distinct
consideration. On appeal may P contend that the
trial court erred in finding that there was no
distinct consideration since cause is presumed in
a contract?

A.

No. One who prays for judgment on the pleadings
without offering proof as to the truth of his own
allegations, and without giving the opposing party an
opportunity to introduce evidence, impliedly admits
the truth of all the material and relevant allegations of
the opposing party, and to rest his motion for judgment
on those allegations taken together with such of his
own as are admitted in the pleadings. (See Sanchez
v. Rigos, 45 SCRA 368).

572

Rule 34
Judgment On The Pleadings
Q.

May the action of the court on a motion for
judgment on the pleadings be the subject of an
appeal or petition for certiorari, prohibition, or
mandamus?

A.

No. Any action of the court on a motion for judgment
on the pleadings shall not be subject of an appeal or
petition for certiorari, prohibition or mandamus. (S2
R34, 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).116

115The second paragraph of S2 R34 should be read as referring only to the
order of the court denying the motion for judgment on the pleadings or the order
of the court submitting the case for judgment on the pleadings (see S10 R18),
not to the judgment on the pleadings itself which is appealable under Si R41.

573

RULE 35. SUMMARY JUDGMENTS
Q.

What is a summary judgment?

A.

A judgment rendered by a court without a full-blown
trial, if the court finds that, except as to the amount of
damages there is no genuine issue as to any material
fact and the plaintiff or defendant is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law. The judgment need not
be on the entire case but only on specified factual
issues, with the court proceeding to try the other
factual issues. This is known as a partial summary
judgment. (THOMAS MAUET, FUNDAMENTALS OF
PRETRIAL TECHNIQUES 262 [1988]).

Q.

Even if there is a legal question remaining but
there is no material factual issue, a summary
judgment may be rendered.
When is there no genuine issue as to any material
fact?

A.

There is no genuine issue on any material fact when
there is no factual issue which will require a full-dress
evidentiary hearing involving presentation of witnesses
for regular examination. The absence of a genuine
material factual issue may be established by affidavits,
depositions, or admissions. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE 73-74 [2005 ed.]).

Q.

In what actions is summary judgment proper?

A.

In all actions where a claim or cause of action is
pleaded by or against a party. Note that in the special
civil action for declaratory relief, a summary judgment
may also be rendered although technically speaking
there is no claim or cause of action therein. (S1 & 2,
R35). Summary judgment is however not proper in
574

Rule 35
Summary Judgments
actions for declaration of nullity or annulment of
marriage or legal separation. (Roque v. Encamacion,
95 Phil. 643).
It has been written that a summary judgment is
proper only in actions to recover a debt, or for a
liquidated sum of money, or for declaratory relief.
(1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 357 [7th rev. ed., 3 rd printing, 1999]).
It is submitted that there is no such limitation and that
a summary judgment is proper in all actions in which
a claim is asserted by or against a party. Hence a
summary judgment is proper in personal injury cases.
(THOMAS MAUET, FUNDAMENTALS OF PRETRIAL
TECHNIQUES 262 [1988]).
Q.

When may a claimant move for summary judgment?

A.

A party seeking to recover upon a claim, counterclaim, or
cross-claim or to obtain a declaratory relief may, at
any time after the pleading in answer thereto has been
served move with supporting affidavits, depositions, or
admissions for a summary judgment in his favor upon
all or any part thereof. (Si R35).

Q.

Republic filed a forfeiture case against the heirs
of Ferdinand Marcos. After pre-trial, the Republic
filed a motion for summary judgment. The
Respondents argue that, by agreeing to proceed
to trial during the pre-trial conference, petitioner
waived its right to summary judgment. Is the
argument of the Respondents correct?

A.

No. This argument must fail in the light of the New
York Supreme Court ruling which we apply by
analogy to this case. In Ecker v. Muzysh, 19 NYS2d
250 (1940), the defendant opposed the motion for
summary judgment on a ground similar to that raised
by the Marcoses, that is, "that plaintiff had waived her
575

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
right to summary judgment" by her act of proceeding
to trial. If, as correctly ruled by the New York court,
plaintiff was allowed to move for summary judgment
even after trial and submission of the case for
resolution, more so should we permit it in the present
case where petitioner moved for summary judgment
before trial.
Therefore, the phrase "anytime after the pleading
in answer thereto has been served" in Section 1, Rule
35 of our Rules of Civil Procedure means "at any
stage of the litigation." Whenever it becomes evident
at any stage of the litigation that no triable issue
exists, or that the defenses raised by the defendant(s)
are sham or frivolous, plaintiff may move for summary
judgment. A contrary interpretation would go against
the very objective of the Rule on Summary Judgment
which is to "weed out sham claims or defenses
thereby avoiding the expense and loss of time
involved in a trial." (Republic v. Sandiganbayan, G.R.
No. 152154, 15 July 2003, e.b.).
Q.

Give an example where a claimant may move for a
summary judgment.

A.
1) Plaintiff files a tort case against defendant arising
from a vehicular accident. Defendant files an
answer admitting negligence but averring that the
damages claimed are exorbitant and unsupported
by evidence. Plaintiff may move for a summary
judgment in his favor on the issue of defendant's
negligence in which case the court will proceed
to try only the issue regarding the amount of
damages recoverable.

576

Rule 35
Summary Judgments
2) Plaintiff files an action to collect on a promissory
note. Defendant files an answer to which he
attaches a receipt showing payment. Plaintiff may
move for a summary judgment by attaching a
document signed by the parties showing that the
payment in the receipt was for another loan which
is not subject of the complaint.
Q.

May a defendant move for a summary judgment in
his favor? If so, when?

A.

Yes. A party against whom a claim, counterclaim, or
cross-claim is asserted or a declaratory relief is sought
may, at any time move with supporting affidavits,
depositions or admissions for a summary judgment in
his favor as to all or any part thereof. (S2 R35).

Q.

Describe the proceedings in a motion for summary
judgment.

A.

The motion shall cite the supporting affidavits,
depositions or admissions and the specific law relied
upon. The adverse party may file a comment and
serve opposing affidavits, depositions, or admissions
within a non-extendible period of five days from receipt
of the motion. Unless the court orders the conduct of a
hearing, judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if
the pleadings, supporting affidavits, depositions and
admissions on file, show that, except as to the amount
of damages, there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. (S3 R35, as amended in
the 2020 Rules of Civil Procedure).

Q.

Plaintiff sues defendant for collection of a promissory
note in the amount of P700,000. Defendant files
his answer setting forth the affirmative defense of
payment Defendant has a cancelled check in the
amount of P700,000 and a written receipt in full
577

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
voLumE I
signed by the plaintiff. If you were the lawyer for
the defendant, what procedural device would you
employ in behalf of the defendant in order to
obtain an expeditions result in his favor?
A.

The procedural device I would employ in behalf of the
defendant is to file a motion for summary judgment. I
would support the motion with the defendant's
affidavit, attaching thereto the cancelled check and
receipt. A full-blown trial would be avoided by the
defendant since it is clear that the debt had been paid
and that the cross-examination of the defendant
would be futile."'

Q.

Plaintiff sued defendant for collection of P1 million
based on the latter's promissory note. The complaint
alleges, among others:
1) Defendant borrowed P1 million from plaintiff as
evidenced by a duly executed promissory
note;
2) The promissory note reads:
"Makati, Philippines
Dec. 30, 2014
For value received from plaintiff, defendant
promises to pay plaintiff P1 million, twelve (12)
months from the above indicated date without
necessity of demand.
Signed
Defendant"

"'See Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464 (2d Cir. 1946), cited in ANTONIO
R. BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE 74(2005 ed.).

578

Rule 35
Summary Judgments
A copy of the promissory note is attached as
Annex "A."
Defendant, in his verified answer, alleged
among others:
1) Defendant specifically denies the allegation in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of the complaint, the truth
being defendant did not execute any promissory
note in favor of plaintiff, or
2) Defendant has paid the P1 million claimed in
the promissory note (Annex "A" of the Complaint)
as evidenced by an "Acknowledgment Receipt"
duly executed by plaintiff on January 30, 2015
in Manila with his spouse signing as witness.
A copy of the "Acknowledgment Receipt" is
attached as Annex "1" hereof.
Plaintiff filed a motion for judgment on the
pleadings on the ground that defendant's answer
failed to tender an issue as the allegations therein
on his defenses are sham for being inconsistent;
hence, no defense at all. Defendant filed an
opposition claiming his answer tendered an issue.
Plaintiffs motion for judgment on the
pleadings was denied. Defendant filed a motion for
summary judgment on the ground that there are no
longer any triable genuine issues of facts. Should
the court grant defendant's motion for summary
judgment? (15 Bar Q7b ed).
A.

Yes, the court should grant Defendant's motion for
summary judgment.
Under S2 R35, a defendant may at any time,
move with supporting admissions for a summary
judgment in his favor.
579

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Here the Plaintiff had impliedly admitted the
genuineness and due execution of the acknowledgment
receipt, which was the basis of Defendant's defense,
by failing to specifically deny it under oath. Hence
Plaintiff's claim is groundless and the Defendant is
entitled to a summary judgment in his favor.
Q.

Distinguish a judgment on the pleadings from a
summary judgment.

A.

The distinctions between a judgment on the pleadings
and a summary judgment are as follows:
1) Judgment on the pleadings is proper if it appears
that there is no genuine issue between the
parties, while a summary judgment is proper even
if there is a remaining issue as to the amount of
damages.
2) Judgment on the pleadings is based exclusively
upon the pleadings without the presentation of
any evidence, while a summary judgment is
based not only on the pleadings but also upon
supporting affidavits, depositions, and admissions
showing that, except as to the amount of
damages, there is no genuine issue. A judgment
on the pleadings is a judgment on the facts as
pleaded, while a summary judgment is a
judgment on the facts as proven summarily by
affidavits, depositions or admissions. 2 MANUEL
V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF
COURT 170 (1979 ed.).
3) Judgment on the pleadings may be prayed for only
by a plaintiff or claimant, while a summary
judgment may be prayed for by a defending party.
(S2 R35).

580

Rule 35
Summary Judgments
Q.

Plaintiff filed with the RTC an action to collect P1
million on a promissory note against the Defendant
Defendant filed an answer in which he raised the
affirmative defense of payment Defendant attached
to his answer a copy of a receipt purportedly
signed by the Plaintiff, acknowledging payment of
the P1 million promissory note. Plaintiff did not
file a reply to the answer. If you were the lawyer
for the defendant, what procedural device would
you use in order to obtain an expeditious, favorable
result for your client?

A.

I would file a motion for summary judgment dismissing
the complaint. A motion for summary judgment is
available where there is no genuine material factual
issue and defendant is entitled to a judgment in his favor.
Here the plaintiff is deemed to have admitted the
genuineness and due execution of the receipt, an
actionable document, when he failed to file a reply
specifically denying under oath its genuineness and
due execution. Thus there is no genuine material
factual issue as to payment.

Q.

May a party introduce exhibits in support of the
motion for summary judgment?

A.

Yes. While the rules expressly mention only "supporting
affidavits, depositions or admissions," there is no bar
to supporting the motion with documents or exhibits.
In practice, such exhibits are attached to the supporting
affidavit. (See THOMAS MAUET, FUNDAMENTALS OF
PRETRIAL TECHNIQUES 262 [1988]; 1 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
360-61 [7th rev. ed., 3 rd printing, 1999]). Thus 35 R35
provides that "[c]ertified true copies of all papers or
parts thereof referred to in the [supporting] affidavit
shall be attached thereto or served therewith."
581

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is a partial summary judgment?

A.

A partial summary judgment is a judgment which is
rendered if in a motion for summary judgment,
judgment is not rendered upon the whole case or for
all the reliefs sought and a trial is necessary. In such
a case, the court may, by examining the pleadings and
the evidence before it and by interrogating counsel,
ascertain what material facts exist without substantial
controversy, including the extent to which the amount
of damages or other relief is not in controversy, and
directing such further proceedings in the action as are
just The facts so ascertained shall be deemed
established, and the trial shall be conducted on the
controverted facts accordingly. (S4 R35).

Q.

May a partial summary judgment be appealed
separately from the judgment in the entire case?

A.

No. A partial summary judgment is an interlocutory
order that was never meant to be treated separately
from the main case. It is merely a pre-trial adjudication
that certain issues in the case shall be deemed
established for the trial of the case. Hence the failure
to appeal separately from a partial summary judgment
or to challenge it by a special civil action for certiorari
does not make the same final and executory.
(Philippine Business Bank v. Chua, 15 November
2010, Brion, J.).

Q.

May a partial summary judgment be executed if
the entire case has not yet been resolved?

A.

No. What S4 R35 contemplates is that an appeal from
a partial summary judgment shall be taken together
with the judgment that the trial court may render in the
entire case after trial has been conducted on the
controverted facts. Inasmuch as a partial summary
judgment does not finally dispose of the action,
582

Rule 35
Summary Judgments
execution thereof shall not issue, conformably with
Section 1 of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. (Province
of Pangasinan v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 104266,
31 March 1993; Guevarra v. Court of Appeals, 124
SCRA 297 [1983]).
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for collection of the
principal amount of P1,000,000 and accrued interest
of P350,000 against Defendant. Defendant filed his
answer. Plaintiff moved for summary judgment
contending that there was no genuine material
factual issue. The court rendered summary judgment
for the principal amount of P1,000,000 but ordered
that trial proceed regarding the accrued interest
of P350,000 since there was a genuine material
factual issue therein. Subsequently Plaintiff filed
a motion for execution of the judgment for
P1,000,000 contending that it became final and
executory because of the Defendant's failure to
appeal therefrom. May the court grant the motion
for execution?

A.

No. The summary judgment rendered by the court is a
partial summary judgment since it was rendered only
with respect to the relief respecting the principal of
P1,000,000 but not respect to the relief regarding the
interest which was still the subject of trial. The Supreme
Court has held that a partial summary judgment,
being an interlocutory order, may not be appealed.
Being merely interlocutory, the partial summary judgment
may not be enforced while the case is still pending.

Q.

A summary judgment did not make any determination
as to damages. Is it appealable?

A.

Yes. A summary judgment which did not make any
determination as to damages is a final judgment and
thus appealable. (Trade & Investment Dev't Corp. v.
583

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Phil. Veterans Bank, 1 July 2019, Caguioa, J.). In a
partial summary judgment under S4 R3, the trial court
would have specified what facts are controverted and
trial would still be conducted on such facts.
Q.

May the action of the court on a motion for
summary judgment be the subject of an appeal or
petition for certiorari, prohibition, or mandamus?

A.

No. Any action of the court on a motion for summary
judgment shall not be subject of an appeal or petition
for certiorari, prohibition or mandamus. (S2 R34, 2020
Rules of Civil Procedure).118

118The second paragraph of 52 R34 should be read as referring only to the
order of the court denying the motion for summary judgment or the order of the
court submitting the case for summary judgment (see 510 R18), not to the
summary judgment itself which is appealable under Si R41.

584

RULE 36. JUDGMENTS, FINAL ORDERS,
AND ENTRY THEREOF
Q.

Define judgment.

A.

The final determination by a court of the rights of the
parties in a case submitted before it.

Q.

What are the essential requisites of a valid judgment?

A.
1) The court rendering the judgment must have
'urisdiction over the subject matter of the case
and over the person of the plaintiff and defendant,
or over the res, in an action in personam or quasi
in rem. (spr)
2) Indispensable parties should have been impleaded.
Q.

Kemper Insurance Company, an American company,
sued Cosco Philippines Shipping for damages to
goods delivered by Cosco. Judgment was rendered
by the RTC in favor of Kemper. On appeal, Cosco
raised for the first time that Atty. Lat, who had
signed the verification and certification against
forum shopping in behalf of Kemper Insurance,
had not been authorized by a board resolution to
file the complaint in behalf of Kemper and to sign
the verification and CFS. May the judgment of the
RTC be set aside?

A.

Yes. The failure of Atty. Lat to show that he was
authorized to file the complaint in behalf of Kemper
meant that the RTC did not acquire jurisdiction over
the person of the plaintiff. Hence the court did not
acquire jurisdiction over the case. Lack of jurisdiction

585

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
over the case may be raised at any stage of the case.
(Cosco PhiIs. Shipping v. Kemper Insurance Company,
23 April 2012)
Q.

What are the requirements for the rendition of a
judgment or final order?

A.

A judgment or final order determining the merits of the
case shall be in yvritinq personally and directly
prepared by the judge, stating clearly the facts and
the law on which it is based, signed by him, and filed
with the clerk of court.

Q.

What is a sin perjuicio judgment?

A.

It is a judgment without a statement of the facts in
support of its conclusions. Such a judgment is void
for it violates Section 14, Article VIII of the Constitution.
Thus the party adversely affected would be unable to
file a motion for reconsideration or appeal the judgment
for he has to speculate on the grounds upon which
the judge based his decision.

Q.

A dismissal order tersely read as follows: "For
failure of the Plaintiff, to prosecute, the case is
hereby dismissed." Is the dismissal order valid?

A.

No. The same has the effect of an adjudication on the
merits (S3 R17) and thus should have stated the facts
on which it is based pursuant to 51 R36. Failure to
comply therewith renders the order null and
void. (Shimizu Philippines Contractors v. Magsalin,
20 June 2012).

Q.

An RTC decision merely narrated the relevant
facts and then proceeded to the dispositive portion.
Is the RTC decision valid?

586

Rule 36
Judgments, Final Orders,
And Entry Thereof
A.

No the decision is void. Under S1 R36, the judgment
shall clearly and distinctly state the facts and the law
on which it is based. A decision without any legal basis
is a nullity. (PNB v Entapa, 7 Sep 2016, Leonen, J.)

Q.

What is a memorandum decision?

A.

A memorandum decision is one rendered by an
appellate court which adopts by reference the findings
of facts and the conclusions of law set forth in the
decision, order, or resolution appealed from. (Sec. 40,
BR Blg. 129; S5 R51).

Q.

The Decision of the Regional Trial Court of Makati
affirming the decision of the MTC of Makati City
read in full as follows:
MEMORANDUM DECISION
After a careful and thorough perusal, evaluation
and study of the records of this case, this Court
hereby adopts by reference the findings of fact and
conclusions of law contained in the decision of the
Metropolitan Trial Court of Makati, Metro Manila,
Branch 63 and finds that there is no cogent reason
to disturb the same.
WHEREFORE, judgment appealed from is
hereby affirmed in toto.
The decision of the MTC or the findings of
fact and conclusions of law adopted by the RTC
were not attached or annexed to the memorandum
decision. The Defendant assailed the validity of
the RTC judgment on the ground that it does not
comply with Article VIII, Section 14 of the
Constitution which states that "[tic) decision shall
be rendered by any court without expressing therein
clearly and distinctly the facts and the law on
which it is based." Did the RTC judgment sufficiently
comply with the said constitutional provision?
587

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. While memorandum decisions are allowed by
Section 40 of B.P. Blg. 129, the memorandum
decision, to be valid, cannot incorporate the findings
of fact and the conclusions of law of the lower court
only by remote reference, which is to say that the
challenged decision is not easily and immediately
available to the person reading the memorandum
decision. For the incorporation by reference to be
allowed, it must provide for direct access to the facts
and the law being adopted, which must be contained
in a statement attached to the said decision. In other
words, the memorandum decision authorized under
Section 40 of B.P. Blg. 129 should actually embody
the findings of fact and conclusions of law of the lower
court in an annex attached to and made an
indispensable part of the decision. (See Francisco v.
Permskul, 12 May 1989, Cruz, J.).

Q.

What is a nunc pro tunc judgment or order?

A.

"Nunc pro tunc" means "now for then." A nunc pro
tunc judgment or order is one rendered to record
some judicial act done at a former time but which was
not carried into the record. It is proper only for the
purpose of placing into the record judicial action which
was actually taken.
For instance the name of the defendant was
already corrected in open court from Juan dela Cruz
to Juan Cruz and approved by the court but this was
not carried into the record. The court in its judgment
ordered Defendant Juan dela Cruz to pay Plaintiff.
Upon plaintiff's motion or even on its own initiative,
the court may issue a nunc pro tunc order correcting
the defendant's name.
Since the only function of a nunc pro tunc
judgment or order is to place into the record judicial
action actually taken, it cannot correct judicial errors,
588

Rule 36
Judgments, Final Orders,
And Entry Thereof
however flagrant and glaring these may be (Henderson
v. Tan, 87 Phil. 466), nor can it construe what the
judgment means. (Lichauco v. Tan Po, 51 Phil. 862).
Q.

In a judgment for partition, certain properties
subject of the partition were overlooked and not
mentioned in the dispositive portion. What step
may the court take?

A.

The court may render a nunc pro tunc judgment
including the overlooked properties in the dispositive
portion. (Magno v. Magno, 17 August 2016, Peralta, J.).

Q.

What is meant by entry of judgments and final orders?

A.

If no appeal or motion for new trial or reconsideration
is filed within the time provided in the Rules, the
judgment or final order shall forthwith be entered by
the clerk in the book of entries of iudgments. The date
of finality of the iudgment or final order shall be
deemed to be the date of its entry. The record shall
contain the dispositive part of the judgment or final
order and shall be signed by the clerk, with a certificate
that such judgment or final order has become final
and executory.

Q.

What is the importance of the date of entry?

A.

The date of entry is the starting point of the 6-month
period for filing a petition for relief (S3 R38), the 5year period for filing a motion for execution (S6 R39),
and the 10-year period for filing an action for revival of
judgment (Art. 1144, Civil Code).

Q.

What is a several judgment?

A.

It is a judgment rendered by a court in an action
against several defendants where the court renders
judgment against one or more of them, leaving the
action to proceed against the others. (S4 R36).
589

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is a separate judgment?

A.

It is a judgment rendered by a court in an action
wherein more than one claim for relief is presented
and where the court renders a separate judgment
disposing of a claim or some of them but allowing the
action to proceed against the remaining claims. (S5 R36).

Q.

May a separate judgment be enforced even while
the action is proceeding against the remaining claims?

A.

Yes. Under S5 R36, in case a separate judgment is
rendered, the court by order may stay its enforcement
until the rendition of the subsequent judgment or
judgments. Since the word used is "may," the court
has the discretion not to stay the enforcement of the
separate judgment. This distinguishes a separate
judgment from a partial summary judgment which
cannot be enforced until judgment has been rendered
in the entire case.

Q.

May an appeal be taken from a separate or several
judgment?

A.

No, unless the court allows the appeal. (Si[f] R41).
The remedy of the aggrieved party is to file the
appropriate special civil action under R65. (Si R41).
Where an appeal is allowed, the same shall be taken
by filing a notice of appeal and a record on appeal
within 30 days from notice of the order allowing the
appeal. (S3 R41).

Q.

Distinguish a partial summary judgment from a
separate judgment.119

1191n Marcos v. Republic, G.R. No. 189434, 25 April 2012, it was stated
that a partial summary judgment may also be considered as a separate
judgment. This is not altogether precise. As held by the Supreme Court in
Province of Pangasinan v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 104266, 31 March 1993,
the applicable provision where a partial summary judgment has been rendered is
S4 R35 and not 55 R36 which applies to judgments in general.

590

Rule 36
Judgments, Final Orders,
And Entry Thereof
PARTIAL SUMMARY
JUDGMENT

SEPARATE JUDGMENT

One claim. Judgment for part
thereof or for some of the
reliefs thereof.
Judgment is summary.

More than one claim.
Judgment for one claim/s but
action to proceed as to
remaining claims.

Governed by S4 R35.

Governed by S5 R36.

Interlocutory order.

Judgment or final order.

Cannot be appealed until
after judgment in the entire
case has been rendered.

As a rule not appealable
while the main case is
pending, unless the court
allows an appeal therefrom.
(S1[f] R41)

Cannot be enforced until
rendition of judgment in the
entire case.

May be enforced even prior
to rendition of the subsequent
judgment/s unless stayed by
court. (S5 R36)

Note: A partial summary judgment and a separate
judgment are similar in that both may be executed
after rendition of judgment in the entire or main case,
under the same terms and conditions as execution of
a judgment or final order pending appeal. (S2[1,3] R39).
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for collection on a road
construction project against the Province of
Pangasinan. Per the plaintiffs contract with the
province, the project involved two phases, Phase
1 and Phase 2, for a total consideration of P5
million and that upon completion of Phase 1, the
plaintiff would be entitled to a payment of P3
million. The plaintiff alleged that he had completed
Phase 1 and had accomplished 60% of Phase 2
but that the defendant had decided not to proceed
with the project and to pay the amounts due him.
The plaintiff filed a motion for partial summary
judgment on Phase 1 which was granted by the
591

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
trial court. Subsequently the plaintiff filed a
motion for execution of the partial summary
judgment while the trial court was still trying the
case with respect to Phase 2. The trial court
granted the motion for execution stating that
since the Province of Pangasinan had failed to
appeal from the partial summary judgment within
30 days from notice, the same had become final
and executory, invoking 55 R36. Was it proper for
the trial court to grant the motion for execution?
A.

No. The Supreme Court has held that a partial
summary judgment being interlocutory cannot be the
subject of execution. The Supreme Court also held
that since what was involved was a partial summary
judgment, the applicable provision was S4 R35 and
hence it was error for the trial court to rely upon S5
R36 which pertains to judgments in general. (Province
of Pangasinan v. Court of Appeals, 220 SCRA
726 [1993]).120

Q.

Tan, a stockholder and director of CST Inc. (CST),
filed a derivative suit for the declaration of
unenforceability of promissory notes and mortgage
against Philippine Business Bank (PBB), John,
and Felipe before the Makati City RTC. Tan alleged
that CST's real properties had been fraudulently
mortgaged to PBB without the authority of the
board of directors of CST. Tan alleged that a
forged secretary's certificate purportedly authorizing
John to obtain a loan from PBB and to mortgage
CST's properties had been procured by defendants.

120A partial summary judgment was proper since there was only one claim,
that is, for collection of the road project. The defendant's anticipatory breach
rendered the breach single and indivisible, thus constituting only one cause of
action. A separate judgment under S5 R36 involves two or more claims, with
judgment being rendered in one.

592

Rule 36
Judgments, Final Orders,
And Entry Thereof
John and Felipe had signed as co-makers on the
promissory notes (PNs) executed by CST in favor
of PBB.
PBB filed an answer alleging the genuineness
of the secretary's certificate and the enforceability
of the PNs and mortgage deeds. PBB also filed a
cross-claim against Felipe demanding payment of
the PNs he had co-signed with CST. In Felipe's
answer to PBB's cross-claim he denied having
authorized John to obtain the loan from PBB but
admitting having signed the PNs in a sincere effort
to persuade John to pay off the loan and redeem
CST's properties.
PBB subsequently filed a Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment based on S1 R35, claiming
that since Felipe already admitted the execution of
the promissory notes in favor of PBB amounting to
P75,000,000 insofar as its cross-claim against him
was concerned, there was no genuine issue on
any material fact on the issue of his liability to
PBB. PBB argued that although Felipe claimed
that he signed the promissory notes merely to
persuade John to pay off his loan to PBB, he was
still liable as an accommodation party under Section
29 of the Negotiable Instruments Law. The RTC
granted the Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
Felipe filed a notice of appeal from the summary
judgment against him. PBB countered with a
motion to disallow appeal and a motion for execution.
The RTC, invoking S1(f) R41, disallowed Felipe's
appeal and granted the motion for execution.
The RTC ruled that since Felipe had failed to avail
of certiorari as per the last sentence of S1 R41,

593

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

the partial summary judgment had become final
and executory. Did the RTC act correctly in
granting the motion for execution of the summary
judgment?
A.

No, the RTC did not act correctly in granting the
motion for execution of the partial summary judgment.
A partial summary judgment is an interlocutory order
which cannot become final and executory by the
failure to file a certiorari petition to challenge the
judgment. Accordingly, the RTC grievously erred
when it issued the writ of execution against Felipe.
(Philippine Business Bank v. Chua, 15 November
2010, Brion, J.).121

121 While the judgment rendered against Felipe was a summary judgment,
it was not a partial summary judgment because it was a judgment on the entire
claim, i.e., PBB's cross-claim against Felipe. Thus the summary judgment was
actually a several judgment which under 55 R36 may be enforced prior to the
rendition of judgment in the main case or in the other claims, unless stayed by
the court. This point was belatedly raised by PBB on appeal but the Supreme
Court stated, inter alia, that PBB was estopped from doing so since it had in the
court a quo treated the judgment as a partial summary judgment and had
anchored its legal theory on that consideration.

594

RULE 37. NEW TRIAL OR
RECONSIDERATION
Q.

When may a party file a motion for new trial or
reconsideration?

A.

Within the period for taking an appeal. (Si R37).

Q.

What are the grounds of a motion for new trial?
(FAME-N)

A.
a) Fraud, accident, mistake or excusable negligence
(1) which ordinary prudence could not have
guarded against and (2) by reason of which such
aggrieved party has probably been impaired in
his rights; or
b) Newly discovered evidence, which (1) he could
not, with reasonable diligence, have discovered
and produced at the trial, and which (2) if presented
would probably alter the result. (Si R37).
Q.

May a motion for new trial be filed with the Court
of Appeals in an appealed case? If so when and
on what ground?

A.

Yes. At any time after the appeal from the lower court
has been perfected and before the Court of Appeals
loses jurisdiction over the case, a party may file a
motion for a new trial on the ground of newly discovered
evidence which could not have been discovered prior
to the trial in the court below by the exercise of due
diligence and which is of such a character as would
probably change the result. (Si R53). The court of appeals
may receive evidence in its discretion. (52 R53).

595

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a motion for new trial be filed with the
Supreme Court?

A.

In civil cases a motion for new trial may not be filed
with the Supreme Court as such a remedy is not
provided for in the Rules of Court. The Supreme Court
however may in exceptional cases take cognizance of
factual issues by virtue of its plenary judicial power.
(JOSE FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
201 [1997]).
In criminal cases, a motion for new trial on the
ground of newly-discovered evidence may be filed
with the Supreme Court. (Si R125 in relation to S14
R124). Thus in Custodio v. Sandiganbayan, 8 March
2005, the Supreme Court entertained a motion for
new trial by the accused convicted in the AquinoGalman double murder case.

Q.

May a motion for extension of time to file a motion
for new trial or reconsideration be filed?

A.

No motion for extension of time to file a motion for
new trial or reconsideration may be allowed. (83
R41). Motions for extension of time to file a motion for
new trial or reconsideration may be filed only in
connection with cases pending before the Supreme
Court. No such motion may be filed before any lower
court. (Fernandez v. CA, 16 May 2005).

Q.

What is the meaning of "fraud" as a ground for
new trial under Sl(a) R37?

A.

The fraud referred to in S1(a) R37 is extrinsic fraud,
that is, deception or trickery by which the aggrieved
party was prevented from having trial or presenting
his case before the court. It should be distinguished
from intrinsic fraud which involves the presentation of
false or perjured testimony but did not otherwise
prevent the aggrieved party from presenting his case.
596

Rule 37
New Trial Or Reconsideration
Q.

Give examples of extrinsic fraud.

A.
1) When a party connived with the court personnel so
that notices of trial dates were sent to the old
address of the aggrieved party's counsel although
a notice of change of address had been filed.
2) The aggrieved party's lawyer betrays him and sells
out his case to the other side.
3) The judge is bribed by the adverse party to render
a decision in his favor.
Q.

What is the meaning of accident within the purview
of S1 R37?

A.

Accident is similar to the concept of fortuitous event in
civil law. It is something which ordinary prudence on
the part of party or counsel could not have guarded
against.
If counsel loses his planner but did not exert
diligent efforts to inquire from the court about trial
dates, he cannot complain if he was not able to attend
an important trial setting. On the other hand if counsel
was injured in a vehicular collision and was unable
to attend crucial trial dates, that would be a ground for
a new trial.

Q.

Give an example of mistake which constitutes a
sufficient ground for a new trial.

A.

If a party, because of a pending compromise agreement,
believed in good faith that it was not necessary for
him to answer, appear at the trial and put up a
defense, there is a mistake which would constitute a
sufficient ground for a new trial. (Salazar v. Salazar,
8 Phi. 853).
597

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is mistake of a party's counsel a ground for a
new trial?

A.

No. The mistake or lack of foresight or skill on the part
of counsel cannot be admitted as reason for
reopening cases. Otherwise there would be no end to
cases so long as a new counsel could be engaged
who could allege and show that prior counsel had not
been sufficiently diligent, or experienced or learned.

Q.

Distinguish a motion for new trial from a motion
for reopening a trial.

A.
1) A motion for new trial is a remedy specifically
mentioned in the Rules of Court, while a motion
for reopening of trial is not so mentioned, at least
insofar as civil cases are concerned.
2)

A motion for new trial may only be filed after the
judgment had been rendered, while a motion for
reopening may be made before or after judgment.

3) A motion for new trial is based on specific grounds
set forth in S1 R37, while a motion for reopening
is based on broader grounds, that is, the paramount
interests of justice.
Q.

What are the contents of a motion for new trial?
(WAS)

A.
1) The motion shall be in writing.
2) It should state the grounds therefor.
3) A motion based on the ground of fraud, accident,
mistake, or excusable negligence shall be supported
by an affidavit of merits while a motion based on
598

Rule 37
New Trial Or Reconsideration
newly discovered evidence shall be supported by
affidavits of the witnesses by whom such evidence
is expected to be given, or by duly authenticated
documents which are proposed to be introduced
in evidence. (32 R37).
Q.

What is an affidavit of merits?

A.

It is an affidavit which recites: (FEC)
1) The nature and character of the fraud, accident,
mistake, or excusable negligence on which it is
based;

Q.

2)

The facts constituting the movant's good and
substantial cause of action or defense, as the
case may be; and

3)

The evidence he intends to present if the motion
is granted, which evidence must be such as to
warrant the reasonable belief that the result of the
case would probably be different, if a new trial
were conducted.

What are the grounds
reconsideration? (LED)

for

a

motion

for

A.
1) The damages awarded are excessive;
2) The evidence is insufficient to justify the decision
or final order;
3) The decision or final order is contrary to law.
Q.

What are the contents
reconsideration?

A.

A motion for reconsideration shall point out specifically
the findings or conclusions of the judgment or final
order which are not supported by the evidence or
599

of

a

motion

for

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
which are contrary to law, making express reference
to the testimonial or documentary evidence or to the
provisions of law alleged to be contrary to such
findings or conclusion. (32 R37).
Q.

What are the instances when a motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial of a final
judgment is prohibited? (ISESA)

A.
1) Under the Rule on Summary Procedure.
2) In ejectment cases.
3) Cases governed by the Rules of Procedure on
Intra-Corporate Disputes, and

Q.

4)

Cases governed by the Rule of Procedure for
Small Claims Cases.

5)

Order of court granting an affirmative defense.
(S12[c] R15, 2020 Rules).

What are the instances when a motion for
reconsideration is a condition precedent for taking
an appeal? (CLAN)

A.
1) From a judgment in cases for legal separation,
annulment, and declaration of nullity of marriage.
2) From a judgment in petition for custody of minor
under the SC Rules on Cases Involving Custody
of Minors.
Q.

In 1995, Rhomel Cote and respondent Florie Cote,
both Filipinos, were married in Quezon City. In
2002, Rhomel filed a Petition for Divorce before
the Family Court of the First Circuit of Hawaii on
the ground that their marriage was irretrievably
600

Rule 37
New Trial Or Reconsideration
broken. This was granted in 23 August 2002 by
the issuance of a decree of absolute divorce that
stated that either party (Rhomel or Florie) is
permitted to marry from and after the effective
date of the decree.
Seven years later, Florie commenced a petition
for recognition of foreign judgment granting the
divorce before the RTC. Florie also prayed for the
cancellation of her marriage contract, hence, she
also impleaded the Civil Registry of Quezon City
and the NSO. In 2011, the RTC granted the petition
and declared Florie to be capacitated to remarry
after the RTC's decision attained finality and a
decree of absolute nullity has been issued.
Petitioner filed a Notice of Appeal on 17 May
2011. However, the RTC, believing that the
petition was covered by A.M. No. 02-11-10-SC or
the Rule on Declaration of Absolute Nullity of Void
Marriages and Annulment of Voidable Marriages,
applied Section 20 of said Rule and denied the
appeal because the notice was not preceded by a
motion for reconsideration. Aggrieved, the petitioner
filed a petition for certiorari with the CA. Was the
denial of the appeal correct?
A.

No. A decree of absolute divorce procured abroad is
different from annulment as defined by our family
laws. A.M. No. 02-11-10-SC covers only void and
voidable marriages that are specifically cited and
enumerated in the Family Code of the Philippines.
Void and voidable marriages contemplate a situation
wherein the basis for the judicial declaration of absolute
nullity or annulment of the marriage exists before or at
the time of the marriage. It treats the marriage as if it
never existed. Divorce, on the other hand, ends a
legally valid marriage and is usually due to circumstances
arising after the marriage.
601

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
It was error for the RTC to use as basis for denial
of petitioner's appeal Section 20 of A.M. No. 02-1110-SC. Since Florie followed the procedure for
cancellation of entry in the civil registry, a special
proceeding governed by Rule 108, an appeal from the
RTC decision should be governed by S3 R41 and not
A.M. No. 02-11-10-SC. (Republic v. Cote, 14 March
1).122
2018, Reyes,
Q.

What is the effect of a motion for new trial or
reconsideration on the period of appeal?

A.

The filing of a timely motion for new trial or
reconsideration shall toll or interrupt the reglementary
period of appeal. Upon receipt of the order denying
the motion for new trial or reconsideration, the movant
has a fresh 48-hour, 6-working day, 15-day or 30-day
period to appeal, as the case may be.

Q.

What is a pro forma motion for new trial or
reconsideration? What is the result if such a
motion is filed?

A.

A pro forma motion for new trial or reconsideration is
one which does not comply with the requirements of
S2 R37 and S2-5, S7 R15. Such a motion would be a
mere scrap of paper and would have no legal effect.
This includes a motion for new trial based on
fraud, accident, mistake or excusable negligence which
is not supported by an affidavit of merits; or motions
without the requisite proof of service and notice of

I221he SC nevertheless affirmed the CA's decision dismissing petitioner's
petition for certiorari on the ground that there was no grave abuse of discretion
on the part of the RTC in dismissing the appeal. This is arguable. It is more
plausible to think that the dear misapplication of AM. No. 02-11-10-SC
amounted to grave abuse of discretion. Furthermore, the petition should also
have been treated as one for mandamus since the duty to allow a timely and
proper appeal is ministerial.

602

Rule 37
New Trial Or Reconsideration
hearing. The result is that the pro forma motion does
not toll the reglementary period of appeal and thus the
challenged judgment would become final.
Q.

May a second motion for new trial be filed? If so
when may it be filed?

A.

Generally no. The exception would be when the
second motion for new trial is based on a ground not
existing nor available when the first motion for new
trial was made. The second motion may be filed
within the time herein provided excluding the time
during which the first motion had been pending. (S5
R37). In the light of Neypes v. Court of Appeals, 14
September 2005, this should be taken to mean that
the second motion may be filed within 15 or 30 days
from notice of the denial of the first motion.

Q.

May a second motion for reconsideration be filed?

A.

No, pursuant to S5 R37. This rule applies also to the
Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court. (S2 R52,
S4 R56). However in exceptional cases and in the
exercise of its equity jurisdiction, the Supreme Court
may entertain a second motion for reconsideration.

603

RULE 38. PETITION FOR RELIEF
Q.

When may a party file a petition for relief from a
judgment, final order or other proceeding?

A.

When a judgment or final order is entered, or any
other proceeding is thereafter taken against a party in
any court through fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable
negligence, he may file a verified petition in such
court and in the same case praying that the judgment,
order or proceeding be set aside. (S1 R38).

Q.

Is Rule 38 applicable to criminal cases?

A.

Yes. See for instance Basco v. Court of Appeals, 337
SCRA 472 (2000) where the Supreme Court allowed
the filing of a petition for relief from a judgment of
conviction in a criminal case.

Q.

May a party file a petition for relief from a denial
of appeal?

A.

Yes, where the party by fraud, accident, mistake, or
excusable negligence, has been prevented from
taking an appeal. He may file a verified petition for
relief in such court and in the same case praying that
the appeal be given due course.
For instance after a judgment had been rendered
against the defendant, the court sent the decision to
the defendant's counsel who had just been struck with
a serious illness. Because of this the counsel was
unable to file a notice of appeal on time. The defendant
may file a petition for relief asking that his belatedly
filed notice of appeal be given due course.

604

Rule 38
Petition For Relief
Q.

Within what time must the petition for relief be filed?

A.

It must be filed within 60 days after the petitioner
learns of the judgment, final order, or other proceeding
to be set aside and not more than 6 months after such
judgment or final order was entered or such proceeding
was taken. Both periods must be complied with.

Q.

Is the 60-day period reckoned from the time the
petitioner learns of the judgment or final order or
from the time the petitioner learns of the finality of
the judgment or final order?

A.

As expressly provided under the Rules of Court, the
60-day period under S3 R38 should be reckoned from
the time the aggrieved party has knowledge of the
judgment or order sought to be set aside. In other
words, for purposes of the 60-day period under R38,
knowledge of the finality of the judgment or order is
irrelevant. (Lasam v. Philippine National Bank, 5 December
2018, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Does a petition for relief under R38 require a
certification against forum shopping?

A.

Yes since a petition for relief is a new petition wherein
a party seeks relief based on grounds different from
those in the original case, that is, fraud, accident,
mistake, or excusable negligence. (Norris v. Parente/a,
27 February 2003).

Q.

The executor filed a petition for the probate of X's
will. The notice of the hearing of the allowance of
the will was published three weeks consecutively
in a newspaper of general circulation. At the hearing
the will was admitted to probate. Seven months
after the admission of the will to probate, the
daughter of X filed a petition for relief under R38
to set aside the order of allowance. Was the
petition timely filed?
605

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Publication of the notice of hearing is constructive
notice which is sufficient to constitute due process of
law. (In re Estate of Johnson, 39 Phil. 156)

Q.

P filed a case against D. D filed an answer. P
bribed the court staff to send a fake notice of
dismissal to D. D thus no longer appeared in the
case. The court proceeded to render a judgment
in favor of P which became final and executory. D
learned of the judgment only after 1 year from its
entry. Does D still have a remedy?

A.

Yes D can still file an action to annul the judgment
under R47 on the ground of extrinsic fraud. He should
file the action within 4 years from his discovery of the
fraud. D may still avail of R47 since the remedy of
new trial or petition for relief was no longer available
through no fault of his. (S1&2 R47).

Q.

What are the formal requirements of the petition?

A.
1) The petition must be verified.
2) It must be accompanied by a certificate against
forum shopping, since it is an initiatory pleading
asserting a claim for relief
3) It must be accompanied by affidavits showing the
fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable negligence
relied upon, and the facts constituting the petitioner's
good and substantial cause of action or defense,
as the case may be. (S3 R38).
Q.

What is the nature of a petition for relief under
S1 R38?

A.

It is similar to a motion for new trial on the ground of
fraud, accident, mistake, or excusable negligence, the
difference being that the motion for new trial under
606

Rule 38
Petition For Relief
R37 is filed before the judgment becomes final, while
a petition for relief under Si R38 presupposes a final
judgment or order.
Q.

Respondents filed a collection case against the
petitioner. Summons was served upon the petitioner
by publication, but the summons and order were
sent to a wrong address of the petitioner. The
RTC rendered a judgment which became final and
executory. The petitioner filed a petition for relief
from judgment, invoking the ground of extrinsic
fraud. Petitioner alleged that the respondents
deliberately indicated a wrong address although
they could have easily determined the petitioner's
address from the GIS of his company. The RTC
denied the petition for relief on the ground that
petitioner did not explain in his petition why he
did not avail of appeal. Did the RTC correctly deny
the petition for relief?

A.

No. The extrinsic fraud employed by the respondents
meant that the petitioner was not properly served with
summons and thus the judgment was void for failure
of the trial court to acquire personal jurisdiction over
the petitioner. In such a case, the petition for relief
should not be dismissed for failure of one to avail
himself of the remedy of an appeal and for untimeliness.
(Duremdes v. Jon/la, 26 February 2020, Inting, J.).

Q.

Is a petition for relief under Rule 38 available
against a judgment of the Court of Appeals?

A.

No. Petition for relief under R38 is not available
against a judgment of the Court of Appeals. "Any
court" in Si and 2 R38 does not include the Court of
Appeals but refers only to the trial courts. (Sps. Mesina
v. Meer, 2 July 2001).

607

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Within what time should a petition for relief
be answered?

A.

Within 15 days from receipt of the court order
requiring the adverse parties to answer the petition.
The court issues the order if it finds that the petition is
sufficient in form and substance to justify relief. The
order shall be served in such manner as the court
may direct, together with copies of the petition and the
accompanying affidavits. (S4 R38).

Q.

What proceedings are taken by the court after the
answer is filed?

A.

After the filing of the answer or the expiration of the
period therefor, the court shall hear the petition and if
after such hearing, it finds that the allegations therein
are not true, the petition shall be dismissed. But if the
court finds such allegations to be true, it shall set
aside the judgment or final order or other proceeding
complained of upon such terms as may be just.
Thereafter the case shall stand as if such judgment,
final order or other proceeding had never been rendered,
issued or taken. The court shall then proceed to hear
and determine the case as if a timely motion for a new
trial or reconsideration had been granted by it. (S6 R38).
Where the denial of an appeal is set aside, the
lower court shall be required to give due course to the
appeal and to elevate the record of the appealed
case as if a timely and proper appeal had been made.
(S7 R38).

Q.

P files an action with the Regional Trial Court of
Las Pinas City, Branch 170, to recover a parcel of
land co-owned by D. P however did not implead in
his complaint E and F, the co-owners of the land.
The RTC rendered a judgment in favor of P
ordering the reconveyance of the land to P. No
608

Rule 38
Petition For Relief
appeal having been filed the judgment became
final and executory on 10 January 2004 and was
entered in the book of entries of judgment on the
same day. E and F learned of the judgment on 10
March 2004 and on 15 March 2004 they filed a petition
for relief from the judgment with Branch 170 of
the Las Pinas RTC. P filed an answer seeking the
dismissal of the petition for relief. If you were the
judge, would you dismiss the petition for relief?
A.

•

Yes. The petition for relief cannot be availed of by E
and F since they were not parties to the RTC case.
(Si R38). E and F should avail of the remedy of
annulment of judgment under R47.

Q.

In a petition for relief under R38, it was argued by
petitioners that their counsel's failure to file the
appeal was because of his advanced age of 80
and that this constituted mistake and excusable
negligence. May the counsel's advance age be
so considered?

A.

No. This argument stereotypes and demeans senior
citizens. It assumes that a person with advanced age
is prone to incompetence. This cannot be countenanced.
(Madarang v. Sps. Morales, 9 June 2014).

609

RULE 39. EXECUTION, SATISFACTION,
& EFFECT OF JUDGMENTS
Q.

What is meant by execution?

A.

Execution is the remedy provided by law for the
enforcement of a judgment. (21 Am Jur. 18). It also
refers to the process of enforcing the judgment.

Q.

Are there final judgments or orders to which the
concept of execution is not applicable?

A.

Yes. If the judgment does not order the doing of
something or the payment of money, there is nothing
in the judgment which needs to be enforced or
executed. For instance a judgment dismissing a case
without pronouncement as to damages and costs.
Also a judgment in an injunction case which orders
the defendant not to do an act or a judgment
declaring a contract null and void. In such cases, if
the appeal period has lapsed, the judgment becomes
"final and unappealable," not "final and executory."
In land registration proceedings, after the ownership
has been proved and confirmed by judicial declaration,
no further proceeding to enforce said ownership is
necessary, except when the adverse or losing party
had been in possession of the land and the winning
party desires to oust him. (Ting v. Heirs of Lirio, G.R.
168913, 14 March 2007).

Q.

Petitioners filed with the CFI of Cebu an action for
recovery of land against the Private Respondents.
The Private Respondents filed an answer raising
the defense of their ownership. The CFI decided in
favor of the Private Respondents but on appeal
the Court of Appeals reversed and decided in
favor of the Petitioners declaring them as the
610

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
owners of the land and ordering the Private
Respondents to vacate the premises. In the body
of its decision, the Court of Appeals stated that
there was no fraud or bad faith on the part of the
Private Respondents. The Court of Appeal's
judgment became final and executory. The Petitioners
moved for the execution of the judgment before
the CFI. This was opposed by the Private Respondents
on the ground that a hearing supplementary to
execution should be conducted to allow them to
present evidence to prove that they are builders in
good faith and to prove the value of the improvements.
Should the CFI grant the opposition of the Private
Respondents?
A.

No. Once a decision has become final and executory,
the only jurisdiction left with the court is to order its
execution. To allow the supplemental hearing would
be to amend or alter a final and executory judgment.
(Baclayon v. Court of Appeals, supra).

Q.

Are orders of execution appealable?

A.

No. (Si R141)

Q.

What if the order of execution varies the terms of
the judgment or gives an improper interpretation
of the judgment? May the order be appealed?

A.

No. The prior rulings that such orders of execution
may be appealed are superseded by Si R141. The
remedy of the aggrieved party is to file a special civil
action of certiorari under Rule 65.

Q.

When does execution issue as a matter of right?

A.

Execution shall issue as a matter of right:

611

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
1) On motion, upon a judgment or order that disposes
of the action or proceeding upon the expiration of
the period to appeal therefrom if no appeal has
been duly perfected.
2) If the appeal has been duly perfected and finally
resolved, the execution may forthwith be applied
for in the court of origin on motion of the judgment
obligee, submitting therewith certified true copies
of the judgment or judgments or final order or
orders sought to be enforced and of the entry thereof,
with notice to the adverse party. The appellate
court may, on motion in the same case, when the
interest of justice so requires, direct the court of
origin to issue the writ of execution. (Si R39).
Q.

When execution is a matter of right, may the court
of origin issue the writ of execution motu proprio?

A.

No. Pursuant to S1 R39, a writ of execution shall
issue only after motion.

Q.

When execution is a matter of right, is notice to
the adverse party required?

A.

We have to distinguish. Under the first paragraph of
Si R39, where no appeal was made during the
reglementary period, notice to the adverse party is not
required. However under the second paragraph, notice
to the adverse party is required since the same is provided
for in the second paragraph, unlike in the first. (Anama
v. Philippine Savings Bank, 25 January 2012).1' 3

1231hi5 ruling has been modified by the 2020 Rules which states that all
motions shall be served so as to ensure their receipt by the other party. Hence
even in the first paragraph of 51 R39, notice to the adverse party is required.

612

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

When execution is a matter of right, should the
motion for the issuance of a writ of execution be
set for hearing?

A.

No, because such a motion is a non-litigious motion.
•The court shall resolve the motion within five days
from receipt thereof. (S4 R15, 2020 Rules).

Q.

Distinguish between finality of judgment for
purposes of appeal and finality of judgment for
purposes of execution.

A.

Finality of judgment for purposes of appeal refers to a
judgment which completely disposes of a case. A final
judgment in this sense is distinguished from an
interlocutory order which still leaves something more
to be done by the court and is not appealable.
Finality of judgment for purposes of execution
refers to a judgment where the period to appeal
therefrom has expired without any appeal being duly
perfected or where an appeal has been duly perfected
but finally resolved. The judgment in this sense is
more precisely referred to as "final and executory"
in order to avoid confusion with final judgment in the
first sense.

Q.

What is the remedy if a motion for execution is
denied?

A.

The remedy is mandamus. The issuance of a writ of
execution is a ministerial duty of the court under Si
R39, compellable by a writ of mandamus. (Greater
Metropolitan Manila Solid Waste Management Committee
v. Jancom Environmental Corporation, C.R. No. 163663,
30 June 2006, citing cases). Jancom and other cases
cited therein may be deemed to have superseded
Soccoro v. Ortiz, G.R. No. L-23608, 24 December 1964,
wherein it was stated that the proper remedy is appeal.
613

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P files a suit to collect P2,500,000 from D with the
Regional Trial Court. The RTC rendered judgment
in favor of D. P appeals to the Court of Appeals
which reversed the RTC and rendered judgment in
favor of P. P filed a motion for a writ of execution
with the RTC which denied the same without
justifiable cause. P's motion for reconsideration
was denied. What is the remedy of P?

A.

P may file a motion with the Court of Appeals to direct
the RTC to issue the writ of execution. (Si R39).
Mandamus is not proper since there is a plain,
adequate, and speedy remedy under S1 R39. (JOSE
FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 115
[1997]).

Q.

What are instances wherein the court may refuse
to enforce a final and executory judgment?

A.
1) When subsequent facts occur which render execution
impossible, unjust, or inequitable.
2)

Where the judgment has been novated by the
parties.

3) Where the judgment obligor had already complied
with the judgment.
4)

Where a temporary restraining order or preliminary
injunction is issued by the proper court in a
petition for relief from judgment under R38,
petition for annulment of judgment under R47, or
petition for certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus
under R65.

614

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

A quo warranto judgment directing the reinstatement
of respondent as regional director of the National
Commission on Indigenous Peoples became final
and executory. However, it was later discovered
that the respondent had falsified his bachelor's
degree and thus had become ineligible for the
position of regional director. May the judgment
still be executed?

A.

No. The general rule is that the execution of a court's
judgment becomes a matter of right upon the
expiration of the period to appeal and no appeal was
duly perfected. Generally, therefore, courts may no
longer review or modify a final and executory judgment.
This is otherwise referred to as the principle of
immutability of judgments, which dictates that once a
decision becomes final, the enforcement or execution
of the judgment becomes a purely ministerial act. An
exception to the rule is whenever circumstances
transpire after the finality of the judgments rendering
execution unjust and inequitable.
Here there was a supervening circumstance, that
is, the discovery that the respondent had falsified his
bachelor's degree and thus had become ineligible for
the contested position. To still order the execution of
the judgment would be clearly unjust and inequitable.
(Arroyo v. CA, 10 April 2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

A judgment was rendered by a Court in favor of
Roberto and against Francisco in the sum of
P500,000. When the sheriff was in the process of
enforcing the writ of execution, Roberto stopped a
levy being made on the properties of Francisco
because he and the latter had agreed that the
amount due from Francisco will be increased to
P550,000 payable in 10 monthly installments of
P55,000 each, with Racquel, a sister of Francisco,
615

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
guaranteeing the payment of the installments.
After paying 5 monthly installments or P275,000,
Francisco and Racquel stopped paying. Whereupon,
Roberto asked the sheriff to enforce the writ of
execution for the amount of P225,000. Should the
sheriff enforce the writ of execution? (80 Bar 05 ed)
A.

No, the sheriff should not enforce the writ of execution.
The Supreme Court in Fun Cam Lu v. Yap, 74
Phil. 287, has held that where the judgment is
novated by agreement between the judgment obligee
and obligor, the judgment may no longer be enforced.
Here Roberto and Francisco had novated the
judgment by changing substantially the terms thereof.
Hence the judgment may no longer be enforced.

Q.

What is discretionary execution?

A.

The execution, ordered by the court in its discretion,
of a judgment or final order during the pendency of an
appeal. (S2 R39).

Q.

What are the requirements in order that discretionary
execution may issue? (MNG SH)

A.
1) Motion of the prevailing party with notice to the
adverse party.
2) Upon good reasons to be stated in the special
order after due hearing. (52[a] R39.).124

1241ake note however that under S6 R15 of the 2020 Rules, it is now
discretionary upon the court to call a hearing on a litigious motion, including a
motion for execution pending appeal. p

616

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

What is meant by "good reasons" which would
justify discretionary execution?

A.

Good reasons are those which constitute superior
circumstances demanding urgency which will outweigh
the injury or damages should the losing party secure
the reversal of the judgment. The Rules of Court did
not intend that execution pending appeal shall issue
as a matter of right. (Ong v. Court of Appeals, 203
SCRA 38 [1991]).

Q.

Give examples of good reasons which may justify
discretionary execution.

A.
1) Where there is danger of the judgment becoming
ineffectual as where the losing party is disposing
of its assets (Scottish Union & National Insurance
Co. v. Macadaeg, 91 Phil. 891) or where the articles
subject of the case would deteriorate (Federation
of United NAMARCO Distributors v. Court of
Appeals, 4 SCRA 867).
2)

Where the judgment debtor is insolvent or in
imminent danger of being insolvent. (Santos v.
Mojica, G.R. No. L-24266, 24 January 1969).

Q.

Is financial distress of the prevailing party which
is a corporation a good reason for granting execution
pending appeal?

A.

No. The financial distress of a corporation does not
outweigh the long standing general policy of enforcing
only final and executory judgments. Certainly, a juridical
entity like petitioner corporation, has other than
extraordinary execution, alternative remedies like
loans, advances, internal cash generation and the like
to address its precarious financial condition. (Pulumbarit
v. CA, 14 October 2015, Jardeleza, J.).
617

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a suit to collect P500,000 from D arising
from the value of construction materials delivered
by P to D which the latter paid for with a check
which bounced. The Regional Trial Court rendered
judgment in favor of P. D filed an appeal. P filed a
motion for execution pending appeal with the RTC
contending that D's appeal was frivolous and
dilatory. The RTC granted the motion conditioned
upon P posting a bond in favor of D for the amount
of P500,000. Was the grant of the motion for
execution pending appeal proper?

A.

No. The ground that the appeal is dilatory and that a
bond was posted by the prevailing party are by
themselves not sufficient to constitute good grounds
for the issuance of discretionary execution.
Where the reason given is that an appeal is
frivolous and dilatory, execution pending appeal cannot
be justified. This is because the trial court would be
virtually pre-empting the appellate court's decision on
the appeal.
Likewise the mere posting of a bond is not a
good ground for the issuance of discretionary execution.
Otherwise, execution pending appeal would issue as
a matter of course. (Ong v. Court of Appeals, 203
SCRA 38 [1991]).
(Note: If the motion for execution pending appeal
is filed with the appellate court, it can order execution
pending appeal if it finds that the appeal is frivolous
and dilatory).

618

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

May awards of moral and exemplary damages and
attorney's fees be the subject of execution
pending appeal?

A.

No. Unlike actual damages for which the petitioners
may clearly be held liable if they breach a specific
contract and the amounts of which are fixed and
certain, liabilities with respect to moral and exemplary
damages as well as the exact amounts remain uncertain
and indefinite pending resolution by the appellate
court. The existence of the factual bases of these types
of damages and their causal relation to the petitioners'
act will have to be determined in the light of the
assignments of errors on appeal. (Tiorosio-Espinosa
v. Hofiletia-Europa, 20 January 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

Q.

Should a motion for execution pending appeal be
filed with the trial court or with the appellate court?

A.

The motion for execution may be filed:
a) With the trial court while: (JP)
It has jurisdiction over the case, and
It is in possession of either the original record or
the record on appeal (JP); or
b) With the appellate court after the trial court has
lost jurisdiction. (S2[a] R39.).

Q.

May a motion for execution pending appeal be
filed with the trial court after it has lost jurisdiction
but is still in possession of either the original
record or the record on appeal?

A.

No more.

619

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May the trial court order execution pending appeal
even after it has lost jurisdiction over the case/
subject matter of the record on appeal?

A.

Yes, provided that a motion for execution pending
appeal was filed with the trial court before it lost
jurisdiction and provided the order is issued prior to
the transmittal of the original record or record on
appeal. (39 R41 in relation to 32 R39).

Q.

When does the trial court lose jurisdiction?

A.

In appeals by notice of appeal, the trial court loses
jurisdiction over the (entire) case: (PE)
1) Upon perfection of the appeals filed in due time, and
2) Upon the expiration of the time to appeal of the
other parties.
In appeals by record on appeal, the trial court
loses jurisdiction over the subject matter of the record
on appeal (but retains jurisdiction over the remaining
subject matter not covered by the appeal): (AE)
1) Upon the approval of the record on appeal filed in
due time, and
2) Upon the expiration of the time to appeal of the
other parties. (S9 R41).

Q.

When is a party's appeal deemed perfected as
to him?

A.

A party's appeal by notice of appeal is deemed
perfected as to him upon the filing of the notice of
appeal in due time.

620

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A party's appeal by record on appeal is deemed
perfected as to him with respect to the subject matter
thereof upon the approval of the record on appeal
filed in due time. (S9 R41).
Under R42, the appeal is deemed perfected as
to the petitioner upon the timely filing of the petition
for review and the payment of the corresponding
docket and other lawful fees. (S8 R42).
Q.

May the trial court grant a motion for execution
pending appeal if there is a pending motion for
reconsideration of its judgment?

A.

No. Where there is a pending motion for reconsideration
of the trial court's decision, an order of execution
pending appeal is improper and premature. The
pendency of the motion for reconsideration legally
precludes execution of the decision because the
motion serves as the movant's vehicle to point out the
findings and conclusions of the decision which, in his
view, are not supported by law or the evidence and,
therefore, gives the trial judge the occasion to reverse
himself. In the event that the trial judge finds the
motion for reconsideration meritorious, he can of
course reverse the decision. (JP Latex Technology,
Inc. vs. Balions, Granger Balloons, Inc., 581 SCRA
553, 563 [20091).

Q.

On September 25 the private respondents
received the RTC's decision annulling the sale of
certain real properties and ordering them to
deposit with the court the rentals and/or income
due from such properties. The private respondents
filed a notice of appeal on October 2. The petitioner
who received the RTC decision on October 1, filed
on October 11 a motion for immediate execution
pending appeal of that portion of the judgment
621

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
requiring deposit The trial court granted the
motion. On certiorari, the Court of Appeals set
aside the order granting execution pending appeal
on the ground that the appeal was perfected on
October 10 or the expiration of the private
respondents' period of appeal and hence the trial
court already lost jurisdiction at that point. Was
the setting aside of the order granting execution
pending appeal proper?
A.

No. In appeals by notice of appeal, the court loses
jurisdiction over the case upon the perfection of the
appeals filed in due time and the expiration of the time
to appeal of the other parties. (39 R41). Here the
appeal was perfected as to private respondent on
October 2 with the filing of the appeal in due time.
However the period to appeal of the other party, that
is the petitioner, was up to October 16. Hence when
the petitioner filed his motion for execution pending
appeal on October 11, the trial court still had
jurisdiction as the petitioner's period to appeal had not
yet expired. (Be!gado v. Intermediate Appellate Court,
G.R. No. 74975, 12 January 1987).

Q.

P filed with the RTC a collection case against A
and B. The court rendered judgment in favor of P.
P and A received a copy of the decision on April 1
while B received his copy on April 10. A filed a
notice of appeal on April 10. P wants to file a
motion for execution pending appeal on April 20,
with the original record still in the possession of
the RTC.
a) Should P file his motion with the RTC or with
the Court of Appeals?

622

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
b)

What if the RTC had elevated the original
record to the Court of Appeals on April 11, a
day after A had filed his notice of appeal.
Should P file his motion with the RTC or with
the Court of Appeals?

A.
a) P should file his motion for execution pending appeal
with the RTC.
Under S2(a) R39, the motion for execution
pending appeal should be filed with the trial court
while it has jurisdiction over the case and is in
possession of the original record.
Here the RTC still has jurisdiction over the case
since the appeal period of B has not yet expired (S9
R41) and it is in possession of the original record.
b) P can neither file his motion for execution pending
appeal with the RTC or the Court of Appeals.
P cannot file the motion with the RTC since it is
not in possession of the original record. Nor can P file
the motion with the Court of Appeals since the RTC
has not yet lost jurisdiction over the case. (S2[a] R39).
What P could do is to wait for the appeal period
of B to expire and then to file the motion for execution
pending appeal with the Court of Appeals.
Q.

Plaintiff filed case versus A, B, and C. Several
judgment for Plaintiff against A but case continued
as against B and C. Plaintiff, A, B, and C received
judgment on June 1. A files a record on appeal
with trial court which approves it on July 1. On
July 3 Plaintiff wants to file motion for execution
pending appeal against A. Where should the
Plaintiff file the motion?
623

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

With the appellate court. Note that the trial court lost
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the record on
appeal upon the approval of the record on appeal and
the expiration of the time to appeal (30 days) of
the other parties from the subject matter of the record
on appeal.

Q.

What are the 3 stages of the trial court's jurisdiction
over an appealed case?

A.
1) Full jurisdiction: When the trial court has jurisdiction
and it is in possession of the original record or
record on appeal, as the case may be. (JP)
2) Residual jurisdiction: When the trial court has lost
jurisdiction but the original record or the record on
appeal has not yet been transmitted to the appellate
court. (P)
3)

Executory jurisdiction. The trial court has lost
jurisdiction and the original record or record on
appeal has been transmitted to the appellate
court. The trial court has no more jurisdiction or
power over the case save to issue and enforce
the writ of execution should the judgment therein
become final.

Q.

May discretionary execution be stayed?

A.

Yes. Discretionary execution may be stayed upon
approval by the proper court of a sufficient supersedeas
bond filed by the party against whom it is directed,
conditioned upon the performance of the judgment or
order allowed to be executed in case it shall be finally
sustained in whole or in part. The supersedeas bond
may be proceeded against on motion with notice to
the surety. (S3 R39).
624

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

What is the "proper court" which will approve the
supersedeas bond?

A.

Generally, the court which issued the order for
execution pending appeal, be it the trial or the
appellate court. (JOSE FERIA, 1997 RULES OF
CIVIL PROCEDURE 117 [1997]). However once the
original record or the record on appeal is transmitted
to the appellate court, it is only that court which can
approve the supersedeas bond.

Q.

What judgments are immediately executory and
shall not be stayed by an appeal therefrom?
(SIRA SEED ICEE)

A.
1)

Judgments in actions for injunction, receivership,
accounting and support (SIRA) shall be enforceable
after their rendition and shall not be stayed by an
appeal taken therefrom, unless otherwise ordered
by the trial court. (34 R39).

2) A judgment rendered against the defendant in an
Aectment case is immediately executory notwithstanding
an appeal unless defendant executes a supersedeas
bond and makes periodic deposits of the rent due
or the reasonable value for the use and
occupation of the premises. (519 R70).
3)

In ejectment cases, the judgment of the RTC
against the defendant shall be immediately executory,
without prejudice to a further appeal that may be
taken therefrom. (321 R70).

4) In civil cases governed by the Rule on Summary
Procedure, the decision of the RTC on appeal
shall be immediately executory, without prejudice
to a further appeal that may be taken therefrom.
(S21 Rule on Summary Procedure).
625

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
5)

A deficiency judgment in a judicial foreclosure
proceeding, while it may be appealed, is
immediately executory. (S6 R68).

6) Judgment or final order of a court in a case of
indirect contempt may be appealed to the proper
court as in criminal cases; but execution of the
judgment or final order shall not be suspended
until a bond is filed by the person adjudged in
contempt. (S11 R70).
7) In an expropriation proceeding, the right of the
plaintiff to enter upon the defendant's property
and appropriate the same for public use or
purpose shall not be delayed by an appeal from
the judgment. (S11 R67).
8) All decisions and orders issued by the RTC under
the Interim Rules of Procedure Governing InfraCorporate Controversies under the Securities
Regulation Code shall be immediately executory.
No appeal or petition taken therefrom shall stay
the enforcement or implementation of the order,
unless restrained by an appellate court. (S4,
Interim Rules of Procedure Governing IntraCorporate Controversies under R.A. No. 8799).
9)

Q.

Any judgment directing the performance of acts
for the protection, preservation or rehabilitation
(ppr) of the environment shall be executory
pending appeal unless restrained by the appellate
court. (S2 R5, Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases).

Distinguish between a judgment or final order
which is "immediately executory" from one which
is "immediately final and executory."

626

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A.

A judgment which is immediately executory may be
appealed but the appeal does not stay the execution
of the judgment or final order. On the other hand, a
judgment or final order which is immediately final and
executory may not be appealed.

Q.

What judgments or final orders are immediately
final and executory?

A.

The following judgments or final orders are immediately
final and executory. (SSCC)
1) Judgments in summary judicial proceedings in the
family law (Art. 247, Family Code.
2) Judgments for direct contempt (S2 R71).
3) Compromise judgments.
4) Judgments in cases covered by the Rule of Procedure
for Small Claims Cases. (Section 23, SC A.M.
No. 08-8-7-SC effective 1 October 2008)

Q.

Petitioners were employees of respondent Nagar,
a recruitment agency owned and managed by
respondent Lacsamana. Nagar assigned petitioners
at respondent Jonas, a corporation engaged in
the manufacture of various food products with
respondent Young as its President, to work as
factory workers, machine operator, quality control
inspector, selector, mixer, and warehouseman.
Sometime in September of 2002, Petitioners filed
before the Arbitration Branch of the NLRC three
separate complaints for wage differentials, 13th
month pay, overtime pay, holiday pay, premium
pay for holiday and rest day, service incentive
leave pay, and unpaid emergency cost of living
allowance (ECOLA) against respondents, which
complaints were consolidated before Labor Arbiter
Jaime Reyno. In January 2003, Petitioners and
627

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Respondents entered into a Joint Compromise
Agreement which provides that Petitioners shall
be considered regular employees of Napar, shall
be re-assigned and assured that they will be given
work, and that in case Napar fails to re-assign and
provide work for Petitioners, Napar shall reinstate
them in the payroll. The compromise agreement
was approved by the Labor Arbiter. However
Napar failed to re-assign and provide work for
Petitioners and to reinstate them in the payroll.
The Petitioners filed a complaint for illegal dismissal
with the Labor Arbiter. The Respondents contend
that the complaint for illegal dismissal was barred
by res judicata and that the remedy of the Petitioners
was to move for the execution of the compromise
judgment Is the Respondents' contention correct?
A.

No. A compromise agreement, once approved, has
the effect of res judicata between the parties and
should not be disturbed except for vices of consent,
forgery, fraud, misrepresentation, and coercion. A
judgment upon compromise is therefore not appealable,
immediately executory, and can be enforced by a writ
of execution. However, this broad precept enunciated
under Article 2037 of the Civil Code has been
qualified by Article 2041 of the same Code which
recognizes the right of an aggrieved party to either (1)
enforce the compromise by a writ of execution, or (2)
regard it as rescinded and insist upon his original
demand, upon the other party's failure or refusal to
abide by the compromise. Article 2041 confers upon
the party concerned the authority, not only to regard
the compromise agreement as rescinded but also, to
insist upon his original demand. The Petitioners
validly exercised this option as there was breach and
non-compliance of the Joint Compromise Agreement
by Respondents. (lnutan v. Napar Contracting & Allied
Services, 25 November 2015, Del Castillo, J.).
628

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

A wife filed with the RTC a petition for the
declaration of the presumptive death of her
husband. The RTC granted the petition and
declared that the husband is presumptively dead.
The Office of the Solicitor General filed a notice of
appeal. The RTC elevated the records of the case
to the Court of Appeals. Did the RTC act correctly
in elevating the case records?

A.

No. A petition for the declaration of presumptive death
of an absentee spouse is governed by Title XI of the
Family Code regarding summary judicial proceedings
in the Family Law. (Articles 41 and 253, Family Code).
Article 247 of Title XI provides that "the judgment of
the lower court shall be immediately final and
executory." Hence it was erroneous for the OSG to
file a notice of appeal and for the RTC to elevate the
case records to the CA. (Republic v. BermudezLorino, G.R. No. 160258, 19 January 2005; Republic
v. Granada, G.R. 187512, 13 June 2012). An aggrieved
party may file a special civil action for certiorari with
the Court of Appeals but he has to show grave abuse
of discretion amounting to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction. (Republic v. Granada, supra).

Q.

Up to when may a final and executory judgment or
order be executed by motion?

A.

Within 5 years from the date of its entry. (S6 R39). If
a writ of execution was issued and levy made within
the 5-year period, the auction sale of the property
thereafter will be valid provided it is made within the
10-year period. If no levy was made within the 5-year
period, the writ of execution may no longer be
enforced by motion.

629

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

After the lapse of 5 years from the entry of a final
and executory judgment or order, may the same
be still enforced?

A.

Yes but no longer by motion but by independent
action. The prevailing party should file an action for
revival of the judgment after 5 years but within 10
years from the date of its entry. (Articles 1144[3],
1152, Civil Code). When the judgment has been
revived, the prevailing party can then enforce it by
motion within 5 years from the date of entry of the
revived judgment. (56 R39)

Q.

A revived judgment was not enforced within 5
years from its entry. May it still be revived by
filing a second action for revival of the judgment?

A.

Yes. The last sentence of S6 R36 explicitly provides
that "Mhe revived judgment may also be enforced by
motion within 5 years from the date of its entry and
thereafter by action before it is barred by the statute
of limitations." This amendment in the 1997 Rules
superseded the ruling in Luzon Surety Company v.
Intermediate Appellate Court, 151 SCRA 652 (1987),
to the effect that there can be only one action for
revival of judgment and that a revived judgment can
be enforced only by motion for execution or money
claim within 5 years from its entry. (JOSE Y. FERIA,
1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 118 [1997]).

Q.

What is an alias writ of execution? Is there still a
need to issue one under the 1997 Rules of Civil
Procedure?

A.

An alias writ of execution is one issued in lieu of the
original writ of execution that had already lapsed. Before
the 1997 revision to the Rules of Civil Procedure, the
lifetime of a writ of execution, under the then S11

630

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
R39, was 60 days from its receipt by the officer
required to enforce the same and after said period,
the writ becomes functus officio.
However, it must be noted that under the present
S14 R39, the lifetime of the writ of execution is no
longer 60 days but during the period within which the
judgment may be enforced by motion, that is, within 5
years from entry thereof Thus within the 5-year
period, a writ of execution is still effective and there is
no need for the issuance of an alias writ of execution.
(Bajet v. Baclig, AM. No. RTJ-00-1598, 30 July 2002).
Conversely after the 5-year period, the judgment may
no longer be enforced by motion and a motion for the
issuance of an alias writ of execution should be denied.
Q. Mrs. E filed a complaint for sum of money against
Mr. F in the amount of P1,000,000.00 before the
Regional Trial Court (RTC). After due proceedings,
the RTC ruled in favor of Mrs. E, and since no
appeal was interposed thereto, the ruling became
final and executory as evinced by an Entry of
Judgment dated July 2, 2012. However, Mrs. E
was unable to immediately move for the execution
of said judgment because she had a work
engagement overseas.
On June 29,2017, Mrs. E returned to the country
and, on the same day, filed a motion for the
issuance of a writ of execution before the RTC. On
July 7, 2017, the RTC granted the motion, and
consequently, issued a writ of execution in Mrs.
Es favor.
Was the RTC's issuance of the writ of execution
procedurally infirm? Explain. (19 Bar QA4).

631

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes, the RTC's issuance of the writ of execution was
procedurally infirm.
Under S6 R39, a judgment must be enforced by
motion within 5 years from entry thereof
Here while the motion for execution was filed
within the 5-year period from 2 July 2012 or until 2 July 2017,
the enforcement was not since the writ of execution
was issued after the 5-year period. Hence the issuance
of the writ of execution was procedurally infirm.

Q.

The judgment in a collection case in favor of P
against ID became final and executory. Within the
5-year period, P filed a motion for issuance of writ
of execution which was granted. Unfortunately for
P he was not able to locate property of D which
may be levied within the 5-year period. After the 5year period, P was able to locate a property of D.
May P file a motion for the issuance of an alias
writ of execution?

A.

No. There is no such thing as an alias writ of
execution under the 1997 Rules. A judgment must be
enforced by motion and by levy on execution within
the 5-year period. After said period, it may no longer
be so enforced. The remedy of the judgment obligee
is to file an action for revival of judgment.

Q.

Mrs. E filed a complaint for sum of money against
Mr. F in the amount of P1,000,000.00 before the
Regional Trial Court (RTC). After due proceedings,
the RTC ruled in favor of Mrs. E, and since no
appeal was interposed thereto, the ruling became
final and executory as evinced by an Entry of
Judgment dated July 2, 2012. However, Mrs. E
was unable to immediately move for the execution
of said judgment because she had a work
engagement overseas.
632

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
On June 29, 2017, Mrs. E returned to the
country and, on the same day, filed a motion for
the issuance of a writ of execution before the
RTC. On July 7, 2017, the RTC granted the motion,
and consequently, issued a writ of execution in
Mrs. Es favor. Was the RTC's issuance of the writ
of execution procedurally infirm? (19 Bar Q4)
A.

Yes, the RTC's issuance of the writ of execution was
procedurally infirm.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, a judgment
must be enforced by motion within five years from
entry thereof.
Here, while the motion for execution was filed
within the 5-year period from 2 July 2012 or until 2
July 2017, the enforcement was not since the writ of
execution was issued after the 5-year period. [Section
6 of Rule 39]
Hence, the issuance of the writ of execution was
procedurally infirm.

Q.

What is a dormant judgment? How may it be
enforced?

A.

A dormant judgment is one which has not been
enforced by motion within 5 years after its entry and is
thus reduced to a mere right of action in favor of the
judgment-obligee. It may be enforced by filing action
for revival of judgment and enforcing the decision
therein. (Salvante v. Cruz, 88 Phil. 236).

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
revival of judgment?

A.

The Regional Trial Court has original and exclusive
jurisdiction, since the action for revival of judgment is
an action incapable of pecuniary estimation. (Anama
v. Citibank, N.A., 13 December 2017, Jardeleza, J.).
633

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Should the action for revival of judgment be filed
with the same court which rendered the judgment
sought to be revived?

A.

No. As an action for revival of judgment is a new
action, the rules on instituting and commencing
actions apply, including the rules on jurisdiction. Its
jurisdictional requirements are not dependent on the
previous action and the petition does not necessarily
have to be filed in the same court which rendered
judgment. (Anama v. Citibank, N.A., 13 December
2017, Jardeleza, J.).

Q.

Where is the venue of an action for revival of
judgment?

A.

If the action for revival of judgment affects title to or
possession of real property or interest therein, then it
is a real action that must be filed with the court having
jurisdiction over the place where the real property
is situated.
Otherwise, the action for revival of judgment is a
personal action wherein venue lies with the residence
of either the plaintiff or defendant, at the option of the
plaintiff. (Infante v. Aran Builders, Inc., 24 August
2007, Austria-Martinez, J.).

Q.

May an action be filed to revive an order dismissing
a complaint for failure to prosecute?

A.

No. An action for revival is not proper since there is
nothing to execute or enforce. (Ganal v. Alpuerto, 12
February 2020, Inting, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action to revive a RTC judgment
against the Defendant. The judgment sought to be
revived declared the Plaintiff as the owner of a
parcel of land located in Muntinlupa City and
ordered the Defendant to execute an absolute
634

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
deed of sale thereof in Plaintiff's favor. Defendant
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of improper
venue. The Defendant contends that the action for
revival of judgment is a personal action which
should have been filed in Makati City where the
parties reside. Should the motion to dismiss on
the ground of improper venue be granted?
A.

No. If the action for revival of judgment affects title to
or possession of real property or interest therein, then
it is a real action that must be filed with the court
having jurisdiction over the place where the real
property is situated.
Here the judgment sought to be revived was a
real action since it affected title to a parcel of land.
Hence the venue was properly laid in the RTC of
Muntinlupa City which had jurisdiction over the place
where the property was situated. (Infante v. Aran
Builders, Inc., supra).

Q.

A, a resident of Dagupan City, secured a favorable
judgment in an ejectment case against X, a
resident of Quezon City, from the Metropolitan
Trial Court of Manila. The judgment entered on 15
June 1991 had not as yet been executed.
a) In July 1996, A decided to enforce the judgment
of the Metropolitan Trial Court of Manila.
What is the procedure to be followed by A in
enforcing the judgment? (97 Bar)

A.
a)

A should file an action for revival of the judgment.
This is because the judgment cannot be enforced
by motion since it is already more than five years
from the entry of the judgment.

635

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The action for revival of the judgment, being
incapable of pecuniary estimation, should be filed with
the regional trial court. Since the action affects
possession to real property, venue is in Manila where
the venue of the ejectment suit lies.
Q.

A files a case against B. While awaiting decision
on the case, A goes to the United States to work.
Upon her return to the Philippines, seven years
later, A discovers that a decision was rendered by
the court in her favor a few months after she had
left. Can A file a motion for execution of the
judgment? Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q10b)

A.

No, A cannot file a motion for the execution of the
judgment.
Under S6 R39, a final and executory judgment
may be enforced by motion within a period of 5 years
from its date of entry.
Here more than 5 years has elapsed from the
entry of the judgment. Hence A cannot enforce the
same by motion but only by an independent action.
(Note: The facts of the problem do not show that
judgment was entered. The entry of judgment may
however be reasonably presumed by the examinee.)

Q.

P filed an application for the registration of a
parcel of land in his name with the RTC. D, an
occupant of the land, filed an opposition thereto.
The RTC rendered a judgment in favor of P which
became final and executory in 1997. In 2008 P
filed with the RTC a petition for the issuance of a
writ of possession seeking to evict D. D opposed
the application on the ground that the petition was
barred since it was filed more than 10 years after
the entry of judgment. Should D's opposition
be granted?
636

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A.

No. The five and ten-year periods under S6 R39 do
not apply to special proceedings, such as land
registration and cadastral cases where the right to
apply for a writ of possession is imprescriptible. Moreover
under Section 47 of the Property Registration Decree,
no right in derogation to that of the registered owner
may be acquired by prescription. (Rodil v. Benedicto,
95 SCRA 137 [1980]).

Q.

On 28 July 2010, respondent Yap filed with the
RTC of Cebu City a petition for cancellation and
re-issuance of Decree No. 99500 covering Lot No.
922 of the Carcar Cadastre, and for the issuance
of the corresponding Original Certificate of Title (OCT)
pursuant to the re-issued decree. His petition
alleged that while a valid decree was issued for
Lot No. 922 in 1920, based on the certification
from the Register of Deeds of the Province of
Cebu, there is no showing or proof that an OCT
was ever issued covering the said lot The RTC
granted the petition and ordered the Register of
Deeds of the Province of Cebu to cancel Decree
No. 99500, re-issue a new copy thereof, and on
the basis of such new copy, issue an Original
Certificate of Title in the name of Andres Abellana,
as administrator of the Estate of Juan Rodriguez.
On appeal, the OSG postulates that the
petition should be denied due to Yap and his
predecessors' failure to file the proper motion to
execute Decree No. 99500 as prescribed under
Section 6, Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. It also
subscribes that the petition is now barred by the
statute of limitations since nine decades had already
passed after the issuance of the said decree in
November 1920 without any action brought upon
by Yap or his predecessors-in-interest. Is the
OSG's argument correct?
637

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
A.

No. There is nothing in the law that limits the period
within which the court may order or issue a decree in
a land registration case. The reason is that the
judgment is merely declaratory in character and does
not need to be asserted or enforced against the
adverse party. It is axiomatic that 36 R39 does not
apply in land registration proceedings. There is no
provision in the Land Registration Act similar to S6
R39, regarding the execution of a judgment in a civil
action, except the proceedings to place the winner in
possession by virtue of a writ of possession.
(Republic v. Yap, 7 February 2018, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Banco Filipino filed a petition for extrajudicial
foreclosure of real estate mortgage against the
Petitioners. In due course, the property was sold
at public auction and bought by Banco Filipino.
After the expiration of the redemption period,
Banco Filipino filed a petition for issuance of writ
of possession pursuant to Section 7 of Act No.
3135. The court granted the petition and issued
the writ of possession in 1984 but the same was
not implemented. Seven years thereafter Banco
Filipino filed a motion for issuance of alias writ of
possession. Petitioners opposed the same on the
ground that since more than 5 years had elapsed
from the order issuing the writ of possession, the
same can no longer be enforced by mere motion.
Should the court grant the motion for the issuance
of alias writ of possession?

A.

Yes. S6 R39 applies only to ordinary civil actions, not
to other or extraordinary proceedings not expressly
• governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure but by some
other specific law or legal modality. 36 R39 is not
applicable to an ex parte petition for the issuance of
the writ of possession as it is not in the nature of a
civil action governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure
638

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
but a judicial proceeding governed separately by
Section 7 of Act No. 3135 which regulates the methods
of effecting an extrajudicial foreclosure of mortgage.
(Topacio v. Banco Filipino, 17 November 2010,
Brion, J.).
Q.

Lirio filed a petition for the original registration of
Lot 18281 with the CFI of Cebu. (1st LRC Case)
The CFI granted the petition and the decision
became final and executory in 1977. The CFI
issued an order directing the LRC to issue the
decree of registration and the certificate of title in
favor of Lirio. No decree of registration was
however issued by the LRC. In 1997 Petitioner
filed with the RTC of Cebu an application for
registration of title to the same lot. (2nd LRC Case).
The Respondents (heirs of Lirio) filed an answer
in which they alleged that the 2nd LRC Case is
barred by res judicata or the 1st LRC Case.
Petitioner argues that the lst LRC Case cannot be
the basis of res judicat since it is an extinct
judgment, that is, one which was not enforced
within 10 years from the date of its entry pursuant
to S6 R39 of the Rules of Court. Is Petitioners
argument meritorious?

A.

No, the Petitioner's argument is not meritorious.
The Supreme Court has held that Section 6,
Rule 39 of the Rules of Court does not apply in land
registration proceedings. 36 R39 refers to civil actions
and is not applicable to special proceedings, such as
a land registration case This is so because a party in
a civil action must promptly enforce a judgment that is
secured against the adverse party, and his failure to
act to enforce the same within a reasonable time as
provided in the Rules makes the decision unenforceable
against the losing party. In special proceedings, the
639

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
purpose is to establish a status, a right or a particular
fact in land registration proceedings, the ownership
by a person of a parcel of land is sought to be
established. (Ting v. Heirs of brio, G.R. No. 168913,
14 March 2007).
Q.

May the five-year period to enforce the judgment
by motion be suspended?

A.

Yes where the delay in enforcing the judgment is
attributable to or due to the acts of the losing party.
In such a case the time during which the execution is
stayed is excluded and the five-year period extended
by the delay caused by the losing party. An example
would be where the losing party employed legal
maneuvers to block the enforcement of the judgment.
In a case, petitioner triggered the series of delays in
the execution of the RTC's final decision by filing
numerous motions and appeals in the appellate
courts, even causing the CA's issuance of the TRO
enjoining the enforcement of the decision. (Central
Surety & Ins. Co. v. Planters Product, 7 March 2007).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for collection of sum of
money against defendant. Judgment was rendered
in favor of plaintiff and entered in 1962. In 1964,
plaintiff filed a motion for the examination of the
defendant The incident remained pending in the
court until 1968 when the examination of the
defendant revealed that he owned shares of stock
in CF Corporation. Defendant argued that these
shares could no longer be levied upon since the
5-year period in S6 R39 had already expired. Is
defendant's argument correct?

A.

No. The 5-year period for enforcing the judgment by
execution, counted from 1962, was interrupted or
suspended by plaintiffs filing in 1964 of the motion for
examination of the judgment debtor. The proceedings
640

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
supplementary to execution amounted to a stay of
execution. (Blouse Potenciano v. Mariano, 6 March
1980, cited in Perez v. Manotok Realty, 14 October
2019, Inting, J.).
Q.

P filed a collection case for P700,000 against D.
Judgment in favor of P was entered in 5 January
2000 but the same was not enforced by motion.
On 19 December 2009, P served a written demand
to pay upon D which the latter did not heed. On 2
February 2010, P filed with the RTC an action to
revive the judgment in the collection case. D filed
a motion to dismiss on the ground of res judicata.
P opposed the motion stating that under Article
1155 of the Civil Code, the prescriptive period was
interrupted when he made an extrajudicial demand
made on D. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes since the action was brought more than ten years
from the entry of judgment in the collection case. P's
written demand did not interrupt the running of the
prescriptive period. The reason is that Article 1155 of
the Civil Code, which provides that the prescription of
actions is interrupted when there is an extrajudicial
demand by the creditors and when there is a written
acknowledgment of the debt by the debtor, refers to
actions to recover on a debt arising from contract or
from law, and not to an action to revive a judgment.
(Philippine National Bank v. Deloso, 30 March 1970;
Philippine NationalBank v. Osete, 24 SCRA 63 [1968]).125

125The statement in Board of Liquidators v. Zulueta, 115 SCRA 548, 557
(1982), that the written extrajudicial demand interrupted the prescriptive period
for filing the revival suit was merely an obiter dictum that did not overturn the
holdings in Deloso and Osete.

641

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The judgment in a collection case in favor of P
against D became final and executory and
judgment was entered on 20 January 2000. On 5
January 2010, P filed with the RTC an action for
revival of the judgment, but the same was dismissed
without prejudice for failure to serve summons on
D. Copy of the dismissal order was served on P
on 1 April 2010. May P still file an action to revive
the judgment and if so, until when?

A.

Yes, P may still file an action to revive the judgment
The filing of the action for revival interrupted the
running of the prescriptive period. The period started
to run again when the action was dismissed on 1 April
2010, and P has the balance of 15 days or until 16
April 2010 within which to file the action for revival.
(Board of Liquidators v. Zulueta, 115 SCRA 548 [1982]).

Q.

Respondents filed an action for cancellation of
title against Petitioner (Civil Case No. 15357). The
RTC, in this case, cancelled the titles of the
petitioner and his father Jose because they were
obtained through the misrepresentation of the
petitioners grandfather, Isidro Campit. The judgment
became final and unappealable in July 1979. The
respondents have long desired to divide the
subject property among themselves, but the
petitioner adamantly refused to surrender his title
to the property to them, or to the Register of
Deeds, despite their formal demand. Due to the
petitioner's continued refusal to surrender the
subject TCT, the respondents filed anew an action
for annulment and cancellation of title with the
RTC in August 2003, docketed as Civil Case No,
18421. The petitioner opposed the respondents'
action and argued that the August 1978 decision
in Civil Case No. 15357, which declared his title
null and void, could no longer be enforced
642

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
because its execution was already barred by the
Statute of Limitations, as the said decision was
never executed within 10 years from July 19, 1979
- the date of finality of the judgment. Is the
petitioner's opposition valid?
A.

No. Considering that the action for annulment and
cancellation of title filed by the respondents is substantially
in the nature of an action for reconveyance based on
an implied or constructive trust, combined with the
fact that the respondents have always been in
possession of the subject property, Civil Case No.
18421 may be treated as an action to quiet title, the
filing of which does not prescribe. Thus, the
respondents' filing of Civil Case No.18421 was proper
and not barred by the time limitations set forth under
the Rules of Court in enforcing or executing a final
and executory judgment. (Campit v. Gripa, 17
September 2014).

Q.

Petitioner was found guilty of homicide and
sentenced to imprisonment of 12 years, 1 month
and 1 day to 20 years and to pay the heirs of the
victim P32,000 for funeral expenses and P30,000
as death indemnity. The judgment became final
and executory in 1989. In 2010, private respondent,
the son of the deceased victim, filed a Motion for
Execution of Judgment. He alleged, among others,
that despite his request to the City Prosecutor to
file a motion for execution, the judgment has not
been enforced because said prosecutor has not
acted upon his request. The Petitioner opposed
the motion contending that the judgment can no
longer be enforced pursuant to S6 R39. Should
the RTC grant the motion for execution?

643

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

With respect to the penalty of imprisonment, the
judgment may be enforced. The applicable provision
is not 56 R39 but Article 93 of the Revised Penal
Code. Pursuant to Article 93, the period of prescription
of the penalty did not start to run since the Petitioner
did not evade the service of his sentence by escaping
from imprisonment. Since the penalty had not
prescribed, the same may be enforced by arresting
the Petitioner to serve his sentence.
With respect however to the civil liability, the
judgment may no longer be enforced. The civil liability
arising from the offense has prescribed pursuant to
Article 1144(3) of the Civil Code, in relation to S6 R39.
(BasiIonia v. Vifiaruz, 10 August 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

In an action for revival of a judgment of partition,
is it necessary that all the parties, in whose favor
the case for partition was adjudged, be made
plaintiffs to the action for revival of judgment?

A.

No. Even just one of the co-owners, by himself alone,
can bring an action for the recovery of the co-owned
property, even through an action for revival of judgment,
because the enforcement of the judgment would
result in such recovery of property. Any which one of
said prevailing parties, who had an interest in the
enforcement of the decision, may file the complaint for
revival of judgment, even just by himself. (Clidoro V.
Jalmanzar, 9 July 2014).

Q.

How may execution issue or be enforced in case
of the death of a party?

A.

In case of the death of a party, execution may issue
or be enforced in the following manner:

644

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
a) In case of the death of the judgment obligee, upon
the application of his executor or administrator, or
successor in interest.
b)

In case of the death of the judgment obligor
against his executor or administrator or successor
in interest, if the judgment be for the recovery of
real or personal property, or the enforcement of a
lien thereon. However if the judgment is for
money, it must be filed as a money claim against
the estate of the judgment obligor. (S5 R86).

c) In case of the death of the judgment obligor after
execution is actually levied upon any of his
property, the same may be sold for the satisfaction
of the judgment obligation, and the officer making
the sale shall account to the corresponding
executor or administrator for any surplus in his
hands. (S7 R39).
Q.

The standard model for a motion for execution
cited in legal form books runs as follows:
(CAPTION & TITLE)
MOTION FOR EXECUTION
The Plaintiff, through the undersigned counsel
most respectfully alleges that:
1) A decision has been rendered in this case for
collection of P500,000 and the period for
appeal had long expired without the Defendant
making an appeal.
2) The Decision is thus final and executory.
WHEREFORE it is respectfully prayed that an
order of execution of the judgment be issued.
(Sgd.) Atty. Juan De la Cruz
645

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Counsel for Plaintiff
(Address, IBP, PTR, Roll No, etc.)
COPY FURNISHED:
Atty. Pedro Santos
Counsel for Defendant
(Address, IBP, PTR, Roll No. etc.)
What is the defect of this model form?
A.

It does not comply with S8(e) R39 which provides that
the motion for execution shall specify the amounts of
the interest, costs, damages, rents, or profits (PIRG
D) due, aside from the principal obligation under
the judgment.

Q.

May the sheriff compute the interest where the
same was not specifically indicated in the writ of
execution as mandated by 58 R39?

A.

No. It is the judge's, not the sheriff's, duty to compute
the interest payable. (P/anti/la v. Baliwag, 6 June 2001).

Q.

How do the Rules classify judgments which are
the subject of execution?

A.

The Rules classify such judgments into three:
1) Money judgments. (59).
2) Judgments for specific acts. (S10).
3) Special judgments. (311).

646

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

Outline the procedure for enforcement of execution
of judgments for money.

A.
1)

Immediate payment on demand. The officer shall
demand from the judgment obligor the immediate
payment of the full amount stated in the writ of
execution and all lawful fees. The judgment
obligor shall pay in cash, certified bank check
payable to the judgment obligee, or any other
form of payment acceptable to the judgment
obligee. If the judgment obligee or his duly
authorized representative is present at the time of
payment, the judgment obligor shall pay directly
to the judgment obligee or representative.
Otherwise the judgment obligor shall deliver the
payment to the executing sheriff.

2)

Satisfaction by levy. If payment cannot be made
under No. 1, the officer shall levy upon the
properties of the judgment obligor giving the latter
the option to immediately choose which property
or part thereof may be levied upon, sufficient to
satisfy the judgment. If the judgment obligor does
not exercise the option, the officer shall first levy
on the personal properties if any, and then on the
real properties if the personal properties are
insufficient to answer for the judgment.

3) Garnishment of debts and credits. The officer may
levy on debts due the judgment obligor and other
credits, including bank deposits, financial interests,
royalties, commissions and other personal property
not capable of manual delivery in the possession
or control of third parties. Levy shall be made by
serving notice upon the person owing such debts
or having in his possession or control such credits
to which the judgment obligor is entitled. The
647

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
garnishee shall make a written report to the court
within 5 days from service of the notice of
garnishment. The garnished amount in cash, or
certified bank check issued in the name of the
judgment obligee, shall be delivered directly to
the judgment obligee within 10 working days from
service of notice on said garnishee requiring such
delivery, except the lawful fees which shall be
paid directly to the court. (S9 R39).
Q.

A judgment was rendered in favor of P against D
for a sum of money. The judgment became final
and executory and a writ of execution was issued.
The sheriff (unaccompanied by P) went to the
Defendant who issued a check payable to the
order of the sheriff for the amount of the judgment
award. The sheriff deposited the check in his personal
account, withdrew the proceeds, and absconded.
May the judgment still be enforced against D?

A.

Yes. There was no valid payment since the check
was issued payable to the sheriff and not to the
judgment obligee P. Hence D's obligation still subsists
and a writ of execution may still be enforced against
him. (Philippine Airlines Inc. v. Court of Appeals, 181
SCRA 557 [1990]). The PAL ruling was subsequently
codified in 39(a) R39 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure.

Q.

In the preceding problem, would your answer be
the same if what was turned over by D to the
sheriff was cash?

A.

No. In that case there would be valid payment
pursuant to S9 R39.

648

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

A judgment in favor of P against D became final
and executory. The sheriff garnished D's bank
account with Banco de Plata. Five days later the
sheriff went back to the bank and the bank
manager turned over to the sheriff a manager's
check payable to P representing the garnished
amount The sheriff absconded with the check
and the proceeds thereof after forging the
signature of P. May the bank be held liable by P
in case of loss?

A.

Yes. The bank, as garnishee, should have delivered
directly to P the check as mandated by S9(c) R39. If
any loss occurs to P, the bank should be held
accountable.

Q.

How is a judgment for conveyance, delivery of
deeds, or other specific acts (cds) in connection
therewith enforced?

A.

If a judgment directs a party to execute a conveyance
of land or personal property, or to deliver deeds or
other documents, or to perform any other specific act
in connection therewith, and the party fails to comply
within the time specified, the court may direct the act
to be done at the cost of the disobedient party al
some other person appointed by the court and the act
when so done shall have like effect as if done by the
party. If real or personal property is situated within the
Philippines, the court in lieu of directing a conveyance
thereof may by an order divest the title of any party
and vest it in others which shall have the force and
effect of a conveyance executed in due form of law.
(S1O[a] R39).

649

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Q.

The judgment directed the defendant to execute a
conveyance of land located in the Philippines in
favor of the plaintiff. The defendant refused to do
so. May the court hold defendant in contempt?

A.

No. The court can simply direct the conveyance to be
done by some other person or issue an order
divesting the title of the defendant over the property
and vesting it in the plaintiff. (Caluag v. Pecson, G.R.
No. L-1403, 29 October 1948).

Q.

How shall the officer enforce a judgment for the
delivery or restitution of real property?

A.

The officer shall demand of the person against whom
the judgment for the delivery or restitution of real
property is rendered and all persons claiming rights
under him to peaceably vacate the property within 3
working days and restore possession thereof to the
judgment obligee; otherwise, the officer shall oust all
such persons therefrom with the assistance, if
necessary, of appropriate peace officers, and employing
such means as may be reasonably necessary to
retake possession, and place the judgment obligee in
possession of such property. (S1O[c] R39).

Q.

P filed an action for recovery of possession of
land against D. The RTC decided in favor of P and
after the judgment had become final and executory
the RTC, upon P's motion, issued a writ of
execution directing the sheriff to place P in
possession of the subject land. When the sheriff
tried to evict D from the land, the latter refused to
do so. May the RTC hold D in indirect contempt?

A.

No. The writ was not directed to D but to the sheriff.
As the writ did not command the judgment debtor to
do anything, he cannot be guilty of the acts described
in Rule 71 which is "disobedience of or resistance to a
650

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
lawful writ, process, order, judgment, or command of
any court." The proper procedure is for the sheriff to
oust D, availing of the assistance of peace officers
pursuant to 510(c) R39. (Lipata v. Tutaan, L-16643,
29 September 1983).126
Q.

When the property subject of the execution
contains improvements constructed or planted by
the judgment obligor or his agent, may the officer
destroy, demolish, or remove said improvements?

A.

No, except upon special order of the court, issued
upon motion of the judgment obligee after due hearing
and after the judgment obligor or his agent has failed
to remove the same within a reasonable time fixed by
the court. (SM HR) (S1O[d] R39).127

Q.

What is a special "break-open" order?

A.

It is the special order provided for in 510(d) R39.

Q.

In an ejectment case, the sheriff and plaintiff's
counsel went to the defendant's premises in order
to deliver possession to the plaintiff by virtue of a
writ of execution. They found no one staying
thereat but with the door padlocked. In order to
deliver possession to plaintiff, the sheriff "smashed"
the padlock. Plaintiff's lawyer was charged
administratively by the defendant who argued that
the sheriff and the lawyer "used violence to break
open [his] domicile without authority from the
court." Is the lawyer administratively liable?

123It does not matter whether the writ was directed to the sheriff or not.
For so long as the judgment was for the delivery or restitution of real property,
the proper procedure is to oust the person against whom the judgment is
rendered and those claiming under him.
127- 0
N te that under 56 R15, the conduct of a hearing is only discretionary
upon the court.

651

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. There is only one instance where a special
"break-open" order is required and that is under
S10(d) R39. This is evidently not the case here since
no building or structure constructed by the defendant
was demolished or required to be demolished. The
sheriff cannot be expected to wait for the defendant to
return before enforcing the writ of execution. (Arcadio v.
Ylagan, A.M. No. 2734, 30 July 1986).

Q.

What is a special judgment?

A.

One which requires the performance of any act, other
than the payment of money or the sale or delivery of
real or personal property, which a party must
personally do because his personal qualifications and
circumstances have been taken into consideration.
(Caluag v. Pecson, 82 Phil. 8). Note however that the
judgment should not require the performance of a
service otherwise that would run afoul of the
Constitutional proscription against involuntary servitude.

Q.

How is a special judgment executed or enforced?

A.

A certified copy of the judgment shall be attached to
the writ of execution and served by the officer upon
the party against whom the same is rendered or upon
any other persons required thereby, or by law, to obey
the same, and such party or person may be punished
for contempt if he disobeys the same.

Q.

Give an example of a special judgment

A.

One which orders the defendant to disclose a secret
formula, code, or password to the plaintiff, or to install
a software personally designed by and known only to
the defendant.

652

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

What is the effect of levy on execution as to third
persons?

A.

The levy on execution shall create a lien in favor of
the judgment obligee over the right, title, and interest
of the judgment obligor in such property at the time of
the levy subject to liens and encumbrances then
existing. (512 R39). In respect of land, the writ of
execution shall be registered with the Register of
Deeds in order to affect third persons. (Secs. 69, 74,
and 113(d), P.D. No. 1529).

Q.

What properties are exempt from execution?

A.

(FLIP CHIEFS LBP) (513 R39).
1) FAMILY HOME and homestead.
2) LETTERED GRAVESTONES.
3) INSURANCE (LIFE) proceeds.
4) PROVISIONS for individual
sufficient for 4 months.

or

family

use

5) CLOTHING and articles for ordinary personal use.
6) HOUSEHOLD furniture and utensils 5 P100K
7) IMPLEMENTS and tools (ordinary) used in
livelihood.
8) EARNINGS, salaries, and wages for personal
services within 4 months preceding the levy.
9) FISHING BOAT and accessories 5 P100K
10) SUPPORT, or pension or gratuity from govt.
11) LAW specially exempts.
12) BEASTS OF BURDEN.
13) PROFESSIONAL LIBRARIES & EQUIPMENT 5
P3OOK
653

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Are incomes earned by a judgment obligor (which
is a juridical person) within 4 months preceding
the levy exempt from execution?

A.

No. 513 R39 and Sec 1, Rule IV NLRC Manual on
Execution of Judgments are confined only to natural
persons. (DArmoured Security and Inv. Agency v.
Orpra, 27 June 2005)

Q.

Atty. Magtanggol Abogado recently passed the
bar. He ordered a complete set of SCRA and
Philippine Reports from Central Bookstore, Inc.
He was unable to pay the price thereof. Central
sued Atty. Abogado for collection of the unpaid
price and won. The judgment became final and
executory. May the sheriff levy upon the SCRA
and Philippine Report books?

A.

Yes. No article mentioned in S13 R39 shall be exempt
from execution issued upon a judgment recovered for
its price or upon a judgment of foreclosure of a
mortgage thereon. (S13 R39).

Q.

When must the exemptions under S13 R39 be
claimed?

A.

The exemptions under 313 R39 must be claimed at
the time the sheriff is effecting the levy and
garnishment; otherwise these are deemed waived.
(Herrera v. McMicking, 14 Phil. 641). Note however
that in the case of exemption of the family home, the
same may be raised before the sale of the property.
(Spouses Versola v. Court of Appeals, 31 July 2006).

Q.

Is it sufficient for the spouses to claim that the
property is their family home for it to enjoy the
benefit of exemption from execution or forced sale?

654

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A.

No. The Supreme Court has ruled that the right to
exemption from forced sale or execution under Article
153 of the Family Code is a personal privilege granted
to the judgment debtor and as such it must be
claimed not by the sheriff but by the debtor himself
before the sale of the property. It is not sufficient that
the person claiming exemption merely alleges that
such property is a family home. This claim for
exemption must be set and proved to the sheriff.
Failure to do so would estop the party from later
claiming the exemption. (Spouses Versola v. Court of
Appeals, 31 July 2006; Oliva-De Mesa v. Acero, 16
January 2012).

Q.

May the exemptions in S13 R39 be waived by
stipulation?

A.

Prior to the filing of a case, it is submitted that the
exemptions may not be waived by stipulation because
it would run afoul of public policy. When the case is
filed however, a party may waive the exemption.

Q.

Give examples where the law provides for special
exemptions.

A.
1)

The right to receive support under the Family
Code as well as any money or property obtained
as such support shall not be levied upon on
attachment or execution. (Article 205, Family Code).

2)

Foreign currency deposits. (Foreign Currency
Deposit Act).

3)

Deposits maintained by banks with the BSP as
part of their reserve requirements. (Sec. 103,
New Central Bank Act).

655

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Daisy R. Yahon (respondent) filed a petition for the
issuance of protection order under the provisions of
Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9262, otherwise known as
the "Anti-Violence Against Women and Their
Children Act of 2004," against her husband, S/Sgt.
Charles A. Yahon (S/Sgt. Yahon), an enlisted
personnel of the Philippine Army who retired in
January 2006. Respondent and S/Sgt. Yahon were
married on June 8, 2003. Subsequently the RTC
issued a judgment directing Sgt. Yahon to provide
P4,000 a month to respondent Sgt. Charles A.
Yahon was also directed to give to respondent
50% of whatever retirement benefits and other
claims that may be due or released to him from
the government and the said share of petitioner
shall be automatically deducted from Sgt. Yahon's
benefits and claims and be given directly to the
respondent. The AFP Finance Center demurred
from complying with the directive saying that Sgt.
Yahon's retirement benefits are exempt from
execution under 513(l) of R39, which exempts
from process "any pension or gratuity from the
Government." Is the AFP Finance Center correct?

A.

No. Section 8(g) of R.A. No. 9262, being a later
enactment, should be construed as laying down an
exception to the general rule that retirement benefits
are exempt from execution. The law itself declares
that the court shall order the withholding of a
percentage of the income or salary of the respondent
by the employer, which shall be automatically remitted
directly to the woman "Notwithstanding other laws to
the contrary." Section 8(g) of R.A. No. 9262 used the
general term "employer,"which includes in its coverage
the military institution, S/Sgt. Yahon's employer. Where
the law does not distinguish, courts should not distinguish.
Thus, Section 8(g) applies to all employers, whether
private or govemment. (Republic v. Yahon, 16 June 2014).
656

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

Is there such a thing as an alias writ of execution?

A.

No more. Under the old rules, the lifetime of a writ of
execution was 60 days from receipt by the sheriff.
Hence there was a need of an alias writ of execution
upon the expiration of the 60-day period. This is no
longer necessary under the 1997 Rules which fixes
the lifetime of a writ of execution at 5 years from the
date of entry of the judgment. (S6 R39). However the
sheriff shall make a report to the court within 30 days
after his receipt of the writ and every 30 days thereafter
until full satisfaction of the judgment. (S14 R39).

Q.

What is a third-party claim?

A.

A remedy afforded to a third-party with a claim to
property levied, attached, or seized by virtue of court
order, wherein the third-party makes an affidavit of his
title or right of possession to the property and serves
the affidavit upon the court officer and a copy upon
the judgment obligee. It is available to a third-party in
cases of levy on execution (S16 R39), attachment
(S14 R57), and replevin (S7 R60). It is also referred
to as terceria.

Q.

Distinguish a third-party claim from a third-party
complaint.

A.
1) A third-party claim is merely an affidavit, while a
third-party complaint is a pleading.
2) A third-party claim is filed by a stranger while a
third-party complaint is filed by a party.
3) A third-party claim does not require leave of court,
while a third-party complaint does.

657

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Discuss briefly the procedure for making a thirdparty claim under S16 R39. (ASBA)

A.
1) The third-party shall make an affidavit showing his
title to or right of possession over the property.
2) He shall serve the affidavit upon the levying officer
and a copy upon the judgment obligee.
3) Thereafter the officer is not bound to keep the
property, unless the judgment obligee, on demand
of the officer, files a bond approved by the court
to indemnify the third-party claimant in a sum not
less than the value of the property levied. The
officer shall not be liable for damages for the
taking or keeping of the property to any thirdparty claimant if the indemnity bond is filed.
4)

A claim for damages for the taking or keeping of
the property may be enforced by the third-party
against the bond provided he files an action
within 120 days from the filing of the bond.

Q.

When may the third-party avail of a third-party claim?

A.

While the property is still in the possession of the
officer and before it is sold at execution.

Q.

What happens if after the filing of the third-party
claim the sheriff still proceeds with the sale of a
property even if no indemnity bond was filed?

A.

The sheriff shall be personally liable for such damages
as may be sustained by the third-party claimant.
(Bayer Ph/Is. Inc. v. Agana, G.R. No. L-38701, 8 April
1975). The third party can file an action for reconveyance
against the purchaser.

658

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

What are the remedies available to a third-party
with a claim to title or possession of property
which is levied upon by a court?

A.

The remedies of the third-party are: (TRIM)
1) Motion or application with the court for the release
of the property. This is based on the continuing
jurisdiction of a court with respect to matters
concerning the execution or enforcement of its
judgment.
2) Third-party claim or terceria under S16 R39.
3)

An action to claim damages on the indemnity bond
if one is filed.

4) A separate reivindicatory action to recover possession
of the property from the officer or the purchaser at
the execution sale.
Note that in third-party claim in attachment (S14
R57) and replevin (57 R60), the third party has the
additional remedy of intervention which is not available
in R39. (TRIMI) This is because intervention may be
availed of only before rendition of judgment. (S2 R19).
Q.

If a third-party claimant has availed of a thirdparty claim but is unable to recover the property,
may he still file a separate action to recover
possession?

A.

Yes. Nothing contained in 516 R39 shall prevent the
third-party claimant from vindicating his claim to the
property in a separate action. (S16 R39).

659

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the proper remedy of a third party if his
third-party claim is denied by the trial court?

A.

Neither appeal (because third-party claimant is not a
party) nor certiorari is the proper remedy because
there is an adequate remedy of filing a separate
reivindicatory action. (PSALM v Maunlad Homes, 8
Feb 2017, Peralta, J.)

Q.

In a decision in Civil Case No. 93-1000 which
became final and executory, the RTC of Manila
(Branch 21) issued a writ of execution for its
enforcement. The sheriff levied upon certain chattels
and scheduled the auction sale thereof.
However, Santamaria filed a third-party claim
with the sheriff asserting that the chattels levied
upon by the latter belong to him and not to the
judgment debtor. Because the judgment obligee
posted an indemnity bond in favor of the thirdparty claimant, the sheriff refused to release the
chattels and stated that he would proceed with
the auction sale.
Hence Santamaria filed with the RTC of
Bulacan (Branch 8) an action against the judgment
obligee and the sheriff for the recovery of the
chattels and seeking to enjoin the auction sale.
The RTC of Bulacan in due course issued a writ of
preliminary injunction enjoining the sheriff from
proceeding with the auction sale. The judgment
creditor and the sheriff filed a motion to dismiss
stating that Santamaria can no longer file a
separate action since he had already filed a thirdparty claim and that the auction sale cannot be
enjoined since a court cannot interfere with the
judgment of a coordinate court. How should the
motion to dismiss be resolved? (93 Bar 08ed).
660

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied. Nothing
contained in 316 R39 shall prevent the third-party
claimant from vindicating his claim to the property in a
separate action. (316 R39). There is no interference
with the processes of a coordinate and co-equal
court, since the sheriff was improperly implementing
the writ of execution. (Abiera v. Court of Appeals, 45
SCRA 314).

Q.

Enforcing a writ of execution issued by the Pasig
Regional Trial Court in a civil action, the sheriff
attached several pieces of machinery and equipment
found in defendant's place of business. Antonio
Sadalay filed with the sheriff an affidavit of thirdparty claim stating that the attached properties
belong to him, not to the defendant.
a) Can Sadalay intervene in the case and ask the
Pasig RTC to resolve his third-party claim?
b) If Sadalay decides to file a separate action in
the Regional Trial Court in Makati to vindicate
his claim, may he validly obtain a writ of
injunction from the Makati RTC to enjoin the
sale in execution of the levied properties? (91
Bar Q9).

A.
a) No, Sadalay may not intervene in the case and
ask the Pasig RTC to resolve his third-party claim.
Under 32 R19, intervention should be filed
before rendition of judgment by the trial court.
Here the Pasig RTC's judgment is already final
and executory. Hence intervention is no longer possible.
b) Yes, Sadalay may validly obtain a writ of injunction
from the Makati RTC to enjoin the execution sale.
661

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Under S16 R39 nothing contained therein shall
prevent the third-party claimant from vindicating his
claim to the property in a separate action. The Supreme
Court held that there would be no interference with
the processes of a coordinate and co-equal court, since
the sheriff was improperly implementing the writ of
execution. (Abiera v. Court of Appeals, 45 SCRA 314).
Q.

What is the remedy of the judgment obligee
against a third-party claimant who filed a frivolous
or plainly spurious claim?

A.

He may claim damages against the third-party
claimant in the same case or he can file a separate
action for damages. (S16 R39).

Q.

Describe briefly how property is sold on execution.

A.
1) The sale must be made at public auction, to the
highest bidder, to start at the exact time fixed in
the notice.
2) Any excess property or proceeds of the sale shall
be delivered to the judgment obligor.
3) The judgment obligor, if present at the sale, may
direct the order in which property, real or
personal, shall be sold, when such property
consists of several known lots or parcels which
can be sold to advantage separately.
4) The officer conducting the sale or his deputies
cannot purchase nor be interested directly or
indirectly in any purchase at such sale.
5)

The officer shall issue a certificate of sale to
the purchaser pursuant to Sections 24 to 26 of
Rule 39.
662

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

If the judgment obligee is the purchaser at the
execution sale, is there a need for him to pay the
amount of his bid?

A.

No, he need not pay the amount of the bid except:
1) If a third-party claim has been filed; or
2)

The amount of his bid exceeds the judgment
amount in which case he shall pay only the
excess. (321 R39). This may happen where there
is a bidder other than the judgment obligee.

Q.

The judgment obligee was the purchaser at the
execution sale in which a third-party claim was
filed. Should the judgment obligee pay the amount
of his bid in cash?

A.

Yes, per 821 R39. The amount should be deposited
with the court subject to its orders and the resolution
of the third party's claim. (See Filipinas Colleges v.
Timbang, 106 Phil. 247 [1959]; Sy v. Catajan, 164
SCRA 299 [1988]). In Crisologo v. Hao, 2 December
2020, Gaerlan, J., it was held that while the judgment
obligee needs to pay the bid amount if there is a thirdparty claim, such payment need not be in cash. It is
submitted that the Filipinas Colleges doctrine is the
controlling case law since Crisologo was not
promulgated by the en banc.128

128There appears to be no good reason why the judgment obligee should
be required to pay the bid amount if there is a third-party claim. The third-party
claimant would be adequately protected by the indemnity bond filed by the
judgment obligee. The third party may also bring a reivindicatory action to
recover the property seized.

663

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Can a husband file a third-party claim if conjugal
property is being levied upon to answer for the
separate obligation of the wife?

A.

Yes. (Spouses Buado v. Court of Appeals, 24 April
2009). However, if conjugal or community property is
being levied upon to answer for an obligation chargeable
to the conjugal or community property, a spouse
cannot file a third-party claim for he or she is not
considered a third party in such a situation.

Q.

Give the rules regarding the certificate of sale to
be issued by the officer to the purchaser.

A.
1) Personal property capable of manual delivery. If ;
the purchaser desires, the officer must execute
and deliver to him a certificate of sale. The sale
conveys to the purchaser all the rights which the
judgment obligor had in such property as of the
date of the levy on execution or preliminary
attachment. (S23 R39).
2) Personal properly not capable of manual delivery.
The officer must execute and deliver to the
purchaser a certificate of sale. The certificate
conveys to the purchaser all the rights which the
judgment obligor had in such property as of the
date of the levy on execution or preliminary
attachment. (524 R39).
3)

Rea/ property. The officer must give to the ,
purchaser a certificate of sale. The certificate
must be registered in the registry of deeds of the '
place where the property is situated. This is
necessary since the one-year redemption period
commences from the registration of the certificate
of sale. (325 R39).
664

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
4) Property claimed by a third person. The certificate
of sale to be issued by the sheriff shall make
express mention of the existence of the third-party
claim. (326 R39). The failure of the certificate of
sale to expressly mention the third-party claim will
however not invalidate the sale. (Crisologo v.
Hao, 2 December 2020, Geerlan, J.).
Q.

Is there a right of redemption over property sold
at execution?

A.

In the case of personal property there is no right of
redemption. In the case of real property, there is a
right of redemption.

Q.

The sheriff on execution levied upon the defendant's
growing crops. Does the defendant have a right to
redeem the growing crops?

A.

No. While growing crops are classified as real
property under Article 415(2) of the Civil Code, the
right to the growing crops mobilizes the same by
anticipation. (Sibal v. Valdez, 50 Phil. 512).

Q.

Who may redeem real property sold?

A.
1) The judgment obligor or his successor-in-interest.
2) The redemptioner, that is, a creditor having a lien
by virtue of an attachment, judgment, or mortgage
on the property sold subsequent to the lien under
which the property was sold. (327 R39).
Their right to redeem is an example of a legal
right of redemption.

665

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Q.

Give an example of a redemptioner.

A.

P files a case against D for damages and is able to
attach D's land. The writ of attachment is annotated
on the original certificate of title but not on the owner's
duplicate. Subsequently D mortgages the land to X
who is unaware that it had been attached by P. If P
wins and the land is sold on execution, X is a
redemptioner, his mortgage lien being subsequent to
the lien obtained by P through attachment.

Q.

Why do the Rules of Court give the right of
redemption to a redemptioner?

A.

To enable the redemptioner to protect his lien on the
property sold at execution. This is because if no
redemption is made within the allowable period, the
redemptioner's lien on the property is extinguished
because the purchaser acquires all the rights of the
judgment obligor to the property as of the time of the
levy, free of subsequent liens (S33 R39).

Q.

Outline the periods of redemption in execution
sale of real property.

A.
1) The judgment obliqor, whether exercising a first or
subsequent registration, has a period of one year
from the date of the registration of the certificate
of sale within which to redeem the property.
Once he redeems, there shall be no further
redemption. In no case may the judgment obligor
redeem beyond the one-year period.
2) The redemptioner exercising first redemption has
the same one-year period within which to redeem.

666

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
3) The redemptioner exercising a subsequent redemption
has a period of 60 days after the last redemption
within which to redeem. The redemptioner may
redeem even beyond the one-year period provided
it is within 60 days after the last redemption. (S28
& 29, R39).
Illustration
P files a case to collect P1 million in damages
from X. P is able to levy on attachment on X's land
on which there is a prior registered mortgage in favor
of A for P300,000. Afterwards X mortgages the land
to B for P200,000 and then to C for P100,000.
Judgment rendered in favor of P and the land is sold
at execution with P as the purchaser for P1 million.
Redemption periods:
X as the judgment obligor and B and C as
redemptioners have the right to redeem. A does not
have the right of redemption since his lien is prior to
the lien under which the property was sold. The
reason why the law does not grant the prior lienholder
a right of redemption is that there is no need to
protect his interest as the execution sale will not affect
his lien.
The judgment obligor X, whether exercising first
or subsequent redemption, has one year from the
registration of the certificate of sale within which to
redeem. In no case will his right of redemption go
beyond the one-year redemption period. If X redeems,
no further redemption shall be allowed and X is
restored to his estate. (S29 R39).

667

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Redemptioners B and C, when exercising the
right of first redemption, have one year from the
registration of the certificate of sale within which to
redeem. If they are exercising a subsequent redemption,
they have 60 days after the last redemption within
which to redeem. A redemptioner may redeem from
another redemptioner even beyond the one-year
period provided he redeems within 60 days after the
last redemption. If either B or C redeems, the other
can still redeem.
Redemption amounts:
First redemption by judgment obligor or redemptioner
1) Purchase price.
2) 1% per month interest thereon.
3) Assessments and taxes paid by the purchaser
after purchase.
4) 1% interest on No. 3.
5) If the purchaser be also a creditor having a prior
lien to that of the redemptioner, other than the
judgment under which such purchase was made,
the amount of such other lien. Note: Thus in the
illustration, if B (rather than P) was the purchaser,
C if he wants to redeem should also pay B
P200,000. If B was not the purchaser, C if he
wants to redeem need not pay B P200,000. If the
redemption period lapses, B's mortgage lien is
obliterated even as to C. (S33 R39).
Second redemption by judgment obligor or
redemptioner
1) Sum paid on the last redemption.
2) 2% of No. 1.
668

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
3) Assessments and taxes paid by the last
redemptioner after the redemption.
4) Interest on No. 3. (This appears to be legal
interest of 12% per annum as the judgment is
final and executory).
5) The amount of any liens held by the last
redemptioner prior to his (redemptioner's) own,
with interest. Note: No. 5 is not applicable to
redemption by the judgment obligor since after all
the redemption does not obliterate the subsequent
liens as to the judgment obligor. (S29 cf.
S33 R39).
Thus if B will redeem, he needs to pay the
purchase price of P1 million. If C will redeem from B,
C should pay B the amount the latter paid on
redemption plus the amount of P200,000 representing
B's mortgage lien. If it is X who will redeem from B, X
should pay B the amount the latter paid on
redemption but is not required to pay B's mortgage
lien of P200,000.
Q.

What proof is required of a redemptioner?

A.
1) a) A certified true copy of the judgment or final
order under which he claims the right to
redeem; or
b) If he redeems upon a mortgage or other lien,
a memorandum of the record thereof, certified
by the register of deeds; or
c) An original or certified true copy of any
assignment necessary to establish his claim; and

669

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) An affidavit executed by him or his agent, showing
the amount then actually due on the lien. (S30 R39).
Q.

Who is entitled to the rents, earnings, and income
of the real property pending redemption?

A.

The judgment obligor shall be entitled to the rents,
earnings, and income of the property pending redemption
until the expiration of his period of redemption. (S32
R39). Once the one-year redemption period has
expired, the rents, earnings, and income shall belong
to the purchaser or redemptioner as the case may be.

Q.

Upon the expiration of the right of redemption,
what rights are acquired by the purchaser or
redemptioner?

A.

Upon the expiration of the right of redemption, the
purchaser or redemptioner shall be substituted to and
acquire all the rights, title, interest and claim of the
judgment obligor to the property as of the time of the
levy. (S33 R39).

Q.

P filed with the RTC a sum of money case against
D. P won and the judgment became final and
executory in 1990. Upon motion, the land of D
was levied on execution and bought by P at the
execution sale in the same year. Upon the
expiration of the redemption period, the court
issued a writ of possession placing P in
possession. In 1996, P filed a motion to direct the
Register of Deeds to issue a new certificate of title
over the land in his name.
a) In implementing the involuntary transfer of title
of real property levied and sold on execution,
is it enough for the executing party P to file a
motion with the court which rendered judgment
or does he need to file a separate and original
action with the Regional Trial Court?
670

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
b)

Can such remedy be availed of even if more
than five years from the entry of judgment
had passed?

A.
a) P should file a separate and original action with
the RTC.
Under Section 75 of the Property Registration
Decree, upon expiration of the redemption period for
land sold on execution, the purchaser at such sale or
anyone claiming under him may petition the court for
the entry of a new certificate of title to him.129
Hence P should file the proper petition with
the cadastral court for the issuance of a new title in
his name.
b) Yes, such remedy can still be availed of.
Under the Law on Civil Procedure, It is settled
that execution is enforced by the fact of levy and sale.
The fact of levy and sale constitutes execution, and
not the action for the issuance of a new title.
Here, the levy and sale of the properties took
place in 1990 or well within the five-year period
provided for in S6 R39. (Padilla v. Philippine Producers
Cooperative Marketing Association, 15 July 2005,
Corona, J.; Reyes v. Tang, 14 December 2011,
Perez, J.).

129Compare with Section 79 of the Property Registration Decree on judgment
afjudicating ownership wherein a mere motion with the court will suffice.

671

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed a sum of money case against D. During the
pendency of the case, D sold his parcel of land
covered by TCT No. 1234 in favor of X in a
notarized but unregistered deed of sale. X took
possession of the land. Subsequently the court
rendered judgment in favor of P and the same
became final and executory. The court issued a
writ of execution and levy on execution on the
land was effected by registering the writ of execution
with the register of deeds. At the execution sale,
the land was bought by P and the certificate of
sale was registered.
a)

Who between P and X has a better right to
the land?

b) Would your answer be different if the land was
unregistered?
A.
a) P has a better right to the land.
It is axiomatic that a registered levy on execution
prevails over a prior unregistered sale. (Uy v. Medina,
8 August 2010; Suntay v. Keyser Mercantile Inc., 20
December 2014; Buzon v. Licauco, 13 Phil. 357
[1909]). In the purchase of registered land under levy
on execution, the provisions of 333 R39 cannot
overturn the provisions of Section 51 of the Property
Registration Decree which provides that the act of
registration is the operative act to convey or affect the
land insofar as third person are concerned. (Buzon v.
Licauco, supra; see Carumba v. Court of Appeals, 31
SCRA 558 [1970]; Radiowealth Finance Co. v.
Palileo, 197 SCRA 245 [1991]). Since the deed of
sale by D in favor of X was not registered, it did not
convey or affect the land insofar as P was concerned.

672

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
b) Yes, my answer would be different. In that case,
X would have a better right. The reason is that
the purchaser of unregistered land at a sheriffs
execution sale steps into the shoes of the
judgment obligor and merely acquires the latter's
interest in the property sold as of the time the
property was levied upon pursuant to S33 R39.
Here at the time of the levy, the judgment obligor
D no longer had any interest in the land since he had
sold and delivered the same to X. (Carumba v. Court
of Appeals, supra).
Q.

P filed a sum of money case against D. During the
pendency of the case, D sold his parcel of land
covered by TCT No. 1234 in favor of X in a
notarized but unregistered deed of absolute sale.
X took possession of the land. Subsequently the
court rendered judgment in favor of P and the
same became final and executory. The court issued
a writ of execution and levy on execution on the
land was effected by registering the writ of execution
with the register of deeds. X then registered the
deed of absolute sale in his favor. At the
execution sale, the land was bought by P and
after the expiration of the redemption period, the
certificate of sale in P's favor was registered. Who
between P and X has a better right to the land?

A.

P has a better right to the land.
Under S33 R39, upon the expiration of the right
of redemption, the purchaser or redemptioner shall be
substituted to and acquire all the rights, title, interest
and claim of the judgment obligor to the property as of
the time of the levy. (S33 R39). In other words, the
purchaser's right to the property retroacts to the date
of the levy. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO 300 [5th rev. ed.]).
673

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
At the time of the levy, the sale in favor of X was
not yet registered and thus did not affect or convey
the land insofar as third persons are concerned. (Sec.
51, Property Registration Decree). Hence insofar as P
was concerned, D was still the owner of the land and
thus P acquired the rights of D.
Q.

In extrajudicial foreclosure of real estate mortgages
under Act No. 3135, is the issuance of a writ of
possession ministerial upon the court after the
foreclosure sale and during the redemption period?

A.

Yes. The court may issue the order for a writ of
possession upon the mere filing of an ex parte
motion's° and the approval of the corresponding bond.

Q.

Is there an exception to the foregoing rule?

A.

Yes. Under 533 R39, which is made applicable to
extrajudicial foreclosures of real estate mortgages,
the possession of the property shall be given to the
purchaser or last redemptioner unless a third party is
actually holding the property in a capacity adverse to
the judgment obligor. Thus, the court's obligation to
issue an ex parte writ of possession in favor of the
purchaser in an extrajudicial foreclosure sale ceases
to be ministerial when there is a third party in
possession of the property claiming a right adverse to
that of the judgment debtor/mortgagor. (Cabling v.
Lumapas, 18 June 2014).

130While 55(b) R15 requires that all motions, including a motion for the
issuance of a writ of possession, must be served on the other party, it is
submitted that such service is not required in an ex parte motion for writ a/
possession under Section 7 of Act No. 3135 (extrajudicial foreclosure of REM)
since the right to file the motion ex parte is a substantive right provided for bylaw.

674

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

Petitioner was the highest bidder in an
extrajudicial foreclosure sale over a real property.
After the redemption period, the final deed of sale
was issued by the sheriff and a new certificate
of
title was issued in the name of Petitioner. The
Petitioner filed an application for issuance of
a
writ of possession. The Respondent filed
an
opposition on the ground that that the property
had previously been sold to her by Aida lbaba
o,
the property's registered owner and the judgm
ent
debtor/mortgagor in the extrajudicial foreclosur
e
sale, pursuant to a Deed of Conditional Sale.
It
appears from the records that no deed of absolute
sale over the subject property has been executed
in the Respondent's favor. The trial court grant
ed
the opposition and denied the application for issua
nce
of a writ of possession. The trial court stated that
its obligation to issue a writ of possession ceas
es
to be ministerial once it appears that there is
a
third party in possession of the property claim
ing
a right adverse to that of the debtor/mortgag
or.
Did the trial court rule correctly?

A.

No. We emphasize that the exception provided unde
r
S33 R39 contemplates a situation in which a third
party holds the property by adverse title or right
,
such as that of a co-owner, tenant or usufructua
ry,
who possesses the property in his own right, and
is not merely the successor or transferee of
the
right of possession of another co-owner
or the
owner of the property. Here, the respondent cann
ot
be said to possess the subject property by adve
rse
title or right as her possession is merely premised
on
the alleged conditional sale of the property to her
by
the judgment debtor/mortgagor. The execution of
a
contract of conditional sale does not imme
diately
transfer title to the property to be sold from seller
buyer. In such contract, ownership or title to
te
675

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
property is retained by the seller until the fulfillment of
a positive suspensive condition which is normally the
payment of the purchase price in the manner agreed
upon. (Cabling v. Lumapas, 18 June 2014).
Q.

D borrowed P500,000 from P with X acting as the
surety. D did not pay on maturity so P sued D and
X. Judgment rendered in favor of P as against D
and X for P500,000. The bank account of X was
garnished in the amount of P500,000. X demanded
indemnification from D but the latter did not pay X.
D argued that X's claim for indemnification was
waived since he did not raise it as a cross-claim
pursuant to S2 R9. Is D's argument meritorious?

A.

No. Under S35 R39, when a judgment is upon an
obligation of one of the parties as security for another,
and the surety pays the amount or any part thereof,
either by sale of his property or before sale, he may
compel repayment from the principal. This is a
specific provision which prevails over S2 R9.

Q.

What are the remedies available to the judgment
obligee in aid of execution? (EIRE)

A.
1)

Examination of judgment obligor when judgment
returned unsatisfied. In case the judgment is
returned unsatisfied, the judgment obligee is
entitled to an order from the court which rendered
the judgment, requiring the judgment obligor to
appear and be examined concerning his property
and income and proceedings may be had for the
application of the property and income of the
judgment obligor towards the satisfaction of the
judgment. (S36 R39).

676

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
2)

Examination of obligor of judgment obligor. The
court may by order require require the obligor of
the judgment obligor to appear before the court or
commissioner appointed by it for examination.
The person indebted to the judgment obligor may
pay to the sheriff holding the writ of execution the
amount of his debt and this shall constitute a
sufficient discharge of the debt. (S37 &39 R39).

3) Order for application of property and income to
satisfaction of judgment. If upon investigation of
his current income and expenses, it appears that
the earnings of the judgment obligor for his
personal services are more than necessary for
the support of his family, the court may order that
he pay the judgment in fixed monthly installments,
and upon his failure to pay any such installment
when due without good excuse, may punish him
for contempt. (S40 R39).
4) Appointment of receiver. The court may appoint a
receiver of the property of the judgment obligor;
and it may also forbid a transfer or other disposition
of, or any interference with, the property of the
judgment obligor not exempt from execution.
(S41 R39).
Q.

P, a Quezon City resident, filed a collection case
against D, a Pasay City resident, before the RTC
of Quezon City. After trial, judgment was rendered
in favor of P and in due course a writ of execution
was issued against D which was returned
unsatisfied. P filed a motion for examination of D
before the RTC of Quezon City which was granted
and an order requiring D to appear before the RTC
of Quezon City was served upon D. May D be
compelled to appear before the RTC?

677

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Under S36 R39, no judgment obligor shall be
required to appear before a court or commissioner
outside the province or city in which such obligor
resides or is found. The remedy of P is to ask the
court to appoint a commissioner and for the order to
specify the time and place in Pasay City where the
examination shall be conducted.131

Q.

Esguerra filed in 1989 with the RTC an action to
annul free patent in the name of De Guzman.
Esguerra alleged that a portion of De Guzman's
free patent encroached upon his land. The complaint
was later amended to include Holcim Philippines
Inc. which Esguerra alleged was quarrying from
the disputed portion. A final and executory
judgment was rendered ordering De Guzman to
segregate from her OCT the portion belonging to
Esguerra and to deliver possession thereof to
Esguerra. The judgment also ordered Holcim to
cease and desist from quarrying on the disputed
area and to make an accounting of the royalties it
paid to De Guzman. During the execution stage,
Esguerra filed a motion for the examination of
Holcim pursuant to S37 R39. Assuming that
during the hearing of the motion, Holcim denies
any indebtedness to De Guzman, may the trial
court, upon proof of Holcim's debt to De Guzman,
order Holcim to pay such debt to Esguerra?

A.

No. Pursuant to S43 R39, in the examination of a
person, corporation, or other juridical entity who has
the property of such judgment obligor or is indebted to
him (S37 R39), and such person, corporation, or
juridical entity denies the indebtedness, the court

131The phrase "outside the province or city" in 836 R39 appears to be
Cr s
anachronistic in the light of the amendment of the territorial grouping
be
phrase
the
that
suggested
is
It
129.
Blg.
B.P.
under
jurisdiction of the RTC
amended to "outside of the judicial region."

678

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
may only authorize the judgment obligee to institute
an action against such person or corporation for the
recovery of such interest or debt. Nothing in the Rules
gives the court the authority to order such person or
corporation to pay the judgment obligee and the court
exceeds its jurisdiction if it orders the person who
denies the indebtedness to pay the same. (Esguerra
v. Holcim Phi/s. Inc., 2 September 2013, Reyes, J.).
Q.

Is the principal debtor bound by a judgment against
the surety even if he is not impleaded in the suit?

A.

Yes, the principal debtor is bound from the time that
he has notice of the action or proceeding, and an
opportunity at the surety's request to join in the defense.

Q.

What do you understand by res judicata?

A.

Res judicata literally means "a thing decided." In fine,
it means that once a matter has been decided with
finality by a court, the matter is conclusive as between
the parties to the case and can no longer be relitigated.
Res judicata embraces two concepts: (1) "bar by
prior judgment," as provided for in S47(a) & (b) R39;
and (2) "conclusiveness of judgment" (also known as
"collateral estoppel" or "auter action pendant") as
provided for in S47(c) R39. (Rasdas V. Estenor, G.R.
No. 157605, 13 December 2005).

Q.

Give the rules on "bar by prior judgment" and on
"conclusiveness of judgment."

A.

Bar by prior judgment:
a) In case of a judgment or final order: (SPC)
1) Against a specific thing,

679

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) Or in respect to the probate of a will or the
administration of the estate of a deceased
person, or
3) In respect to the personal, political, or legal
condition or status of a particular person or
his relationship to another, the judgment or
final order is conclusive upon: (TWAC)
The title to the thing,
The will or administration, or
The condition, status or relationship of the person.
However the probate of a will or granting of
letters of administration shall only be prima facie
evidence of the death of the testator or intestate.
(S47[a] R39).
b) In other cases, the judgment or final order is, with
respect to (1) the matter directly adjudged or as
to (2) any other matter that could have been
raised in relation thereto, conclusive between the
parties and their successors-in-interest by title
subsequent to the commencement of the action or
special proceeding, litigating for the same thing
and under the same title and in the same
capacity. (S47[b] R39)
Conclusiveness of judgment:
c) In any other litigation between the same parties or
their successors in interest, that only is deemed
to have been adjudged in a former judgment or
final order which appears upon its face to have
been so adjudged, or which was actually and
necessarily included therein or necessary thereto
(anin). (S47[c] R39). In conclusiveness of judgment,

680

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
the parties in both actions are the same but the
causes of action are different. Hence the former
judgment or final order is conclusive only in
respect as to the matters actually raised and
adjudged therein.
Q.

Distinguish "bar by prior judgment from "conclusiveness
of judgment."

A.
1) AS TO IDENTITY OF CAUSES OF ACTION. In
bar by prior judgment, there is identity of causes
of action between the prior and the subsequent
case, while in conclusiveness of judgment, the
causes of action are different.
2) AS TO CONCLUSIVENESS. In bar by prior
judgment, the prior case is conclusive not only as
to the matters directly adjudged but also to any
other matter that could have been raised in
relation thereto, while in conclusiveness of
judgment, the prior case is conclusive only in
respect of the matters actually raised and
adjudged in the prior case.
3) AS TO PRECLUSIVE EFFECT. Bar by prior
judgment bars the relitigation of a case, while
conclusiveness of judgment bars only the
relitigation of an issue.
4) AS TO GROUND FOR MOTION TO DISMISS.
Bar by prior judgment is a ground for a motion to
dismiss, while conclusiveness of judgment is not.

681

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the requisites of res judicata (bar by
prior judgment)?

A.
1) The prior judgment or order must be final and
executory or final and unappealable.
2) It must be rendered by a court having jurisdiction
over the subject matter and the parties.
3) The prior judgment or order must be on the merits,
that is, it was rendered after a consideration of
the evidence or stipulations submitted by the
parties at the trial of the case. A dismissal order
which even if not on the merits is a dismissal with
prejudice or has the effect of an adjudication on
the merits constitutes res judicata. (E.g., S3 R17,
S5 R16, the two-dismissal rule under Si R17).
4) There is identity of subject matter, parties, and
causes of action (SPC) between the prior action
and the subsequent action.
Q.

Petitioner filed with the CFI a complaint against
the Private Respondent in 1969 for quieting of title
with damages, wherein the former seeks to be
declared the owner of the subject land. In 1970,
the Private Respondent dispossessed Petitioner
of the land in question and stayed there until
January 1978. The Private Respondent won in the
CFI but the CA reversed and declared the
Petitioner as the owner of the subject land and
ordered the Private Respondent to pay Petitioner
P56.40 as the latter's share in the proceeds of the
sale of the copra from the coconuts harvested in
the land.

682

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
The decision became final and executory in 2
February 1978. In 6 February 1978, Petitioner filed
a second case with the CFI against Private
Respondent seeking to recover from the latter the
incomes from the subject land from 1970 up to
January 1978 when possession of the land was
delivered to the Petitioner. Private Respondent
filed a motion to dismiss the second case on the
ground of res judicata. The Petitioner contended
that there was no res judicata since the issue or
matter regarding the income from the land was
not raised in the quieting of title case. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes. There is only one cause of action in the first and
second cases, viz., the continuing refusal by the
Private Respondent to recognize Petitioner's ownership
over the property. (See Jalandoni v. Martin-Guanzon,
102 Phil. 859). Petitioner should have raised the claim
for income in a supplemental pleading. Under S47(b)
R39, a judgment or final order is conclusive between
the parties "with respect to the matter directly
adjudged or as to any other matter that could have
been raised in relation thereto." (Bayang v. Court of
Appeals, 148 SCRA 91).

Q.

For purposes of res judicata, what is meant by
identity of parties?

A.

For purposes of res judicata, only substantial identity
of parties is required and not absolute identity. There
is substantial identity of parties when there is
community of interest between a party in the first case
and a party in the second case even if the latter was
not impleaded in the first case. In other words, privity
or a shared identity of interest is sufficient to invoke
application of the principle of res judicata.

683

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Thus it was held that there was substantial
identity of parties where the party in the second case
was invoking a right to ownership based on heirship
which was also invoked by his brother in a first action
for recovery of ownership that had been decided against
the brother. (loot v. Valenzuela, 5 December 2018).
Q.

Rolando filed a petition for declaration of the
nullity of his marriage to Carmela because of the
alleged psychological incapacity of the latter.
After trial, the court rendered judgment dismissing
the petition on the ground that Rolando failed to
prove the psychological incapacity of his wife.
The judgment having become final, Rolando filed
another petition, this time on the ground that his
marriage to Carmela had been celebrated without
a license. Is the second action barred by the
judgment in the first? Why? (02 Bar Q6b).

A.

Yes. Under S47(b) R39, a judgment is conclusive not
only with respect to the matter directly adjudged but
also as to any other matter that could have been
raised in relation thereto.
Here the ground of lack of license could have
been raised in the first petition for declaration of nullity
of marriage. Not having been so raised, the judgment
of the first case is already conclusive as to the issue
of the marriage license. (Ma/lion v. Alcantara, G.R.
No. 141528, 31 October 2006).132

132The answer of the UP Law Center was that the second petition is not
barred because it involved a different cause of action from the first. However in
the light of the subsequent ruling in Maffion, the revision of the answer is in order.
This is an interesting case of a bar question anticipating future jurisprudence.

684

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

A registered owner of land filed with the RTC a
petition for issuance of new owner's duplicate
certificate of title. The RTC rendered a decision
dismissing the petition for insufficiency of
evidence. May the registered owner file a second
petition for issuance of new owner's duplicate
certificate of title?

A.

Yes. Registered owner of land not barred by res
judicata from filing second petition to replace owner's
duplicate certificate of title. The ownership of registered
land is evidenced by the certificate of title, which is
indefeasible and incontrovertible. Moreover, S4 R1
provides that the Rules of Court apply to land
registration cases only by analogy, in a suppletory
character, and whenever practicable and convenient.
As in proceedings for the reconstitution of original
certificates of title however, proceedings for the
replacement of owner's duplicate certificates of title only
involve "the re-issuance of a new [owner's duplicate]
certificate of title lost or destroyed in its original form
and condition. It does not pass upon the ownership of
the land covered by the lost or destroyed title." Strictly
speaking therefore, there is no conclusive adjudication of
rights between adversarial parties in a proceeding for
the replacement of a lost or destroyed owner's duplicate
certificate of title. (Phil. Bank of Communications v.
Register of Deeds, 11 March 2020, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

D borrowed P1,000,000 from P evidenced by a
promissory note, payable in 20 equal monthly
installments of P50,000 each. There is no acceleration
clause in the note. D paid the first 6 installments
but did not pay the 7th to 11th installments. P sued
D to recover the said installments. D in his answer
raised the defense that his signature to the note

685

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
was forged. The court decided in favor of P,
finding that D's signature was genuine. The
judgment became final and executory. Subsequently
P filed another case against D to collect the 16th
to 20th installments.
a) Can D in the second case raise the defense
that his signature was forged?
b) Can D in the second case raise the defense
that he was intimidated into signing the note?
A.
a)

No more. Although the causes of action are
different, the parties are the same, bringing into
fore the application of the rule on conclusiveness
of judgment. Since the issue regarding the
forgery was directly adjudged in the first case,
such a finding is already conclusive as between
the parties.

b) Yes. The issue on vitiated consent was not directly
adjudged in the first case. Hence it can still be
raised in the second case. Bar by prior judgment
does not apply since the causes of action in the
first and second case are different.
Q.

Husband filed an action for the probate of his
deceased wife's will. The probate court issued an
order admitting the will to probate. Two years
later, a criminal complaint for forgery of the will
was brought against the husband. Should the
complaint be dismissed?

A.

Yes. The order admitting the will to probate is
conclusive as to its authenticity and due execution.
(Mercado v. Santos, 66 Phil. 215). Under S47(a) R39
in case of a judgment or final order in respect to the
probate of a will, the judgment or final order is
686

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
conclusive upon the will. Likewise Si R75 provides
that subject to the right of appeal, the allowance of a
will shall be conclusive as to its due execution.
Q.

Respondents filed an action for annulment of real
estate mortgage against the Petitioners. The RTC
granted the annulment but held the Respondents
liable to the Petitioner for the payment of P1
million. In its judgment, the RTC stated that the market
value of the Respondent's family home did not
exceed P300,000, the statutory limit for exemption
from execution. The RTC judgment became final
and executory. During the execution, may the
Petitioners introduce evidence that the market
value of the Respondents' family home exceeded
P300,000 in order to levy on the family home?

A.

No. Since the RTC in its judgment had already
determined that the market value of the property did
not exceed P300,000, to receive evidence to the
contrary during the execution state would violate res
judicata. (Eulogio v. Bell, 8 July 2015, Sereno, CJ.)

Q.

Does the rule of conclusiveness of judgment
apply also to criminal cases?

A.

Yes. (Ligtas v. People, 17 August 2015, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Ligtas filed a complaint for declaration of tenancy
relationship with the Department of Agrarian
Reform Adjudication Board against Pacate. Pacate
then filed a complaint for theft against Ligtas for
harvesting without her consent the abaca hemp in
her plantation. Subsequently the DARAB rendered
a decision finding that Ligtas was a bona fide
tenant of Pacate. The DARAB decision was not
appealed by the parties. May the RTC convict
Ligtas of theft?

687

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Under the principle of conclusiveness of judgment,
the final determination by the DARAB that Ligtas was
a bona fide tenant is conclusive and binding upon the
criminal court. Hence Ligtas could not be convicted of
theft because as a tenant he has the right to harvest
the abaca hemp. (Ligtas v. People, 17 August 2015,
Leonen, J.)

Q. In an administrative case filed against the
petitioners-public officers for falsification of disbursement
vouchers, the Office of the OmbudsmanMindanao (OMB-Mindanao) found the petitioners
administratively liable.
Subsequently, the OMB-Mindanao found
probable cause to charge petitioners with Malversation
of Public Funds through Falsification of Public
and Commercial Documents, and the violation of
Section 3(e) of R.A. No. 3019, as amended, based
on the same factual circumstances and subject
matter as that in the administrative case.
On a motion for reconsideration in the
administrative case, the OMB-Minadano absolved
the petitioners from administrative liability on
a categorical finding that they "had no direct
participation in the anomalies."
The petitioners accordingly moved for
reconsideration of the Resolution in the criminal
case against them. The OMB-Mindanao however
denied the motion for reconsideration on the
ground that the reglementary period in filing a
motion for reconsideration had already lapsed.
Did the OMB-Mindanao act with grave abuse of
discretion in denying the petitioner's motion for
reconsideration?

688

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
A.

Yes. The ruling of the OMB-Mindanao in the
administrative case absolving the petitioners from
administrative liability on a categorical finding that
they "had no direct participation in the anomalies" is
much more than a finding that there was "insufficient
evidence" to hold petitioners administratively liable,
but rather, that the petitioners did not commit anything
at all which can potentially incriminate them
administratively or criminally. If the petitioners were
already found not to have had any participation in the
anomalies, then this finding merits their exoneration
as well from the criminal case. It falls within the
exception to the general rule that administrative and
criminal cases based on the same operative facts
may proceed independently. Relitigating the petitioner's
liability is barred by the principle of conclusiveness of
judgment. (Pahkiat v. OMB, 3 November 2020, e.b.,
Caguioa, J.).

Q.

A petition for indirect contempt was filed against
the respondents. The petitioner alleged that
respondents, as officers of Manila Golf & Country
Club Inc. (MGCCI), transferred the shares of a
debtor despite service of a notice of garnishment
The RTC absolved the respondents, after finding
that the notice of garnishment was not actually
served upon respondents when they transferred
the shares. Subsequently, the petitioner filed
another case with the RTC against MGCCI to
compel it to transfer the subject shares to it. May
the complaint be dismissed?

A.

Yes, on the ground of res judicata, more particularly,
conclusiveness of judgment. The validity of the
garnishment cannot be relitigated in another case
even if it involves a different cause of action. The
conclusiveness of the factual finding in the indirect
contempt case that there was no valid garnishment is
689

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
fatal to petitioner's cause in the second case.
Petitioner's main claim in his complaint was wholly
dependent on the assumption that it was able to
obtain an attachment on the debtors MGCCI stocks.
Such assumption, however, was already contradicted
by the final order of the RTC in the indirect contempt
case which effectively denounced the very existence
of such an attachment. (Ang v. Bitanga, 28 November
2019, Peralta, C.J.).
Q.

Nasugatan sued Sagasa for injuries he suffered
when Sagasa drove his car recklessly and bumped
into Nasugatan. Sagasa confessed judgment and
was adjudged to pay P5,000.00. Nasugatan became
blind because of the injuries he sustained in the
accident He filed another suit against Sagasa,
this time for P100,000.00. May Sagasa plead the
filing of the first complaint in abatement of the
second suit and contend that the judgment on the
merits in the first case constitutes a bar in the
second? Explain. (86 Bar 01).

A.

Yes, Sagasa may plead that the judgment in the first
case constitutes a bar in the second.
Under S4 R2, if two suits are instituted on the
basis of the same cause of action, a judgment upon
the merits in any one is available as a ground for the
dismissal of the other.
Here the second suit involves the same cause of
action: Sagasa's reckless driving which violated the
right of Nasugatan. In other words Nasugatan's
blindness resulted from the same reckless act of
Sagasa. Hence the second suit is barred by the
judgment in the first suit.

690

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Alternative Answer:
No, Sagasa may not plead that the judgment in
the first case constitutes a bar in the second.
Under S47(b) R39, a judgment in an action in
personam is conclusive between the parties and their
successors-in-interest as to the matter directly
adjudged or as to any other matter that could have
been raised in relation thereto.
Here the blindness could not have been raised in
the first case. Hence the second suit for damages
arising from the blindness is not barred by the
judgment in the first suit.
Note: I favor the first answer. My objection to
the alternative answer is based on my opinion that
competent medical diagnosis could have detected the
possibility that the injuries would result in blindness.
In other words the possibility of blindness could have
been raised in the first case. Hence when Nasugatan
entered into the compromise, he is thereby deemed
to have waived his claim for damages from the
blindness.
Q. In 1996, respondents spouses Eliezer and Leila
Adlawan obtained a P3,669,685.00 loan from
petitioner Central Visayas Finance Corporation covered
by a promissory note and a chattel mortgage over
a Komatsu Highway Dump Truck.
Respondents failed to pay the loan, prompting
petitioner to file an action against respondents for
replevin before the Cebu Regional Trial Court,
docketed as Civil Case No. 22294 (replevin case).
The principal relief sought was for the recovery
of the possession of the dump truck, which was
used as a collateral in the mortgage contract
691

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
between the parties. In the event that delivery
thereof cannot be effected, petitioner stated an
alternative prayer, that is, for the respondents to
pay the amount of P2,604,604.97 which represented
their outstanding obligation.
In its 1999 decision, the trial court ruled in
petitioner's favor and respondents were ordered
to deliver possession of the dump truck to
petitioner. Petitioner then extrajudicially foreclosed on
the chattel mortgage and caused the sale at
public auction of the dump truck, which was then
sold to it as the highest bidder for P500,000.00.
In 2000, petitioner commenced a second case
before the RTC - Civil Case No. 24841 - this time
for collection of sum of money and/or deficiency
judgment relative to respondents' supposed unpaid
balance on their loan, which petitioner claimed to
be at Php2,104,604.97 - less the value of dump
truck - with damages (deficiency case).
Was the second action barred by res judicata?
A.

Yes. Under S47(b) R39, a judgment or final order is
conclusive not only with respect to the matter directly
adjudged but also to any other matter that could have
been raised in relation thereto.
By failing to seek a deficiency judgment in the
replevin case after its case for recovery of possession
was resolved, petitioner is barred from instituting
another action for such deficiency. Pursuant to S47(b)
R39, on the effect of judgments or final orders, the
judgment in the replevin case is, with respect to the
matter directly adjudged or as to any other matter that
could have been raised in relation thereto, conclusive
between the petitioner and respondents.

692

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Petitioner's argument that the replevin case and
the deficiency case involved different causes of action
is without merit. Petitioner ignores the fact that it
prayed in the replevin case that in the event manual
delivery of the vehicle could not be effected, the court
render judgment in its favor by ordering respondents
to pay P2,604,604.97. Following S47(b) R39, petitioners
second complaint is barred by res judicata. (Central
Visayas Finance Corp. v. Adlawan, 25 March 2019,
Del Castillo, .1).133
Q.

Define: (a) res judicata, (b) law of the case, and
(c) stare decisis.

A.

RES JUDICATA. The rule that once a judgment has
become final, it is conclusive as to the matters taken
up or which could have been taken up in the case.
LAW OF THE CASE. The rule that if an appellate
court has passed on a legal question and remanded
the case to the court below for further proceedings,
the legal questions thus determined by the appellate
court will not be differently determined on a
subsequent appeal in the same case where the
facts remain the same. (Allen v. Michigan Bell Tel.
Co., 232 N.W.2d 302 [1975]).
STARE DECISIS. The rule that decisions of the
Supreme Court should stand as precedents for future
guidance.

I33The holding that the replevin case and the deficiency case involve the
same cause of action is arguable. Petitioner's complaint joined two causes of
action in the alternative: recovery of possession of the dump truck (replevin)
and collection of loan in case the dump truck could not be recovered. The
complaint did not involve extrajudicial foreclosure which is a distinct proceeding
and in which the mortgagee has the right to run after the mortgagor for any
deficiency. The fact that collection was stated as an alternative remedy does not
bar resort to extrajudicial foreclosure and any resultant deficiency action.

693

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Plaintiff placed an advertisement in the defendant's
phone directory. Plaintiff sued defendant for
damages for failing to publish the ad. Defendant
moved for summary judgment in the trial court
invoking the clause in the advertising contract
that defendant will not be liable for more than the
value of the advertising contract. The motion for
summary judgment was granted but on appeal,
the Court of Appeals reversed holding that the
disclaimer clause was invalid. The CA remanded
the case to the lower court for trial in which in due
course, judgment was rendered in favor of the
plaintiff. On defendant's appeal to the CA, may
the defendant raise as an issue the validity of the
disclaimer clause?

A.

No, pursuant to the law of the case. The term "law of
the case", as generally used, designates the
principle that if an appellate court has passed on a
legal question and remanded the case to the court
below for further proceedings, the legal questions
thus determined by the appellate court will not be
differently determined on a subsequent appeal in
the same case where the facts remain the same.
Since the validity of the disclaimer clause had
already been passed upon during the first appeal,
such issue can no longer be relitigated on the
second appeal. (Allen v. Michigan Bell TeL Co., 232
N.W.2d 302 [1975]).

Q.

Plaintiff Litton Corporation filed with the CFI an
action for sum of money against the Defendants
corporations. The Plaintiff filed a motion for
summary judgment which was granted by the trial
court. Defendants appealed to the CA. The Plaintiff
filed a motion for execution pending appeal with
the CFI which was granted. Defendants then filed
with the CA a special civil action for certiorari and
694

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
prohibition wherein they alleged that the trial court
acted with grave abuse of discretion amounting to
lack of or excess of jurisdiction when it granted
the motion for summary judgment. The CA
dismissed the petition for certiorari and prohibition
ruling that the trial court acted with sound
discretion in granting the motion for summary
judgment. In the appeal before the CA, the
Defendants raised as an error the grant by the
trial court of the motion for summary judgment.
May the Defendants still raise as error the grant
by the trial court of the summary judgment?
A.

No more. The ruling on the petition for certiorari and
prohibition that the trial court acted with sound
discretion in rendering summary judgment constitutes
the "law of the case" and can no longer be reviewed
anew on appeal. (Litton Mills, Inc. v. Galleon Trader,
Inc. 163 SCRA 489).

Q.

P filed complaint against D who filed a third-party
complaint against E. E was declared in default
with respect to D's third-party complaint for
failure to file his answer. E filed a motion for
reconsideration of the default order which was
denied by the RTC. E filed a special civil action for
certiorari with CA seeking to set aside the default
order which was denied for failure of E to attach
the assailed orders. E's motion for reconsideration
was denied for being filed out of time. The CA's
dismissal was not appealed to the SC by E.
Meanwhile the RTC rendered in favor of P against
D and in favor of D against E ordering E to pay D
the amount D had paid P. E appealed to the CA
which reversed the RTC's decision and held that
E was improperly declared in default.
a) Was the CA's reversal proper?
695

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. E's Petition for Certiorari on the denial of his
motion for reconsideration has already been dismissed
with finality by the Court of Appeals. E did not appeal
said ruling of the Court of Appeals. The dismissal of
the Petition for Certiorari assailing the denial of
respondent E's Motion constitutes a bar to the retrial
of the same issue of default under the doctrine of the
law of the case.
b) E counters that the doctrine of the law of
the case is not applicable, inasmuch as a Petition
for Certiorari is not an appeal. E argues that the
Doctrine of the Law of the Case applies only when
the appellate court renders a decision on the
merits, and not when such appeal was denied
due to technicalities. How would you refute E's
argument?

A.

There is no substantial distinction between an appeal
and certiorari when it comes to the doctrine of the law
of the case since the doctrine is founded on the policy
of ending litigation. Likewise to say that the doctrine of
the law of the case applies only when the appellate
court renders a decision on the merits would be putting
premium on a party's negligence of losing the previous
appeal. (Banco de Oro v. Tansipek, 22 July 2009).
(Note: It is submitted that the "law of the case"
is not applicable since the petition for certiorari and
prohibition does not constitute a first appeal, the same
being an original action. Furthermore in a certiorari
proceeding, the issue that may be properly resolved
by the court is whether an order was issued with
grave abuse of discretion, not whether the order was
erroneous or not.)

696

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

Does a minute resolution constitute a binding
precedent?

A.

No. A minute resolution is not a binding precedent.
Unlike decisions, minute resolutions are not published
in the Philippine Reports nor signed by the members
of the Court and certified by the Chief Justice. (Deutsche
Bank AG Manila Branch v. Commissioner of Internal
Revenue, G.R. No. 188550, 19 August 2013).

Q.

May an unsigned resolution be considered as
binding precedent?

A.

Yes, if it states clearly the facts & law on which it is
based. However, a minute resolution which dismisses
a case without discussing its merits is not doctrinal
but is res judicata between the parties. (Eizmendi v.
Fernandez, 27 Nov 2019, Peralta, C.J.; Denila v.
Republic, 15 July 2020, Gesmundo, J.).

Q.

What are the tests to be applied in resolving a
situation which involves two or more conflicting
decisions which are final and executory?

A.

The two tests are: (1) to ask which judgment came
first, and (2) to ask which judgment was rendered by
a court of last resort. The earlier judgment or the
judgment rendered by a court of last resort would be
the one which would prevail. (Navarra v. Liongson, 10
April 2016). Thus an earlier judgment of a CA division
which held that there was a valid substitution prevails
over a later judgment of another CA division which
held that the substitution was invalid. (Id.).134

134It is submitted that the lone controlling test should be to ask which
judgment was entered first. Even a judgment of an MTC which has already
become final and executory should prevail over a latter judgment of a higher
court, including the Sc; otherwise we would be violating the principle of
immutability of final judgments.

697

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect of a foreign judgment or final
order?

A.

The effect of a foreign judgment or final order of a
foreign tribunal having jurisdiction to render the
judgment or final order is as follows:
a) In case of a judgment or final order upon a specific
thinq the judgment or final order is conclusive
upon the title to the thing; and
b) In case of a judgment or final order against a
person the judgment or final order is presumptive
evidence of a right as between the parties and
their successors in interest by a subsequent title.
(S48 R39).

Q.

May a foreign judgment or final order be repelled?

A.

Yes by evidence of: (1) want of jurisdiction, (2) want
of notice to the party, (3) collusion, (4) fraud, or (5)
clear mistake of law or fact. (S48 R39). Take note that
both the foreign judgment under 348(a) and 348(b)
may be so repelled, unlike in the 1964 rules wherein it
was only the S48(a) judgment which may be repelled.

Q.

What does "want of jurisdiction" in S48 R39
mean? By whose standard should the presence
of jurisdiction be judged?

A.

Want of jurisdiction refers to either subject-matter
jurisdiction or personal jurisdiction. The presence of
jurisdiction should be judged not only in accordance
with the foreign law but also in accordance with the
Philippine law. Hence a judgment rendered in a foreign
court which recognizes summons by publication in in
personam suits against a non-resident defendant
should not be accorded recognition in the Philippines.
(See JOVITO SALONGA, PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL
LAW 551 [1995 ed.]).
698

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

What does "fraud" in S48 R39 mean?

A.

The fraud referred to in 348 R39 has the same
meaning as "fraud" in 31(a) R37, that is, it refers to
extrinsic fraud or deception or trickery by which the
aggrieved party was prevented from having trial or
presenting his case before the court.

Q.

Private Respondent Filipina filed with the Regional
Trial Court of Makati a petition for declaration of
nullity of marriage with her Petitioner husband, a
German citizen. During the pendency of the case,
the Petitioner obtained a divorce decree from the
Court of First Instance of Hamburg, Germany,
based on the German Civil Code provision that if a
couple have lived separately for more than 3 years,
their marriage is deemed irrefutably dissolved.
The decree also awarded parental custody of
the couple's two children to the Petitioner. The
Petitioner thus filed a motion to dismiss the
nullity suit on the ground that there was already a
divorce decree issued by the German court. The
RTC dismissed the Petition, stating in effect that
the foreign divorce decree should be recognized.
On Private Respondent's motion for partial
reconsideration, the RTC partially set aside its
dismissal order and reinstated the case for the
purpose of determining the issue of parental
custody over the two children of the Private
Respondent and the Petitioner. May the RTC take
cognizance of the issue of parental custody after
it had recognized the divorce decree?

699

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. While divorce decrees obtained abroad by
foreigners are recognized in our jurisdiction, the other
effects provided by the decree, like that of custody,
should not be automatically recognized. They can be
repelled by a showing that there was want of jurisdiction,
want of notice to the party, collusion, fraud, or clear
mistake of law or fact. (548 R39).
It is essential that there should be an opportunity
to challenge the foreign judgment in order for the court in
this jurisdiction to properly determine its efficacy.
There was no showing that private respondent
Filipina was given the opportunity to challenge the
judgment of the German court so as to provide basis
for declaring the judgment as res judicata with regard
to the rights of petitioner German to have parental
custody over their two children. The proceedings in
the German court were summary. As to what was the
extent of private respondent's participation in the
proceedings in the German court, the records remain
unclear. The divorce decree itself states that neither
has private respondent commented on the proceedings
nor has she given her opinion to the social services
office. Unlike petitioner who was represented by two
lawyers, the private respondent had no counsel to
assist her in the proceedings before the German
court. More importantly the divorce judgment was
issued to petitioner by virtue of the German Civil Code
provision that when a couple have lived separately for
3 years, the marriage is deemed irrefutably dissolved.
The divorce decree did not state who the offending
spouse was. In the absence of any showing that
Private Respondent was unfit to take custody of her
children, the RTC was correct in setting the issue of
parental custody for hearing. (Roehr v. Rodriguez,
G.R. No. 142820, 20 June 2003).

700

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

May a foreign judgment which is final be forthwith
enforced in the Philippines by a motion for
execution?

A.

No. A petition for the recognition and enforcement of
the foreign judgment must first be filed in the
Philippines. However where the foreign judgment
does not grant any affirmative relief, as when it merely
dismisses a case or decrees a divorce, a petition for
recognition alone is proper. (JOVITO SALONGA,
PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW 535-36 [1995 ed.]).

Q.

Petitioner Fujiki is a Japanese national who
married respondent Maria Paz Marinay in the
Philippines in 2004. The marriage did not sit well
with petitioner's parents. Thus, Fujiki could not
bring his wife to Japan where he resides. Eventually,
they lost contact with each other. In 2008, Marinay
met another Japanese, Maekara. Without the first
marriage being dissolved, Marinay and Maekara
were married in 2008 in Quezon City, Philippines.
Maekara brought Marinay to Japan. However,
Marinay allegedly suffered physical abuse from
Maekara. She left Maekara and started to contact
Fujiki. Fujiki and Marinay met in Japan and they
were able to reestablish their relationship. In 2010,
Fujiki helped Marinay obtain a judgment from a
family court in Japan which declared the marriage
between Marinay and Maekara void on the ground
of bigamy. In 2011, Fujiki filed a petition in the
RTC of Pasay City entitled: "Judicial Recognition
of Foreign Judgment (or Decree of Absolute
Nullity of Marriage)." Fujiki prayed that (1) the
Japanese Family Court judgment be recognized;
(2) that the bigamous marriage between Marinay
and Maekara be declared void ab initio; and (3) for
the RTC to direct the LCR of Quezon City to

701

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
annotate the Japanese Family Court judgment on
the Certificate of Marriage between Marinay and
Maekara and to endorse such annotation to the
Office of the Administrator and Civil Registrar
General in the NSO.
A few days after the filing of the petition, the
RTC immediately issued an Order dismissing the
petition based on Braze v. The City Civil Registrar
of Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental (607
SCRA 638 [2009]) wherein the SC ruled that "[Un a
special proceeding for correction of entry under
Rule 108, the trial court has no jurisdiction to
nullify marriages x x x." Was the Pasay City RTC's
dismissal of the petition correct?
A.

Since the recognition of a foreign judgment only
requires proof of fact of the judgment, it may be made
in a special proceeding for cancellation or correction
of entries in the civil registry under Rule 108 of the
Rules of Court. In Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas (628 SCRA
266 [20101) this Court declared that "[t]he recognition
of the foreign divorce decree may be made in a R108
proceeding itself, as the object of special proceedings
(such as that in Rule 108 of the Rules of Court) is
precisely to establish the status or right of a party or a
particular fact."
Braza is not applicable because Braza does not
involve the recognition of a foreign judgment nullifying
a bigamous marriage where one of the parties is a
citizen of the foreign country. To be sure, a petition for
correction or cancellation of an entry in the civil
registry cannot substitute for an action to invalidate a
marriage. A direct action is necessary to prevent
circumvention of the substantive and procedural
safeguards of marriage under the Family Code, However,

702

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
this rule does not apply in a petition for correction or
cancellation of a civil registry entry based on the
recognition of a foreign judgment annulling a marriage
where one of the parties is a citizen of the foreign
country. There is no circumvention of the substantive
and procedural safeguards of marriage under
Philippine law. A recognition of a foreign judgment is
not an action to nullify a marriage. It is an action for
Philippine courts to recognize the effectivity of a
foreign judgment, which presupposes a case which
was already tried and decided under foreign law.
(Fujiki v. Marinay, 20 June 2013).
Q.

Petitioner Filipina filed a petition for recognition of
foreign divorce of her marriage to a Japanese.
The RTC rendered judgment dismissing the
petition for lack of evidence that the Japanese law
allowed her former spouse to remarry. If petitioner
would file anew a petition for recognition in which
she would introduce evidence that her exhusband had remarried, would that petition be
barred by res judicata?

A.

No. Petition for recognition of foreign divorce concerns
Edna's status. Hence, res ludicata does not apply and
the case may be re-filed. The Supreme Court,
however, simply ordered the remand of the case to
the RTC to avoid waste of time and resources.
(Kondo v. Civil Registrar General, 4 March 2020,
Lazaro-Javier, J.).

Q.

Yi and Chun filed an action for sum of money and
damages against Mercantile Insurance Company
(MIC) before the Superior Court of California,
U.S.A. Judgment was rendered in favor of the
plaintiffs. As Yi sought to enforce the judgement
in the Philippines, she filed an action for

703

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
recognition and enforcement of the judgment
before the RTC. MIC challenges the validity of the
foreign judgment on the ground that there was
want of notice to it since there was no proper
service of summons in the California case, the
service having been effected only through mail.
Is MIC's challenge meritorious?
A.

No. Matters of remedy and procedure such as those
relating to the service of process upon a defendant
are governed by the lex fori or the internal law of the
forum. In this case, Atty. Dyer, member of the bar of
the State of California for more than 30 years, testified
as to the applicable law related to summons. In detail,
he stated the exact pertinent provision under the
California Code of Civil Procedure which allows
service of summons by mail. (Mercantile Insurance
Co. v. lei, 18 March 2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Under Article 1144 of the New Civil Code, an
action upon a judgment must be brought within 10
years from the time the right of action accrues. Is
this provision applicable to an action filed in the
Philippines to enforce a foreign judgment? (05
Bar Q1a)

A.

Yes. Article 1144 does not distinguish between a
domestic or a foreign judgment. The foreign judgment
must not be barred by prescription under the law of
the state of rendition or under Article 1144. (JOVITO
SALONGA, PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW 554
[1995 ed.]).

704

Rule 39
Execution, Satisfaction &
Effect Of Judgments
Q.

Can a foreign arbitral award be enforced in the
Philippine under Section 48 of the Rules of Court?
Explain briefly. (07 Bar al b).

A.

No, a foreign arbitral award cannot be enforced under
Section 48 since it is not a foreign judgment. It may
however be enforced under Rule 12 of the Special
Rules of Court on Alternative Dispute Resolution.
The petition to recognize or enforce the arbitral award
may be filed with the RTC: (a) where the arbitration
proceedings were conducted; (b) where any of the
assets to be attached or levied upon is located; (c)
where the act to be enjoined will be or is being
performed; (d) where any of the parties to arbitration
resides or has its place of business; or (e) in the
National Capital Judicial Region.

705

RULE 40. APPEALS FROM THE
MUNICIPAL TRIAL COURTS TO THE
REGIONAL TRIAL COURTS
Q.

Define appeal.

A.

Appeal is a proceeding by which a party seeks from a
higher court the review of a judgment or final order of
a lower court on the ground that the judgment or final
order is against the evidence or the law.

Q.

Where, when, and how is an appeal taken from a
judgment or final order of the MTC?

A.

Where to appeal:
An appeal from a judgment or final order of a
Municipal Trial Court may be taken to the Regional
Trial Court exercising jurisdiction over the area to
which the former pertains.
When to appeal:
An appeal may be taken within 15 days after
notice to the appellant of the judgment or final order
appealed from. Where a record on appeal is required,
the appeal is taken within 30 days after notice of the
judgment or final order.
The period of appeal shall be interrupted
by a timely motion for new trial or reconsideration.
(S2 & 3 R40).
Where a motion for reconsideration or new trial is
filed and then denied, the movant has a fresh period
of 15 days to file the notice of appeal, counted from
receipt of the order denying the motion for
reconsideration or new trial. (Neypes v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. 141524, 14 September 2005).
706

Rule 40
Appeals From The Municipal Trial Courts
To The Regional Trial Courts
How to appeal:
The appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal
with the court that rendered the judgment or final
order appealed from. Where a record on appeal is
required, the appellant shall file a notice of appeal and
a record on appeal within 30 days after notice of the
judgment or final order.
Q.

Are appeal bonds required for the taking of appeals?

A.

No. The prior requirement of appeal bonds under S3
R40 and 55 R41 was removed by the Interim Rules.
Under the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure, appeal
bonds are no longer provided for therein.
An exception is found under Section 46 of the
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act (R.A. No. 9285)
which provides that the losing party who appeals to
the CA from the judgment of the court confirming the
arbitral award shall be required by the appellate court
to post counterbond executed in favor of the
prevailing party equal to the amount of the award.

Q.

Give the form and contents of a notice of appeal.

A.

The notice of appeal shall indicate the parties to the
appeal, the judgment or final order or part thereof
appealed from, and state the material dates showing
the timeliness of the appeal. Copy of the notice of
appeal shall be served on the adverse party. (S2 & 3
R40).

Q.

What are the material dates showing the timeliness
of an appeal?

A.
1) The day notice of the judgment or final order was
received.
707

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) The day when a motion for reconsideration or new
trial, if any, was filed.
3)

The day when notice of the denial of the motion
for reconsideration or new trial was received.

Q.

When is a record on appeal required?

A.

A record on appeal shall be required only in special
proceedings and in other cases of multiple or
separate appeals. (33 R40).

Q.

What are the form and contents of a record on
appeal?

A.

See S6 R41. Copy of the record on appeal shall be
served on the adverse party.

Q.

What are the rules governing the perfection of an
appeal under R40?

A.

The perfection of an appeal under R40 is governed by
the same rules for appeals from the RTC set forth in
59 R41.

Q.

P filed a case for collection of money against D
before the MTC. The trial court rendered a decision
in favor of P. D wants to appeal on pure questions
of law. Where should he take his appeal?

A.

D should take his appeal to the Regional Trial Court
pursuant to Rule 40. The provision allowing direct
appeal to the Supreme Court on pure question/s of
law applies only to a judgment of the RTC, not that of
the MTC. (52[c] R41).

Q.

D was convicted by the Regional Trial Court of the
crime of estafa and sentenced to prision mayor.
He wants to appeal the judgment of conviction on
a pure question of law. To what court should he
take his appeal?
708

Rule 40
Appeals From The Municipal Trial Courts
To The Regional Trial Courts
A.

To the Court of Appeals. The provision allowing direct
appeal to the Supreme Court on pure question/s of
law does not apply to a judgment of conviction in a
criminal case. What governs here is Section 3 of Rule
122. (Tan v. People, 381 SCRA 74).

Q.

P filed with the MTC an application for original
registration of a parcel of land over which there
was no controversy or opposition. After trial, the
MTC rendered a decision denying the application.
If P wants to appeal the MTC decision, to what
court shall he take his appeal and what provisions
govern his appeal?

A.

P should take his appeal to the Court of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of R41. Under Section
34 of B.P. Blg. 129 on the delegated jurisdiction of the
MTC in cadastral and land registration cases, it is
provided that the decision of the MTC shall be
appealable in the same manner as decisions of
the RTC.

Q.

In an appeal from the MTC to the RTC under R40,
may the RTC pass upon errors which were not
assigned or errors which are not closely related
or dependent on an assigned error?

A.

Yes. S8 R51 does not apply to appeal under R40
because of S7(c) R40 which provides that the RTC
shall decide the case on the basis of the entire record
of the proceedings had in the court of origin and such
memoranda as are filed. (Adore v. Zamora, 30 May
2011, Bersamin, J.).135

135See also 518 R70 to the same effect as 57(c) R40.

709

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed with the Metropolitan Trial Court of Las
Pines City a complaint against D to recover
possession of a parcel of land with an assessed
value of P60,000. D filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground of lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
The MeTC granted the motion to dismiss. P
appealed the order of dismissal to the RTC.
a) Should the RTC affirm the MeTC's dismissal
order?
b) Should the RTC try the case on the merits?
c)

Assuming the RTC tries the case and renders
a judgment in favor of P, what mode of appeal
should be used by D in case he will raise
factual and legal questions?

A.
a) Yes the RTC should affirm the MeTC's dismissal
order since the MeTC clearly did not have
subject-matter jurisdiction.
b) Yes the RTC should try the case on the merits as
if the case was originally filed with it.
Under S8 R40, if an appeal is taken from an
order of the lower court dismissing the case without a
trial on the merits on the ground of lack of subjectmatter jurisdiction, the RTC while affirming the
dismissal order, should, if it has jurisdiction thereover,
proceed to try the case on the merits as if the case
was originally filed with it.
c) D should appeal to the CA by way of Rule 41.
This is because the RTC tried the case in the
exercise of its original rather than appellate
jurisdiction. (S8 R40, first paragraph).

710

Rule 40
Appeals From The Municipal Trial Courts
To The Regional Trial Courts
Q.

P filed with the Metropolitan Trial Court of Las
Piiias City a complaint against D to recover possession
of a parcel of land with an assessed value of
P60,000. D filed an answer. The MeTC tried the
case on the merits and rendered a decision in
favor of P. D appealed to the RTC.
a) Should the RTC dismiss the appeal?
b) Assume the RTC does not dismiss the appeal
and proceeds to take cognizance thereof. The
RTC decides the case in favor of D. What
mode of appeal should P use in case he wants
to have the RTC decision reviewed on
questions of law and fact?

A.

a) No the RTC should not dismiss the appeal.
Under 38 R40, if the case was tried on the merits
by the lower court without jurisdiction over the subject
matter, the RTC on appeal shall not dismiss the case
if it has original jurisdiction thereof, but shall decide
the case in accordance with 37 R40, without
prejudice to the admission of amended pleadings and
additional evidence in the interest of justice.
Here although the MTC did not have jurisdiction
over the real action since the assessed value of the
land exceeds P50,000, the RTC should not dismiss
the case since it has original jurisdiction over real
actions where the assessed value of the real property
exceeds P50,000.
b)

P should appeal by way of R42 to the Court of
Appeals, since the RTC tried the case in the
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction.

711

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Anabel filed a complaint against B for unlawful
detainer before the Municipal Trial Court (MTC) of
Candaba, Pam panga. After the issues had been
joined, the MTC dismissed the complaint for lack
of jurisdiction after noting that the action was one
for accion publiciana.
Anabel appealed the dismissal to the RTC
which affirmed it and accordingly dismissed her
appeal. She elevates the case to the Court of
Appeals, which remands the case to the RTC. Is
the appellate court correct? Explain. (10 Bar Q3)

A.

Yes the appellate court is correct.
Under the Rules on Civil Procedure, where the
MTC dismisses a case on the ground that it has no
jurisdiction, the plaintiff may appeal the order of
dismissal to the RTC, which while affirming the
dismissal order shall try the case on the merits if it has
jurisdiction thereof and as if the case were originally
filed with it. (S8 R40).
Here the RTC had original jurisdiction over the
accion publiciana case; hence it should have tried the
same. Thus the remand by the Court of Appeals was proper.
(Note: The examinee may reasonably presume ,
that the accion publiciana relates to land/realty with
an assessed value exceeding P20,000; otherwise the
MTC would not have dismissed the case).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint for a sum of money
against defendant with the MeTC-Makati, the total
amount of the demand, exclusive of interest, damages
of whatever kind, attorney's fees, litigation
expenses, and costs, being P1,000,000. In due
time, defendant filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint on the ground of the MeTC's lack of
712

Rule 40
Appeals From The Municipal Trial Courts
To The Regional Trial Courts
jurisdiction over the subject matter. After due
hearing, the MeTC (1) ruled that the court indeed
lacked jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
complaint; and (2) ordered that the case therefore
should be forwarded to the proper Regional Trial
Court immediately.
Was the court's ruling concerning jurisdiction
correct? Was the court's order to forward the
case proper? Explain briefly. (04 Bar Q4b).
A.

Yes, the court's ruling concerning jurisdiction was
correct.
Under B.P. Blg. 129, the RTC has original and
exclusive jurisdiction where the total demand exceeds
P400,000.
However the court's ruling to forward immediately
the case to the proper Regional Trial Court was
not correct.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, where a
case is dismissed by the MTC on the ground of lack
of jurisdiction, the remedy of the plaintiff is to appeal
the order of dismissal to the RTC which if it has
jurisdiction shall try the case on the merits as if the
case were originally filed with it. The Rules do not
empower the MTC to forward the case to the proper
RTC. [S8 R40]

Q.

Plaintiff lessor filed with the MTC an unlawful
detainer case against the lessee. The demand
letter by the plaintiff informed the lessor that he
was unilaterally rescinding the lease and demanded
that lessee vacate the premises. The MTC dismissed
the ejectment case for lack of jurisdiction, holding
that accion publiciana was the proper remedy. On
appeal to the RTC, the latter reversed the MTC
713

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
decision and held that the complaint sufficiently
made out a case for unlawful detainer and thus
the MTC had jurisdiction. Defendant appealed to
the CA. The CA affirmed the RTC decision, holding
that assuming arguendo that the complaint was
one for accion publiciana, the RTC was duty bound
not to dismiss the case pursuant to S8 R40. Was
the CA's invocation of S8 R40 proper?
A.

No. Admittedly, S8 R40 authorizes the RTC to decide
an appealed case on the merits -as if it were originally
filed before it- if it finds that it has original jurisdiction
over the case. However, this is not the case here
because the RTC affirmed the MTC's jurisdiction over
the original complaint. (Quesada v. Bonanza Restaurants,
14 November 2016, Brion, J.).136

Q.

Are the other provisions of R41 applicable to
appeals under R40?

A.

Yes, insofar as they are not inconsistent with or may
serve to supplement the provisions of R40. (S9 R40).

136It should also be noted that since the case was dismissed by the MTC
without a trial on the merits, the RTC on appeal should have conducted a trial on
the merits rather than merely deciding the case based on the records. The
RTC's failure to conduct a trial on the merits hence did not cure the MTC's lack d
jurisdiction.

714

RULE 41. APPEAL FROM THE
REGIONAL TRIAL COURT
Q.

What judgment or orders may be appealed?

A.

An appeal may be taken from a judgment or final
order that completely disposes of the case, or of a
particular matter therein when declared by the Rules
of Court to be appealable.

Q.

Can a party file a notice of appeal from a judgment
even if there is a pending motion for reconsideration
by the other party?

A.

Yes. There is nothing in the Rules which makes a
party's right to appeal dependent or contingent on the
opposing party's motion for reconsideration. Similarly,
a party's undertaking to file a motion for reconsideration
of a judgment is not hindered by the other party's filing
of a notice of appeal. Each party has a different
period within which to appeal and since each party
has a different period within which to appeal, the
timely filing of a motion for reconsideration by one
party does not interrupt the other or another party's
period of appeal. (Bernardo v. Soriano, 19 June 2019,
Caguioa, J.)

Q.

Give examples of an order that disposes of a
particular matter which may be appealed as
provided in the Rules of Court.

A.
a) Orders mentioned in Section 1, Rule 109
concerning appeals in special proceedings.
b) Order of partition under S2 R69.

715

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What judgments or orders may not be appealed?

A.

(SPACE ID)
a) An order denying a petition for relief or any similar
motion seeking relief from judgment.
b) An interlocutory order.
c) An order disallowing or dismissing an appeal.
d) An order denying a motion to set aside a judgment
by consent, confession or compromise on the
ground of fraud, mistake or duress, or any other
ground vitiating consent.
e) An order of execution.
f)

A judgment or final order for or against one or
more of several parties or in separate claims,
counterclaims, cross-claims and third-party complaints,
while the main case is pending, unless the court
allows an appeal therefrom.

g) An order dismissing an action without prejudice.
(Si R41 as amended by SC Resolution effective
27 December 2007).

Q.

What is the final judgment rule? What is the
exception thereto?

A.

The final judgment rule provides that an appeal may
be taken only from a judgment or final order that
completely disposes of the case. (Si R41).
The exception is when a judgment or final order
completely disposes of a particular matter in a case
and the Rules declare such judgment or final order to
be appealable. Examples are the order of expropriation in
an expropriation case (54 R67) and the order of

716

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
partition in a partition case (52 R69). Both orders do
not completely dispose of the case but nonetheless
appealable as provided for by the Rules.
Q.

Is an order denying a petition for relief from
judgment appealable? How about an order granting
a petition for relief?

A.

No. (S1[a] R41). Under the 1964 Rules, a judgment
denying relief under R38 was subject to appeal. This
was changed in the 1997 Rules.
With more reason is an order granting a petition
for relief not appealable since the same is clearly an
interlocutory order. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 397 [7th rev. ed., 3rd
printing]).

Q.

Distinguish a final order from an interlocutory order.

A.

A final order is one that disposes of the subject matter
in its entirety or terminates a particular proceeding or
action, leaving nothing else to be done but to enforce
by execution what has been determined by the court,
while an interlocutory order is one which does not
dispose of the case completely but leaves something
to be decided upon. (Silverio v. Court of Appeals,
G.R. No. 178933, 16 September 2006). The rule is
that a final order, unlike an interlocutory one, is
appealable. The remedy of a party from an interlocutory
order is to assign it as an error in the appeal from the
judgment or to file a special civil action for certiorari if
the order was issued without or excess of jurisdiction
or with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack of
or excess of jurisdiction.

717

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint against Defendant
before the RTC. Prior to trial, the RTC dismissed
the case without prejudice for Plaintiff's failure to
prosecute. Twenty days after the Plaintiff's notice
of the order of dismissal, he filed a motion for
reconsideration, invoking meritorious grounds.
a) May the RTC entertain the motion for reconsideration
and revive the case?
b) Would your answer be the same if the order
was silent on whether it was with or without
prejudice?

A.

a) Yes. The remedy from an order dismissing a case
without prejudice is not an appeal but a special civil
action under Rule 65. Hence the 15-day period to
appeal or file a motion for reconsideration is not
applicable to the order of dismissal without prejudice.
Thus the motion for reconsideration was timely filed.
b)

Q.

No, in that case my answer would not be the
same. The dismissal would be considered as one
with prejudice pursuant to 83 R17. In such a case
the dismissal order is a final appealable order.
The failure to file a motion for reconsideration
within 15 days from notice rendered such order
final and unappealable.

The RTC ordered petitioner's Notice of Appeal
expunged from the records "for lack of authority
from, [its] Board of Directors to initiate the
appeal," pursuant to Section 12 of RA 9904.
Petitioners filed a motion for reconsideration of
the order which was denied. The Petitioners filed
a special civil action for certiorari to set aside the
RTC's order. Was certiorari the proper remedy?

718

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
A.

Yes. The order - expunging petitioner's Notice of
Appeal from the records of the case - is effectively an
order disallowing or dismissing an appeal that
precludes resort to an appeal. Hence, pursuant to S1
R41, petitioner's only recourse is via the present
certiorari action.
The order was issued with grave abuse of
discretion amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction. A
board resolution authorizing the representative to
initiate the appeal is not required for the purpose of
filing a notice of appeal. This is because a notice of
appeal is not a pleading, initiatory or otherwise, that,
when required by the law or the rules, must contain,
among others, a verification and certification against
forum shopping to be signed by the party or his/her
representative, and, in the case of a representative,
proof of his/her authority to file the action, i.e., power
of attorney or secretary's certificate with copy of the
board resolution. (United Interior Manggahan Homeowners
Assoc. v. De Luna, 20 November 2017, PerlasBernabe, J.).

Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from the
issuance of a writ of possession in a petition for
extrajudicial foreclosure? Appeal or a special civil
action for certiorari?

A.

Appeal. A special civil action for certiorari could be
availed of only if there is no appeal or any other plain,
speedy, and adequate remedy in the ordinary course
of law. It has been repeatedly held in a number of
cases that the remedy of a party from the trial court's
order granting the issuance of a writ of possession is
to file a petition to set aside the sale and cancel the
writ of possession, and the aggrieved party may then
appeal from the order denying or granting said
petition. When a writ of possession had already been
issued as in this case, the proper remedy is an appeal
719

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
and not a petition for certiorari. To be sure, the trial
court's order granting the writ of possession is
final. The soundness of the order granting the writ of
possession is a matter of judgment, with respect to
which the remedy of the party aggrieved is ordinary
appeal. As respondent availed of the wrong remedy,
the appellate court erred in not dismissing outright the
petition for certiorari. (Producers Bank v. Excelsa
Industries, Inc., 669 SCRA 470 [2012]).
After the consolidation of title in the buyer's
name for failure of the mortgagor to redeem the
property, the writ of possession becomes a matter of
right. Its issuance to a purchaser in an extrajudicial
foreclosure sale is merely a ministerial function. The
trial court has no discretion on this matter. Hence, any
assertion of discretion in connection with such
issuance is misplaced, and a petition for certiorari is
not a proper remedy. The order for the issuance of a
writ of possession being final, it is a proper subject for
appeal. (BPI v. Co, 9 November 2015, Jardeleza, J.).
Q.

In November 2003, First Marbella Condominium
Association, Inc. (FMCA) filed with the RTC,
through the office of the clerk of court, a petition
for extrajudicial foreclosure against Gatmaytan, a
unit owner, for unpaid association dues amounting
to P3 million. The RTC executive judge issued an
order dismissing the petition on the ground that
there was no mortgagee-mortgagor relationship
between FMCA and Gatmaytan. FMCA filed a
motion for reconsideration which was denied.
FMCA elevated the matter to the SC by way of a
petition for certiorari under R45. In its petition,
FMCA raised a sole question of law, that is, that
FMCA may file the petition for extrajudicial foreclosure

720

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
pursuant to Sec. 20 of the Condominium Act
which provides that unpaid assessments shall
constitute a lien which may be enforced in the
same manner as judicial or extrajudicial foreclosure
of real estate mortgage. Was the filing of the
petition for review on certiorari with the Supreme
Court the proper remedy?
A.

No. Only a judgment, final order or resolution
rendered by a court in the exercise of its judicial
functions relative to an actual controversy is subject to
an appeal to the SC by way of a Petition for Review
on Certiorari. The order dismissing the petition for
extrajudicial foreclosure was issued by the RTC
Executive Judge in the exercise of his administrative
function to supervise the ministerial duty of the Clerk
of Court as Ex-Oficio Sheriff in the conduct of an
extrajudicial foreclosure sale; hence, said orders are
not appealable under R45. Rather, the correct remedy
is by petition for mandamus. (First Marbella Condominium
Association, Inc. v. Gatmaytan, 557 SCRA 155 [2008]).137

Q.

P filed a case against D. D filed a motion for leave
of court to file a third-party complaint against E.
The court issued an order disallowing the thirdparty complaint May D appeal from the order?

A.

Yes. Such an order would finally dispose of D's right
to implead E. (Vda. de Dios v. Balagot, 20 SCRA 950
[1967]).

137The SC proceeded nonetheless to treat the petition for review on certiorari
as a petition for mandamus and then to dismiss it on the ground that petitioner
had no right to extrajudicially foreclose since it did not have a special power of
attorney authorizing extrajudicial foreclosure as required under Act. No. 3135.

721

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is an order denying a motion to intervene appealable?
If so what is the period for appealing the order?

A.

Yes, an order denying a motion to intervene may be
appealed. The appeal period is 15 days from notice of
the order. (Foster-Gal/ego v. Spouses Galang, G.R.
No. 130228, 27 July 2004).138

Q.

United Alloy filed with the RTC a case against
United Coconut Planters Bank (UCPB) for annulment
and/or reformation of contract. The complaint was
dismissed by the RTC on the ground of improper
venue and forum-shopping, United Alloy not
having disclosed the pendency of another case
involving the same issues between the parties.
United Alloy filed a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals seeking to set aside the
dismissal order. The CA dismissed the petition for
certiorari, ruling that the proper remedy that
United Alloy should have availed of was appeal.
Was appeal the proper remedy?

A.

No. Except for cases falling under paragraphs (f), (h),
or (i), the dismissal of an action based on the
grounds under Si R16 is without prejudice and does
not preclude the refiling of the same action. And
under S1(g) R41, an order dismissing an action
without prejudice is not appealable. The proper
remedy therefrom is a special civil action for certiorari
under Rule 65.
But, if the reason for the dismissal is based on
paragraphs (f), (h), or (i) (i.e., res judicata, prescription,
extinguishment of the claim or demand, and
unenforceability under the Statute of Frauds) the
dismissal, under S5 R16, is with prejudice and the

138It is opined that the appeal period is 30 days since this is a several
judgment, pursuant to S1(f) R41.

722

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
remedy of the aggrieved party is to appeal the order
granting the motion to dismiss. (United Alloy PhiIs. v.
UCPB, 23 November 2015, Del Castillo, 4. 13°
Q.

What is the remedy of the plaintiff from an order
dismissing a case for failure to state a cause of
action or for lack of subject matter jurisdiction?

A.

A petition for certiorari under R65 since the dismissal
is without prejudice. (S1 R41; Sadhwani v. Sadhwani,
14 Aug 2019, Caguioa, J.; SoIler v. Singson, 3
February 2020, Reyes, J.).

Q.

P filed an unlawful detainer case against D with
the MTC. P won and D appealed to the RTC. The
RTC dismissed D's appeal because of D's failure
to file his memorandum on time, invoking S7(b)
R40. D's motion for reconsideration was denied.
D filed with the CA a special civil action for certiorari
to set aside the dismissal of his appeal P argued
that certiorari was not appropriate since an appeal
was the proper remedy from the RTC order
dismissing D's appeal. Was P's argument correct?

A.

No. Under 51(c) R41, no appeal may be taken from
an order disallowing or dismissing an appeal. In such
a case, the aggrieved party may file an appropriate

139 The rulings of the Supreme Court on this point are conflicting. In
Strongworld Construction Corp. v. Perello, 27 July 2006, the court held a
dismissal for failure to state a cause of action as one "without prejudice" since it
was other than the grounds in Si (f), (h), and (i). However in Madrigal Transport
v. Lapanday Holdings, 11 August 2004, the court characterized the interpretation
that S5 R16 limits the remedy of appeal only to dismissals grounded on S1(f),
(h), and (i) as "absurd." It is submitted that Madrigal Transport is more
persuasive. It is not correct to call dismissals under Si R16 other than (f), (h),
and (i), as "without prejudice" simply because they can be refiled. Dismissals
"without prejudice" are those specifically mentioned in the rules under 85 R7, S3
R17 Of provided by court), and 85 R18 (if provided by court). For instance,
dismissal of the case without a trial on the merits, including that grounded on lack
of jurisdiction, is appealable by the express terms of 58 R40.

723

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
special civil action as provided in R65. Hence the
special civil action for certiorari was the proper remedy.
140
(Sarmiento v. Zaratan, 5 February 2007).
Q.

Plaintiffs filed an action for partition and damages
against the defendants. The defendants filed an
answer raising the affirmative defenses of res
judicata, failure to state a cause of action, lack of
verification and certification against forum shopping,
and failure to comply with a condition precedent
(i.e., earnest efforts to arrive at a compromise
among family members). The RTC dismissed the
complaint based on the affirmative defenses cited
by defendants. The plaintiffs' motion for reconsideration
was denied. More than 15 days after they received
the order denying their motion for reconsideration,
the plaintiffs filed a petition for certiorari under
R65 with the Court of Appeals. The CA dismissed
their petition on the ground that the remedy of the
plaintiffs was appeal not certiorari. Was the
dismissal of the petition correct?

A.

Yes. The RTC dismissed the complaint for (1) being
barred by res judicata; (2) failure to state a cause of
action; (3) lack of verification/certification against forum
shopping; and (4) failure to comply with a condition
precedent (i.e., earnest efforts to arrive at a compromise
among family members). Among the grounds cited,
res judicata made the dismissal one with prejudice.
The availability of appeal as a remedy to a dismissal with
prejudice disqualifies the aggrieved party from
availing of certiorari proceedings, these two being

140Cf. Ang v. Grageda, G.R. No. 166239, 8 June 2006, where it was held
that appeal under R42 was the proper remedy from the RTC order dismissing an
appeal pursuant to S7(b) R40. It is submitted that Sarmiento, which squarely
tackled the issue of whether it is appeal or certiorari which is the proper remedy,
should be regarded as the controlling doctrine.

724

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
mutually exclusive. It is already settled that the proper
recourse from the trial court's order of dismissal with
prejudice is an ordinary appeal under R41. (Heirs of
Ma/it v. Heirs of Ma/it, 28 April 2021, Inting, J.).
Q.

What are the instances of dismissal without
prejudice?

A.
1) Dismissal pursuant to S5 R7 (rule on certification
against forum shopping) unless the dismissal is
due to willful and deliberate forum-shopping.

Q.

2)

Dismissal under Si R17 (plaintiffs notice of
dismissal).

3)

Dismissal under S2 R17 (plaintiff's motion of
dismissal).

4)

Dismissal under S3 R17 (failure to prosecute)
where provided for by the court in its order.

5)

Dismissal under S5 R18 (failure to appear at the
pretrial) where provided for by the court in its order.

6)

Dismissal which the court expressly provides to
be "without prejudice." (See Mijares v. Ranada,
12 April 2005).

P filed with the RTC a torts case against A, B, C,
and D. The sheriff went to D's residence and
served the summons and complaint on D's
husband, since D was temporarily out of the country
in Ireland. Subsequently D filed an answer raising
the affirmative defense of lack of personal
jurisdiction. D argued that she was not properly
served with summons since she was temporarily
out of the country and hence service of summons
on her should conform to S18 R14 which requires
extraterritorial service.
725

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The RTC granted the affirmative defense and
dismissed the case. P filed a timely motion for
reconsideration but the same was denied. On the
60th day from notice of the order denying his
motion for reconsideration, P filed with the Court
of Appeals a petition for certiorari under R65
contending that the dismissal order was issued
with grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack
of or excess of jurisdiction. D filed a motion to
dismiss the petition for certiorari contending that
the proper remedy for P was an appeal. Should the
Court of Appeals dismiss the petition for certiorari?
A.

The Court of Appeals should not dismiss the petition
for certiorari.
Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, no appeal
may be taken from a judgment or final order for or
against one or more of several parties while the main
case is pending and that the aggrieved party may file
an appropriate special civil action under R65. (Si[f] R41).
Here the final order was for D who was one of
several defendants, and the main case was still pending.
Hence the petition for certiorari under R65 was a
proper remedy. (Palma v. Galvez, 10 March 2010).

Q.

Give the modes of appeal.

A.

a) Ordinary appeaL The appeal to the CA in cases
decided by the RTC in the exercise of its original
jurisdiction shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal
with the RTC and serving a copy thereof upon the
adverse party. No record on appeal shall be required
except in special proceedings and other cases of
multiple or separate appeals where the law or the
Rules so require.

726

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
b)

Petition for review under R42. The appeal to the
CA in cases decided by the RTC in the exercise
of its appellate jurisdiction shall be by verified
petition for review in accordance with R42.

c) Appeal by certiorari (Petition for review on certiorari)
under R45. In all cases where only questions of
law are raised or involved, the appeal shall be to
the Supreme Court by verified petition for review
on certiorari in accordance with R45.
Q.

When is appeal a matter of right and when is it not
a matter of right?

A.

Ordinary appeal is a matter of right. This means that
the appellate court should review the case, and this
duty is compellable by mandamus. Appeals under
R42, R43, and R45 are not a matter of right. Review
is discretionary and the appellate court may dismiss
the petition outright if it finds that the questions raised
are too unsubstantial to require consideration.

Q.

When is ordinary appeal not a matter of right?

A.

In cases of an appeal from a several or separate
judgment while the main case is pending, the appeal
must be made with leave of court. (Si R41).

Q.

May there be an instance in which the decision of
the MTC may be appealed to the Court of Appeals?

A.

Yes. The decision of the MTC in the exercise of its
delegated jurisdiction in cadastral and land registration
cases shall be appealable in the same manner as
decisions of the Regional Trial Courts. (Sec. 34, B.P.
Blg. 129).

727

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Give the periods of ordinary appeals.

A.
1) The appeal shall be taken within 15 days from
notice of the judgment or final order appealed from.
2) Where a record on appeal is required, the appellant
shall file a notice of appeal and a record on
appeal within 30 days from notice of the
judgment or final order.
3) In habeas corpus cases, appeal shall be taken
within 48 hours from notice of the judgment or
final order appealed from.
4) In writ of amparo and writ of habeas data cases,
the period of appeal shall be 5 working days
from notice of the adverse judgment or final order.
Q.

P received on 28 February 2006 a decision of the
RTC in a sum of money case which dismissed his
complaint for lack of merit
a) Up to when may P appeal the RTC decision?
b) Let us say that on 13 March 2006, P filed a motion
for reconsideration.
On 5 April P received the order of the court
denying his motion for reconsideration. Up to when
may P appeal the RTC decision?

A.
a) P may appeal the RTC decision up to 15 March 2006.
(Feb 28 + 15).
b)

Up to 20 April 2006. (April 5 + 15 = April 20). The
order denying the motion for reconsideration is a
final period; hence P has a fresh 15-day period
within which to appeal. (Neypes v. CA, G.R.
141524, 14 September 2005, en bane).
728

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
Q.

P filed an action for reconveyance before the RTC
against the D. D filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground of prescription. The court issued an order
granting the motion and dismissing the case. P
received a copy of the dismissal order on 3 March
1998 and on the 15th day thereafter or on 18 March
98 filed a motion for reconsideration. The trial
court denied the motion for reconsideration in an
order which was received by P on 22 July 98. On
27 July 98 P filed with the RTC a notice of appeal.
The RTC denied the notice of appeal stating that P
only had up to 23 July 98 within which to file the
notice of appeal. Did the trial court act correctly in
refusing to give due course to the appeal of P?

A.

No. Under S3 R41 P had 15 days from notice of the
judgment or final order to appeal the RTC decision.
The order denying P's motion for reconsideration was
a final order since it finally disposed of the issues in
the case. Hence P had 15 days from 22 July 98 or up
to 6 August 2004 (22 + 15 — 31 [days in July] = 6).
(Neypes v. CA, G.R. 141524, 14 Sep 05, en banc).

Q.

Aside from R41, what other Rules are governed by
the fresh 15-day period rule?

A.

In Neypes, the Supreme Court stated that aside from
Rule 41, the "fresh" 15-day period rule applies also to
Rule 40 (appeal from MTC to RTC), Rule 42 (petition
for review from RTC to CA), Rule 43 (appeal from
quasi-judicial bodies to the CA), and Rule 45. (Id.).
A scrutiny of the said rules, however, reveals that
the "fresh period rule" enunciated in Neypes does not
apply to Rules 42, 43 and 45 as there is no
interruption in the 15-day reglementary period to
appeal. It is already explicit in 31 R42, S4 R43 and
32 R45 that the appellant or petitioner is accorded a
fresh period of 15 days from the notice of the
729

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
decision, award, judgment, final order or resolution or
of the denial of petitioner's motion for new trial or
reconsideration filed. (See Rodriguez v. People, G.R.
192799, 24 October 2012).
Take note also that Yu v. Tatad, G.R. No.
170979, 9 February 2011, expanded the scope of the
Neypes doctrine to criminal cases in appeals of
conviction under 56 R122.
Q.

In a habeas corpus case, the respondent Director
of the Bureau of Corrections received a copy of
the RTC's decision on October 1 at 10:00 am. Up
to when may the Director appeal the decision?

A.

Up to 3 October, even if beyond 10:00 am. Under Si
R22, in computing any period of time prescribed or
allowed by the Rules of Court or by order of court, or
by any applicable statute, the day of the act or event
from which the designated period of time begins to
run is to be excluded and the date of performance
included. Hence the 48-hour period starts to run on 2
October. (See Kabigting v. Director of Prisons, G.R.
No. L-15548, 30 October 1962; 1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 303
[4th rev. ed., 2nd printing]).

Q.

A, B, and C were co-owners of a parcel of land. A
filed an action for partition against B and C. After
due hearing, the trial court issued an order
decreeing the partition prayed for. The order was
served on A, B, and C on 5 January 2004.
a) Up to when or what time may C appeal?
b) How shall C make or take the appeal?

730

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
A.
a) C may appeal up to 4 February 2004. An action
for partition is one wherein multiple appeals are
allowed and thus the appeal period is 30 days
b) C shall file a notice of appeal and a record of
appeal with the trial court within 30 days after
notice of the judgment or final order or up to 4
February 2004. (52843 R41).
Q.

Give the contents of a notice of appeal filed with
the RTC.

A.

The notice of appeal shall:
1) Indicate the parties to the appeal.
2) Specify the judgment or final order or part thereof
appealed from.
3) Specify the court to which the appeal is being taken.
4) State the material dates showing the timeliness of
the appeal.

Q.

What is a record on appeal?

A.

The record on appeal is a record of the case a quo
prepared and filed by a party who intends to take
an appeal in cases of special proceedings, and in
cases of multiple and separate appeals.

Q.

What is the purpose of a record on appeal?

A.

The purpose of a record on appeal is to enable the
appellate court to have a basis for deciding the appeal
since the original records are still with the lower court.

731

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Q.

Is the order of a liquidation court allowing or
disallowing a claim appealable? If so, is a record
on appeal required?

A.

An order of a liquidation court allowing or disallowing
a claim is a final order, which may be the subject of
an appeal. The issuance of such an order, by its
nature, affects only the particular claim involved, thereby
creating a situation where multiple appeals are allowed.
Consequently, a record on appeal is necessary in
each and every appeal made thereon. (Consolidated
Bank & Trust Co. v. United Pacific Leasing & Finance
Corp., 19 October 2015, Jardeleza, J.).

Q.

Give the form and contents of a record on appeal.

A.
1) The full names of all the parties to the proceedings
shall be stated in the caption of the record on
appeal.
2) It shall include the judgment or final order from
which the appeal is taken.
3) Copies, in chronological order, of only such
pleadings, petitions, motions and all interlocutory
orders as are related to the appealed judgment or
final order for the proper understanding of the
issue involved.
4) Such data as will show that the appeal was
perfected on time.
5)

If an issue of fact is to be raised on appeal, the
record on appeal shall include by reference all the
evidence, testimonial and documentary, taken
upon the issue involved.

6)

A subject index, if the record on appeal exceeds
20 pages. (S6 R41).
732

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
Q.

Where is the record on appeal filed?

A.

With the trial court, for approval.

Q.

What action shall the trial court take on the record
on appeal?

A.

The trial court may approve it as presented, or upon
its own motion or at the instance of the appellee, may
direct its amendment by the inclusion of any omitted
matters which are deemed essential to the determination
of the issue of law or fact involved in the appeal.
(S7 R41).

Q.

When is a party's appeal deemed perfected as
to him?

A.

A party's appeal by notice of appeal is deemed
perfected as to him upon the filing of the notice of
appeal in due time.
A party's appeal by record on appeal is deemed
perfected as to him with respect to the subject matter
thereof upon the approval of the record on appeal
filed in due time. (S9 R41).
Under R42, the appeal is deemed perfected as
to the petitioner upon the timely filing of the petition
for review and the payment of the corresponding
docket and other lawful fees. (S8 R42).

Q.

When does the trial court lose jurisdiction?

A.

In appeals by notice of appeal, the trial court loses
jurisdiction over the (entire) case:
1)

Upon perfection of the appeals filed in due time,
and

2)

Upon the expiration of the time to appeal of the
other parties.
733

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
In appeals by record on appeal, the trial court
loses jurisdiction over the subject matter of the record
on appeal (but retains jurisdiction over the remaining
subject matter not covered by the appeal):
Upon the approval of the record on appeal filed
in due time, and
Upon the expiration of the time to appeal of the
other parties. (S9 R41).
Q.

The trial court issued an order giving due course
to respondent's appeal upon learning that a
notice of appeal had been timely filed and that a
postal money had been issued to the clerk of
court representing the appeal fee. Months later
the petitioner filed a motion to dismiss the appeal
contending that the respondents never paid the
appeal fee. Upon verification the court learned
that while respondent had indeed issued a postal
money order in favor of the Office of the Clerk of
Court of the RTC, the amount pertaining thereto
was never remitted or received by the court. The
RTC thus dismissed the case for failure to
prosecute. On petition for certiorari, the CA held
that the RTC acted with grave abuse of discetion
in dismissing respondent's appeal since the RTC
had already lost jurisdiction over the case when it
gave due course to respondent's appeal. Did the
RTC act with grave abuse of discretion in
dismissing respondent's appeal?

A.

No. Respondent failed to perfect its appeal before the
RTC by not paying the full amount of the prescribed
appellate docket fees. Consequently, the RTC did not
lose jurisdiction over the case and, as a matter of
discretion, properly dismissed the appeal for failure to
prosecute. The RTC retained jurisdiction to dismiss
the appeal as provided under 39 R41. As a result of
734

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
respondent's failure to perfect an appeal within the
period fixed by law, no court could exercise appellate
jurisdiction to review the RTC decision. (Huang v.
Land Bank of the Philippines, 17 February 2016,
Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

What is meant by the residual jurisdiction of the
trial court?

A.

It is the power of the trial court after it has lost
jurisdiction but prior to the transmittal of the original
record or the record on appeal, to: (PWICE)
1) Issue orders for the protection and preservation of
the parties' rights which do not involve any matter
litigated by the appeal;
2) Approve compromises;
3) Permit appeals of indigent litigants;
4)

Order execution pending appeal in accordance
with S2 R39; and

5) Allow withdrawal of the appeal. (S9 R41).
Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for replevin against the
defendant, accompanied by an application for a
writ of replevin for the seizure of hogs allegedly
taken wrongfully by the defendant. The application
for replevin was granted and the hogs seized
pursuant to the writ The action was however
dismissed for lack of personal jurisdiction. The
dismissal became final. Invoking the trial court's
residual jurisdiction, the defendant filed an
application for damages against the replevin bond
alleging that it incurred damages because of the
wrongful seizure of the hogs. May the application
be granted?

735

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. An application for damages against the replevin
bond based on residual jurisdiction cannot be ruled
upon if trial court had dismissed case. Residual
jurisdiction applies only if there was appeal. (Jorgenetics
Swine Improvement Corp. v. Thick & Thin AgriProducts, 5 May 2021, Hernando, J.).

Q.

After the defendant has taken an appeal, may the
RTC dismiss the appeal?

A.

Yes, provided that:
1) The original record or the record on appeal is not
yet transmitted to the appellate court.
2)

The dismissal may be made only on the ground
that it was taken out of time, or that the docket
and other lawful fees were not paid within the
reglementary period.

The dismissal may be upon motion or motu
proprio. (S13 R41).
Q.

Philippine Bank of Communications (PBCom) filed
a collection case against Private Respondent. The
case was dismissed by the RTC for failure of
PBCom to pay the full docket fee per its order.
PBCom filed a motion for reconsideration but it
was denied. PBCom filed a timely notice of appeal
but the same was not given due course by the
RTC on the ground that appeal was not the proper
remedy. Without filing a motion for reconsideration,
PBCom filed a petition for certiorari and mandamus
with the Court of Appeals. The CA denied the
petition on the ground that (1) appeal and not
certiorari and mandamus was the proper remedy,
and (2) PBCom failed to comply with the mandatory
requirement of a motion for reconsideration.

736

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
a) Was the CA correct in stating that appeal and
not certiorari was the proper remedy?
b)

Should the petition for certiorari and
mandamus be dismissed for failure of PBCom
to file first a motion for reconsideration of the
challenged order?

A.
a) No. Under S1(c) R41, no appeal may be taken
from an order disallowing or dismissing an
appeal. In such a case the aggrieved party may
file the appropriate special civil action under R65.
b) No. While the general rule is that a motion for
reconsideration is a condition precedent to filing a
special civil action under R65, an exception is
when the challenged order is patently defective.
Here the RTC's order disallowing the appeal was
patently defective since under S13 R41, the RTC
may dismiss an appeal only on two grounds: (1)
the appeal is taken out of time, and (2) nonpayment of the docket and other lawful fees
within the reglementary period.
Here the RTC disallowed the appeal not on the
two grounds cited but on the ground that appeal was
not the proper remedy. Hence such disallowance is
patently defective and may be set aside by certiorari
and the RTC ordered to give due course to the
appeal. (Philippine Bank of Communications v. Court
of Appeals, 15 February 2017, Caguioa, J.).
Q.

By sheer coincidence, Atty. Lopez was on the
same day, June 30, 1991, served with adverse
decisions of the Court of Appeals and the Regional
Trial Court. In each case, he filed a motion for
reconsideration simultaneously on July 10, 1991.
737

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
He received notices of the denial of his two
motions on August 15, 1991. If Atty. Lopez decides
to appeal in each of the two cases.
a) What mode of appeal should he pursue in each
case?
b) How would he perfect each appeal?
c) Within what time should each appeal be
perfected? (91 Bar Q11)
A.

a)
From the Court of Appeals to the Supreme
Court, by way of a petition for review on certiorari
under R45.
From the RTC, by ordinary appeal to the Court of
Appeals under R41.
From the RTC, by petition for review on certiorari
under R45 to the Supreme Court if the appeal is on
pure questions of law.
b)
From the Court of Appeals to the Supreme
Court, by filing a petition for review on certiorari and
serving a copy on the Court of Appeals and on the
adverse party.
From the RTC to the CA by ordinary appeal, the
appeal is perfected by filing a notice of appeal with
the RTC and serving a copy on the adverse party.
From the RTC to the SC under R45, by filing a
petition for review on certiorari and serving a copy on
the RTC and on the adverse party.

738

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
c)
From the Court of Appeals to the Supreme Court
under R45, the appeal should be perfected within 15
days from receipt of the order denying the motion for
reconsideration, that is, on or before August 30, 1991.
From the RTC to the CA, on or before August 21,
1991, or the remaining period of 6 days counted from
notice of denial, since the day of the act causing the
interruption is excluded from the computation and
added to the remaining five days. Hence 6 days from
August 15 is August 21.141
Q.

'

Petitioner Samson filed a Complaint before the
RTC of Pasig City for Recovery of Property or its
Value against respondent spouses, Tanay Rural
Bank, Inc., and the Register of Deeds of Morong,
Rizal, claiming that he had been paying his onethird (1/3) share of realty taxes covering the
subject portion of land for the years 2002 to 2004.
In 2005, however, his payment was rejected by the
Municipal Treasurer of Tanay, Rizal; at such time
he discovered that respondent spouses had
already mortgaged the entire property in favor of
respondent Bank back in November 2002. In
August 2006, the RTC of Pasig City dismissed the
complaint on the grounds of improper venue, res
judicata, and that the complaint states no cause
of action. It held that the suit is a real action which
should be filed in the RTC of Morong, Rizal, where
the property subject of the case is situated.
Moreover, the lower court pointed out that as
early as 1991, herein petitioner had already filed a

"'Pursuant to the old rule, in which the movant would have only the
balance of the remaining period. (See De Las Alas v. Court of Appeals, 83 SCRA
200). The new rule is that the movant would have a fresh 15-day period.
(Neypes v. Court of Appeals, 14 September 2005).

739

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Complaint for Partition of Real Property and
Damages involving the same subject property
against the same parties, which complaint was
already dismissed by this Court with finality.
Thus, the principle of res judicata applies. Finally,
the trial court held that petitioner's complaint
states no cause of action against herein respondent
Bank as it does not allege any details as to the
liability or any violation of petitioner's rights.
Claiming that the lower court erred in dismissing
his complaint, petitioner Samson filed an appeal
with the CA, which likewise dismissed the same
for having been improperly brought before it. The
appellate court ruled that since petitioner's appeal
raised only issues purely of law, it should be
dismissed outright Did the CA correctly dismiss
the appeal?
A.

Yes. In the instant case, petitioner appealed the Order
of the trial court which dismissed his complaint for
improper venue, lack of cause of action, and res
judicata. Dismissals based on these grounds do not
involve a review of the facts of the case but merely
the application of the law, specifically in this case,
R16. The issue to be resolved is limited to whether or
not said rule was properly applied, which will only
involve a review of the complaint, the motions to
dismiss, and the trial court's order of dismissal, but
not the probative value of the evidence submitted nor
the truthfulness or falsity of the facts. Considering,
therefore, that the subject appeal raised only questions
of law, the CA committed no error in dismissing the
same. (Samson v. Sps. Gabor, 23 July 2014).

740

Rule 41
Appeal From The
Regional Trial Court
Q.

After receiving the adverse decision rendered
against his client, the defendant, Atty. Sikat duly
filed a notice of appeal. For his part, the plaintiff
timely filed a motion for partial new trial to seek
an increase in the monetary damages awarded.
The RTC instead rendered an amended decision
further reducing the monetary awards. Is it
necessary for Atty. Sikat to file a second notice of
appeal after receiving the amended decision? (08
Bar Q12).

A.

No, it is not necessary for Atty. Sikat to file a second
notice of appeal after receiving the amended decision.
The Supreme Court has held that a party need
not file a second notice of appeal from the amended
decision after having perfected an appeal from the
original decision and that to hold otherwise would be
to give a premium to technicalities at the expense of a
just resolution of the case. (PNB-Republic Bank v.
Cordova, 14 March 2008; Pacific Life Assurance Co.
v. Sison, 299 SCRA 16 [1998]).142

142While there is an obiter in Pacific Life Assurance Co. that a notice of
appeal would be necessary if the amended decision decreased the appellant's
liability, it is submitted that the better view is that it would not matter whether the
amended decision increased or decreased the appellant's liability. After all, the
appellant was still held liable in the amended decision.

741

RULE 42. PETITION FOR REVIEW
FROM THE RTC TO THE CA
Q.

How may a party appeal from a decision of the
RTC rendered in the exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction?

A.

A party desiring to appeal from a decision of the RTC
rendered in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
may file a verified petition for review with the Court of
Appeals, furnishing the RTC and the adverse party
with a copy of the petition.

Q.

Within what time should the petition for review
be filed?

A.

The petition should be filed and served within 15 days
from notice of the decision or of the denial of
petitioner's motion for reconsideration or new trial.
Upon proper motion and the payment of the full
amount of the docket and other lawful fees and the
deposit of costs before the expiration of the
reglementary period, the Court of Appeals may grant
an additional period of 15 days only within which to
file the petition for review. No further extension shall
be granted except for the most compelling reason and
in no case to exceed 15 days.

Q.

P filed with the MTC a complaint for P300,000
against D. D filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground of improper venue but this was denied by
the MTC. D challenged the order denying his
motion to dismiss by filing a special civil action
for certiorari before the RTC. The RTC dismissed
the petition for certiorari. How should D seek the
review of the RTC resolution dismissing his
petition for certiorari? By way of R41 or R42?

742

Rule 42
Petition For Review From
The RTC To The CA
A.

By way of R41. Since the RTC decision was rendered
in the exercise of its original rather than appellate
jurisdiction it should be appealed under R41. A
special civil action for certiorari is not a mode of
appeal but an original action.

Q.

A boundary dispute between Brgy. Sangalang and
Brgy. Maguihan was lodged in the Sanggunian
Bayan of Lemery, Batangas. The Sanggunian decided
in favor of Brgy. Sangalang. Brgy. Maguihan filed
a notice of appeal. The Court of Appeals dismissed
the appeal because Brgy. Maguihan availed of the
wrong mode of appeal. Was the dismissal of the
appeal proper?

A.

Yes. Section 119 of the Local Government Code
provides that the decision of the sanggunian
concerned may be appealed to the RTC having
jurisdiction over the area in dispute, within the time
and manner prescribed by the Rules of Court. In the
case at bar, it is clear that when the case was
appealed to the RTC, the latter took cognizance of the
case in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, not its
original jurisdiction. Hence, any further appeal from
the RTC Decision must conform to R42 not R41. The
appellant should have filed a petition for review with
the CA, not a notice of appeal. (Brgy. Sangalang v.
Brgy. Maguihan, 23 December 2009).

Q.

P won in an ejectment suit against D. The MTC
refused to give due course to the notice of appeal
filed by D so the latter filed a special civil action
for certiorari with the RTC. The RTC granted the
petition for certiorari. P appealed to the Court of
Appeals by way of a petition for review under R42.
The CA dismissed P's appeal holding that the
proper remedy was R41 not R42. Was the dismissal
of P's petition for review correct?
743

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. A special civil action for certiorari under R65 is
an original action. Hence the RTC decision granting
the petition for certiorari was made in the exercise of
its original not appellate jurisdiction. Hence the proper
remedy was R41 not R42. (Heirs of Garcia v. Mun. of
lba, Zambales, 22 July 2015, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

The land of Diaz was expropriated by the
Department of Agrarian Reform pursuant to P.D.
No. 27. The DAR valued the land at P197,000. Not
satisfied with the valuation, Diaz filed a complaint
against the LBP and the DAR with the RTC of
Guimba, Nueva Ecija, sitting as a Special Agrarian
Court (SAC). The complaint prayed that the just
compensation be fixed at P5 million. The SAC in
its decision agreed with the DAR's valuation. Diaz
appealed the SAC's decision to the Court of
Appeals by way of ordinary appeal under R41.
The LBP moved to dismiss the appeal. Should the
appeal be dismissed?

A.

Yes. Section 60 of the Comprehensive Agrarian
Reform Law of 1998 provides that an appeal may be
taken from a decision of the SACs by filing a petition
for review with the CA within 15 days from receipt of
the notice of the decision, otherwise the decision shall
become final. Hence the proper mode of appeal is by
a petition for review under Rule 42 and not through an
ordinary appeal under R41. (Land Bank v. CA, G.R.
No. 190660, 11 April 2011).

Q.

In a civil case before the RTC, judgment was
rendered against D. D interposed an appeal to the
CA under R41. P moved that the CA dismiss the
appeal on the ground that it was not perfected on
time. The CA dismissed the appeal although the

744

Rule 42
Petition For Review From
The RTC To The CA
appeal was actually perfected on time. D's motion
for reconsideration of the dismissal was denied.
What is the remedy of D from the CA's dismissal
order.
A.

D's remedy is to file a special civil action for mandamus
with the Supreme Court. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
QUIZZER ON REMEDIAL LAW 89)

Q.

P filed a complaint against D before the MeTC.
The MeTC after trial, dismissed the complaint. P
appealed to the RTC. D moved that the RTC dismiss
the appeal for having been filed out of time. The
RTC dismissed the appeal although it was actually
filed on time. P's motion for reconsideration of the
dismissal order was denied. P received a copy of
the order denying the motion for reconsideration
on 1 April.
a) What is the remedy of P?
b) Within what time should P avail of the remedy?

A.
a) The remedy of P is to file a special civil action for
mandamus since the dismissal was erroneous or
improper. (See S15 R41, 1964 Rules of Civil
Procedure).
b) P should file the action within 60 days from notice
of the order denying the motion for reconsideration
or until 31 May. (S4 R65).
Q.

What are the form and the contents of a petition
for review under R42?

A.
1) The petition shall be verified and filed in 7 legible
copies.
745

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) The petition shall state the full names of the parties
to the case without impleading the lower court or
judges thereof either as petitioners or respondents.
3) It shall indicate the specific material dates showing
that it was filed on time.
4) It shall set forth concisely a statement of the matters
involved, the issues raised, the specification of
errors of fact or law, or both, allegedly committed
by the RTC.
5) It shall state the reasons or arguments relied upon
for the allowance of the appeal.
6) It shall be accompanied by clearly legible duplicate
originals or true copies of the judgments or final
orders of both lower courts, certified correct by
the clerk of the RTC, the requisite number of plain
copies thereof and of the pleadings and other
material portions of the record as would support
the allegations of the petition.
7) It shall be accompanied by a certification against
forum shopping stating the details under S2 R42.
(S2 R42).
Q.

Should the lower courts or judges be impleaded
as petitioners or respondents in the petition?

A.

No. (82 R42).

Q.

May the petition for review under R42 raise
questions of fact?

A.

Yes. (82 R42). Compare with a petition for review on
certiorari which as a rule can only raise legal questions.

746

Rule 42
Petition For Review From
The RTC To The CA
Q.

May the petition for review under R42 raise only
questions of law?

A.

Yes. This can be gleaned from S2(c) R42 which
provides that the petition may raise "errors of fact or
law, or both." (See Tan v. People, 381 SCRA 74, 79
[e.b., 20023).143

Q.

Give briefly the procedure to be observed by the
CA after the filing of the petition.

A.
1)

The CA may require the respondent to file a
comment on the petition, not a motion to dismiss,
or the CA may dismiss the petition if it finds the
same to be patently without merit, prosecuted
manifestly for delay, or that the questions raised
therein are too unsubstantial to require consideration.
(MTD)

2) If upon the filing of the comment or such other
pleadings as the court may allow or require, or
after the expiration of the period for the filing
thereof without such comment or pleading having
been submitted, the CA finds prima facie that the
lower court has committed an error of fact or law
that will warrant a reversal or modification of
the appealed decision, it may give due course to
the petition.

143It is opined that a petition for review under R42 cannot raise pure
questions of law. Under Sec. 7 of the Judiciary Act of 1948, exclusive appellate
jurisdiction over appeals which raise only questions of law is vested in the
Supreme Court. A procedural rule cannot diminish, increase or modify
substantive rights. (Section 5(5), Art. VIII, Constitution). S2(c) R41 provides that
Tin all cases where only questions of law are raised or involved, the appeal shall
be to the Supreme Court by petition for review on certiorari in accordance with
Rule 45." (Underscoring supplied).

747

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3) If the petition is given due course, the CA may set
the case for oral argument or require the parties
to submit memoranda. The case shall be deemed
submitted for decision upon the filing of the last
pleading or memorandum required by the rules or
by the court.
Q.

When is the appeal under R42 deemed perfected
as to the petitioner?

A.

Upon the timely filing of a petition for review and
the payment of the corresponding docket and other
lawful fees.

Q.

When does the RTC lose jurisdiction over the case?

A.

Upon the perfection of the appeals filed in due time
and the expiration of the time to appeal of the other
parties.

Q.

After the RTC loses jurisdiction over the case,
may it still act with respect to the appealed case?

A.

No more, except with respect to those matters falling
within the residual jurisdiction of the RTC. Prior to the
CA giving due course to the petition, the RTC may:
1) Issue orders for the protection and preservation of
the rights of the parties which do not involve any
matter litigated by the appeal;
2) Approve compromises;
3) Permit appeals of indigent litigants;
4) Order execution pending appeal in accordance with
S2 R39;
5) Allow withdrawal of appeal. (S8[a] R41).

748

Rule 42
Petition For Review From
The RTC To The CA
Q.

Will the appeal stay the judgment or final order of
the RTC?

A.

Yes, except in civil cases decided under the Rules on
Summary Procedure or unless the Court of Appeals,
the law, or the Rules of Court provide otherwise.
(S8 R42).

Q.

Is payment of appeal docket fees mandatory for
appellate court to have jurisdiction over the appeal?

A.

Yes. Late payment of docket fees cannot be excused
and it was error for the appellate court to have
accepted the appeal where the appeal docket fee was
not paid within the period for taking the appeal.
(Lazar° v. Court of Appeals, 6 April 2000).

749

RULE 43. APPEALS FROM
QUASI-JUDICIAL BODIES TO
THE COURT OF APPEALS
Q.

What is the scope of R43?

A.

R43 covers appeals from judgments, awards, final
orders of the:
•

Civil Service Commission;

•

Securities and Exchange Commission;

•

Land Registration Authority;

•

Social Security Commission;

•

Office of the President;

•

Civil Aeronautics Board;

•

National Electrification Administration;

•

Energy Regulatory Board;

•

National Telecommunications Commission;

•

Department of Agrarian Reform under R.A. 6657;

•

Government Service Insurance System;

•

Employees Compensation Commission;

•

Agricultural Inventions Board;

•

Insurance Commission;

•

Philippine Atomic Energy Commission;

•

Board of Investments;

•

Voluntary arbitrators authorized by law;

750

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
•

National Commission on Indigenous Peoples
(Secs. 62 and 67, Indigenous Peoples Rights Act
of 1997).

•

Any other quasi-judicial agency, instrumentality,
board or commission in the exercise of its quasijudicial functions.

Take note that under R.A., No. 9282 (approved
30 March 2004) which amended R.A. 1125 (the Court
of Tax Appeals Law), a party adversely affected by a
resolution of a Division of the CTA on a motion for
reconsideration or new trial, may file a petition for
review with the CTA en banc. (Sec. 18, R.A. No.
1125). A motion for reconsideration or new trial filed
with the CTA division is thus a condition precedent for
filing a petition for review with the CTA en banc. A
party adversely affected by a decision or ruling of the
CTA en banc may file with the Supreme Court a
verified petition for review on certiorari under R45.
(Sec. 19).
Take note also that a party affected by a
decision, ruling, or inaction of the Central Board of
Assessment Appeals may file an appeal with the CTA
within 30 days after the receipt of such decision or
ruling or after the expiration of the period fixed by law
for action. Appeal shall be made by filing a petition
for review analogous to Rule 42 within 30 days from
receipt of the decision or ruling or after the expiration
of the period fixed by law for action. A division of the
CTA shall hear the appeal. If the decision of the
CBAA is in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction,
appeal shall be made by filing a petition for review
with the CTA under a procedure analogous to that of
Rule 43. CTA en banc shall hear the case. (Sec. 11,
R.A. No. 1125).

751

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In November 2019, the City Council of Manila
passed Ordinance No. 8331, enacting the 2013
Omnibus Revenue Code of the City of Manila. In
January 2014, some operators of retail businesses in
the City of Manila filed an appeal before Secretary
of Justice Leila M. De Lima (petitioner). The retail
business operators claimed that Section 104 of
Ordinance No. 8331, which imposed percentage
tax on gross sales of retailers from 1% to 3%, is
unconstitutional and violative of the Local
Government Code. The petitioner issued a Resolution
declaring Section 104 of Ordinance No. 8331 void
for being contrary to Section 191 of the Local
Government Code. What is the remedy of the City
of Manila from the petitioner's resolution?

A.

A petition for review under R43. The subject matter of
review is the decision of the Secretary of Justice
evaluating the legality or constitutionality of a local
revenue ordinance, an act which is quasi-judicial in
nature, and therefore may be the subject of an appeal
43. (De Lima
through a petition for review under Rule ).144
v. City of Manila, 17 Oct 2018, Reyes, 1

Q.

In O.P. Case No. 1 0-E-229, upon complaint of
Redmont Mines Corporation, the Office of the
President (OP) ordered the cancellation and/or
revocation of the Financial or Technical Assistance
Agreement (FTAA) executed between the Republic of
the Philippines (Republic) and herein petitioners
Narra Nickel Mining and Development Corporation,
Tesoro Mining and Development, Inc., and McArthur
Mining, Inc. on the ground that more than 40% of
the shares of petitioners were owned by Canadian

with
144 The court also held that the remedy of a special civil action filed
the CA was also available. This seems arguable since the availability of appeal
would preclude resort to the extraordinary writ of certiorari.

752

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
corporations. Petitioners filed a motion for
reconsideration before the OP but the same was
denied. Petitioners then went up to the Court of
Appeals by way of a petition for review under R43.
Is R43 available to the Petitioners?
A.

No. The OP's cancellation and/or revocation of the
FTAA was not one which could be classified as an
exercise of its quasi-judicial authority, thus negating
the CA's jurisdiction over the case. The jurisdictional
parameter that the appeal be taken against a
judgment, final order, resolution or award of a "quasijudicial agency in the exercise of its quasi-judicial
functions" is explicitly stated in S1 R43.
Quasi-judicial •or administrative adjudicatory
power is the power of the administrative agency to
adjudicate the rights of persons before it. With the
legal treatment and parameters of an FTAA in mind, it
becomes apparent that the OP's cancellation and/or
revocation of the FTAA is an exercise of a contractual
right that is purely administrative in nature, and thus,
cannot be treated as an adjudication. As one of the
contracting parties to the FTAA, the OP could not
have adjudicated on the matter in which it is an
interested party, as in a court case where rights and
duties of parties are settled before an impartial
tribunal. In a very loose sense, the OP's cancellation/
revocation may be taken as a "decision" but only to
the extent of considering it as its final administrative
action internal to its channels. (Narra Nickel Mining &
Dev't Corp. v. Redmont Consolidated Mines Corp., 9
December 2015, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

753

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR) Secretary's act of approving a
mining company's application for a Mineral
Production Sharing Agreement and entering into
a MPSA with the mining company be reviewed by
the Court of Appeals under R43?

A.

No. R43 is applicable only to judgments, orders, and
issuances of a quasi-judicial body in the exercise of
its quasi-judicial functions. The act of the DENR
Secretary in approving SRMI's application and
entering into an MPSA with it is not an exercise of its
quasi-judicial power. Hence, it cannot be reviewed by
the CA, whether by a petition for review under Rule
43 or a special civil action for certiorari under Rule 65
of the Rules of Court.
In the case of the DENR Secretary, its power to
approve and enter into a MPSA is unmistakably
administrative in nature as it springs from the mandate
of the DENR under the Revised Administrative Code of
1987, which provides that "pie [DENR] shall x x x be
in charge of carrying out the State's constitutional
mandate to control and supervise the exploration,
development, utilization, and conservation of the country's
natural resources." (Basiana Mining Exploration Corp. v.
Secretary of the DENR, 7 March 2016, Reyes, J.).

Philippine Clearing House Corporation
Q.

In a dispute between Metrobank and United
Overseas Bank (U0B) submitted for arbitration to
the Philippine Clearing House Corporation (PCHC),
the PCHC ruled in favor of U0B. Pursuant to the
PCHC Rules, Metrobank filed a Petition for Review
with the Regional Trial Court of Makati City. Did
Metrobank avail of the correct remedy?
754

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
A.

No. An arbitral award of the PCHC is appealable not
to the Regional Trial Court, but to the Court of
Appeals under R43 since the PCHC is a quasi-judicial
agency. This notwithstanding that under the PCHC
rules, such arbitral awards are appealable to the RTC.
Since the PCHC Rules came about only as a result of
an agreement between and among member banks of
PCHC and not by law, it cannot confer jurisdiction to
the RTC over arbitral awards. (Metro Bank v. Court of
Appeals, 18 February 2009, Nachura, J.).

Construction Industry Arbitration Commission
Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from an
arbitral award of the Construction Industry
Arbitration Commission (CIAC)?

A.

An aggrieved party may choose between two
remedies, depending on the questions or issues being
raised by him.
1) An aggrieved party may appeal from an arbitral
award of the CIAC by way of petition for review
on certiorari under R45 to the Supreme Court.
The petition shall raise only questions of law.
This is pursuant to Section 19 of E.O. No. 1008,
as reiterated in Section 34 of the Alternative
Dispute Resolution Act of 2004 (R.A. No. 9285),
which provides that the CIAC's arbitral award
shall be final and unappealable except on
questions of law which shall be appealable to the
Supreme Court.
Insofar as appeals from the CIAC's arbitral
awards are concerned, E.O. No. 1008 (1985), as
reiterated in R.A. No. 9285 (2004), prevails over the
provisions of Section 9(3) of B.P. Blg. 129 (1980)
granting appellate jurisdiction to the Court of Appeals
over judgments and final orders of quasi-judicial
755

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
bodies; first, since E.O. No. 1008 is the latter law, and
second, since E.O. No. 1008 is the special law as
compared to the general provisions of Section 9(3) of
BR Blg. 129. The inclusion of the CIAC among the
quasi-judicial bodies whose decisions or final orders
may be the subject of a petition for review under R43
was erroneous.
2) If the parties will appeal factual issues, the
appea1145 may be filed with the Court of Appeals,
but only on the limited grounds that pertain to
either a challenge on the integrity of the CIAC
arbitral tribunal (Le., allegations of corruption,
fraud, misconduct, evident partiality, incapacity or
excess of powers within the tribunal) or an allegation
that the arbitral tribunal violated the Constitution
or positive law in the conduct of the arbitral
process, through the special civil action of a
petition for certiorari under Rule 65, on grounds
of grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or
excess in jurisdiction. The CA may conduct a
factual review only upon sufficient and demonstrable
showing that the integrity of the CIAC arbitral
tribunal had indeed been compromised, or that it
committed unconstitutional or illegal acts in the
conduct of the arbitration. (Global Medical Center
of Laguna, Inc. v. Ross Systems International,
Inc., 11 May 2021, e.b., Caguioa, J.).

145A special civil action for certiorari under R65 is not an appeal but an
original action. The first sentence of No. 2 may be better phrased as follows:
"If the parties will challenge the factual findings, the challenge may be filed with
the CA ..."

756

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
Board ofInvestments
Q.

The Board of Investments, in its decision dated 10
December 1992, granted petitioner First Lepanto
Ceramics, Inc.'s application to amend its BOI
certificate of registration by changing the scope
of its registered product from "glazed floor tiles"
to "ceramic tiles." Oppositor Mariwasa filed a
motion for reconsideration of the said BOI decision.
Rebuffed in its bid for reconsideration, Mariwasa
filed a petition for review with the Court of
Appeals. Petitioner moves to dismiss the appeal
on the ground that under Article 82 of the
Omnibus Investments Code, appeals from the BOI
should be filed directly to the Supreme Court.
Should the motion to dismiss the appeal be granted?

A.

No. Article 82 of the Omnibus Investments Code of
1987 providing for direct appeal to the Supreme Court
is violative of Art. VI, Sec. 30 of the Constitution which
provides that "[n]o law shall be passed increasing the
appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as
provided in this Constitution without its advice and
concurrence." Since Article 82 was enacted without
the advice and concurrence of the SC, the same
never became effective and did not amend Section 9
of B.P. Blg. 129 which provides for the CA's appellate
jurisdiction over decisions of quasi-judicial bodies.
(First Lepanto Ceramics, Inc. v. Court of Appeals,
G.R. 110571,7 October 1994, e.b.).

757

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Voluntary Arbitrator
Q.

A dispute arose between Guagua National
Colleges (GNC) and its faculty and labor union
regarding the funding of the retirement plan out of
the tuition fee increase. The dispute was submitted
to voluntary arbitrator Froilan Bacungan who
rendered a decision. After receiving a copy of the
decision, the union filed with the Court of Appeals
a motion for a 15-day extension to file their
petition for review under R43. The CA granted the
motion and the union filed its petition within the
extended 15-day period. GNC then filed its motion
to dismiss, asserting that the decision of the
Voluntary Arbitrator had already become final and
executory pursuant to Article 276 of the Labor
Code which provides that the award or decision
of the voluntary arbitrator shall be final and
executory after ten calendar days from receipt of
the copy of the award or decision by the parties.
The CA denied the motion to dismiss. The denial
of the motion to dismiss was challenged by GNC
before the Supreme Court on a petition for
certiorari under R65.
a) How should the conflict between R43 and
Article 276 of the Labor Code be resolved?
b) May the denial of the motion to dismiss be set
aside under R65?

A.
a) The 10-day period stated in Article 276 should be
understood as the period within which the party
adversely affected by the ruling of the Voluntary
Arbitrators or Panel of Arbitrators may file a
motion for reconsideration. Only after the
resolution of the motion for reconsideration may
758

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
the aggrieved party appeal to the CA by filing the
petition for review under R43 within 15 days from
notice pursuant to S4 R43. In effect, the SC held
that the filing of a motion for reconsideration is a
condition precedent for availing of R43.
b)

No. The denial of the motion to dismiss was not
made with grave abuse of discretion amounting to
lack of or excess of jurisdiction in view of the
conflicting jurisprudence on the matter and in
view of R43. (Guagua National Colleges v. CA,
28 Aug 2018, e.b., Bersamin, J.).

Ombudsman
Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from a
decision of the Ombudsman in an administrative
disciplinary case?

A.

Petition for review to the Court of Appeals under R43.
Appeals from the decision of the Office of the
Ombudsman in administrative disciplinary cases are
no longer appealable to the Supreme Court. (Fabian
v. Desierto, GR. No. 129742, Sept. 16, 1998).
However, the remedy of an aggrieved party from a
decision or order of the Office of the Ombudsman in a
criminal case is to file a petition for certiorari before
the SC. (Estrada v. Desierto, 445 SCRA 655 [2004]).
However, the remedy from the Ombudsman's
ruling exonerating respondents from administrative
liability is not R43 (since such ruling is final &
unappealable) but R65. (Mandagan v. Dela Cruz, 8
October 2018, Perlas-Bernabe).

759

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioner filed a complaint for violation of the
Anti-Graft Law against the respondents (public
officials) before the Office of the Ombudsman.
The Ombudsman, through a joint or consolidated
resolution, exonerated respondents from administrative
liability and dismissed the criminal charges due to
lack of probable cause. After petitioner's motion
for reconsideration was denied, she assailed the
joint resolution by filing a petition for certiorari
under R65 before the CA. The CA, while taking
cognizance of the petition insofar as the
administrative aspect was concerned, dismissed
it in respect of the criminal aspect Petitioner
argued that such dismissal was incorrect since
was involved was a consolidated ruling of the
Ombudsman. Is petitioner's argument correct?

A.

No. Petitioner's remedy from the joint or consolidated
ruling of the Ombudsman (administrative & criminal
case) is a petition for certiorari under R65 to the CA
from the administrative aspect and a petition for
certiorari under R65 to the SC from the criminal
aspect. Each of these remedies remains viable only
with respect to the aspect it is directed to. While the
petition for certiorari with the CA is the proper procedural
recourse to assail the administrative aspect of the
Ombudsman's Joint Resolution, the same is not true
for its criminal aspect. To reiterate, the prevailing rule
is that the petition for certiorari questioning the
criminal incident of the case should be tiled with the
Supreme Court, and not with the CA. Hence, the CA
correctly dismissed the petition filed before it insofar
as the criminal aspect is concerned. (Yatco v. Deputy
Ombudsman, 6 July 2020, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

760

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
Q.

May the Ombudsman appeal from a CA decision
in administrative case?

A.

Yes. It is error to equate the Ombudsman to a judge
or a court when the former is discharging its duty to
decide administrative cases. Unlike a judge or a court,
the Ombudsman — by virtue of its special power, duty
and function under the Constitution and the law to
protect the integrity of the public service — is on "a
league of its own" and thus cannot be "detached,
disinterested or neutral' with respect to the administrative
decisions it renders. Hence, the Ombudsman ought
not to be precluded from defending its decision on
appeal. (OMB v. Chipoco, 19 August 2019, Peralta, J.).

Intra-Corporate Controversies
Q.

How is an appeal taken from decisions or final
orders in cases falling under the Interim Rules of
Procedure Governing Intra-Corporate Controversies
under R.A. No. 8799?

A.

Such decisions and final orders shall be appealable to
the CA through a petition for review under R43,
pursuant to A.M. No. 04-9-07-SC, 14 September
2004. (San Jose v. Ozamiz, 12 July 2017, Carpio, J.).
In Lim v. Moldex Land, Inc., 25 January 2017,
Mendoza, J., the Supreme Court held that the appeal
may nevertheless be brought to the Supreme Court
under R45 "when the issue raised is purely of law and
is one of novelty."
Take note that a motion for new trial, or for
reconsideration of judgment or order is prohibited
under the Rules of Procedure for Intra-Corporate
Controversies.

761

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is the list of quasi-judicial agencies in S1 R43
exclusive?

A.

No. This is shown by the use of the word "among."
(National Water Resources Board v. A.L. Ang
Network, Inc., 8 April 2010).

Q.

Are commercial arbitration awards reviewable
under Rule 43?

A.

No. A commercial arbitral tribunal does not exercise
quasi-judicial powers since it is not a creature of the
law but an ad hoc tribunal or a creature of contract.
(Fruehauf Electronics PhiIs. Corp. v. Technology
Electronics Assembly & Mgt. Pacific Corp., 23 November
2016, Brion, J.).

Q.

What is the remedy from decisions or final orders
of Secretary of the Department of Agrarian Reform?

A.

R43, not R65. (Fl/-Estate Properties v. Reyes, 18
September 2019, Leonen, J.).

Q.

May the appeal raise questions of fact?

A.

Yes an appeal under R43 may involve questions
of fact, of law, or mixed questions of fact and law.
(S3 R43).

Q.

What is the period of appeal?

A.

The appeal shall be taken within 15 days from notice
of the award, judgment, final order or resolution, or
from the date of its last publication, if publication is
required by law for its effectivity, or of the denial of
petitioner's motion for new trial or reconsideration duly
filed in accordance with the governing law of the court
or agency a quo. Upon proper motion and the
payment of the full amount of the docket fee before
the expiration of the reglementary period, the CA may
762

Rule 43
Appeals From Quasi-Judicial
Bodies To The Court Of Appels
grant an additional period of 15 days only within
which to file the petition for review. No further
extensions shall be allowed except for the most
compelling reason and in no case to exceed 15 days.
Q.

How is the appeal taken?

A.

Appeal is taken by filing a verified petition for review
in 7 copies with the CA, with proof of service of a copy
thereof on the adverse party and on the court or
agency a quo.
The petition shall be accompanied by a sworn
certification against forum shopping containing the
details in S2 R42 and shall state the specific material
dates showing that it was filed on time.

Q.

Should the court or agencies whose judgments or
final orders are the subject of the petition be
impleaded?

A.

No, the petition for review shall not implead the courts
or agencies either as petitioners or respondents. (S6
R43). An exception is an appeal from the decision of
the Philippine Competition Commission, which requires
that the PCC shall be included as a party respondent
to the case. (Sec. 39, Philippine Competition Act).

Q.

Give briefly the procedure to be observed by the
CA after the filing of the petition.

A.
1)

The CA may require the respondent to file a
comment on the petition, not a motion to dismiss,
or the CA may dismiss the petition if it finds the
same to be patently without merit, prosecuted
manifestly for delay, or that the questions raised
therein are too unsubstantial to require consideration.
(MID)
763

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) If upon the filing of the comment or such other
pleadings as the court may allow or require, or
after the expiration of the period for the filing
thereof without such comment or pleading having
been submitted, the CA finds prima facie that the
court or agency concerned has committed errors
of fact or law that would warrant a reversal or
modification of the award, judgment, final order or
resolution sought to be reviewed, it may give due
course to the petition; otherwise it shall dismiss
the same.
3) If the petition is given due course, the CA may set 1.
the case for oral argument or require the parties
to submit memoranda. The case shall be deemed
submitted for decision upon the filing of the last
pleading or memorandum required by the rules or
by the Court of Appeals.
Q.

Will the appeal stay the award, judgment, final
order or resolution sought to be reviewed?

A.

No, unless the CA shall direct otherwise upon such
terms as it may deem just. (S12 R43). Compare with
S8(b) R42.

764

RULE 44. ORDINARY
APPEALED CASES (CA)
Q.

What cases are covered by R44?

A.

Ordinary appealed cases or those appealed to the CA
from a decision of the RTC in the exercise of its
original jurisdiction.

Q.

What are the rules governing the title of the case
and the designation of the parties?

A.

The title of the case shall remain as it was in the court
of origin, but the party appealing the case shall be
further referred to as the appellant and the adverse
party as the appellee. Hence if the plaintiff appeals,
he shall be referred to as the plaintiff-appellant while
the defendant is referred to as the defendant-appellee.
If both appeal, the plaintiff will be designated as the
plaintiff-appellant while the defendant is referred to as
the defendant-appellant.

Q.

What is a cross-appeal?

A.

A cross-appeal is one wherein both parties have
appealed.

Q.

What are the papers to be filed by the parties in an
ordinary appeal?

A.
1) Appellant's brief. To be filed by the appellant within
45 days from receipt of the notice of the clerk that
all the evidence, oral and documentary, are
attached to the record. There should be proof of
service of two copies upon the appellee.

765

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) Appellee's brief To be filed by the appellee within
45 days from receipt of the appellant's brief, with
proof of service of 2 copies thereof upon the
appellant.
3) Reply brief Within 20 days from receipt of the
appellee's brief, the appellant may file a reply
brief answering points in the appellee's brief not
covered in his main brief.
4) Memorandum. In certiorari, prohibition, mandamus,
quo warranto and habeas corpus cases, the
parties shall file, in lieu of briefs, their respective
memoranda within a non-extendible period of 30
days from receipt of the notice issued by the clerk
that all the evidence, oral and documentary, is
already attached to the record.
Q.

May an appeal be withdrawn as a matter of right?

A.

An appeal may be withdrawn as a matter of right at
any time before the filing of the appellee's brief.
Thereafter the withdrawal may be allowed in the
court's discretion. (S3 R50).

Q.

Plaintiff filed with the RTC a case against the
Defendant. Defendant filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground of forum-shopping and improper
venue. The RTC granted the motion to dismiss
stating that there was indeed forum-shopping but
that venue was properly laid. Plaintiff appealed to
the Court of Appeals. In the CA, the Defendant
argued that the motion to dismiss should also
have been granted on the ground of improper
venue. The CA held that there was no forumshopping but stated that the case should be
dismiss on the ground of improper venue. Was it
correct for the CA to dismiss the case on the
ground of improper venue?
766

Rule 44
Ordinary Appealed Cases (CA)
A.

No. An appellee can argue only to sustain the
judgment but not to impugn its correctness. Here
Appellee cannot raise improper venue on appeal as it
can argue only to sustain the judgment and not to
impugn its correctness. It was therefore reversible
error for CA to rule that the case should be dismissed
for improper venue. SC ordered remand to RTC.
(Cruz v. MIAA, 9 Sep 2013, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

Q.

Does the Court of Appeals have the power to try
cases and conduct hearings, receive evidence and
perform acts necessary to resolve factual issues?

A.

Under Section 9 of B.P. Blg. 129, the Court of
Appeals has the power to try cases and conduct
hearings, receive evidence, and perform acts necessary
to resolve factual issues in cases falling within its
original and appellate jurisdiction, including the power
to grant and conduct new trials or further proceedings.
The Supreme Court however has held that the
CA's power to receive evidence is qualified by the
CA's internal rules. Hence in accordance with such
rules, in appeals in civil cases, the CA may receive
evidence only when it grants a new trial based on
newly-discovered evidence. (Crispino v. Tansay, 5
Dec 2016, Leonen, J.).

767

RULE 45. APPEAL BY CERTIORARI
TO THE SUPREME COURT
Q.

What is a petition for review on certiorari?

A.

A petition for review on certiorari, also known as
appeal by certiorari, is a mode of appeal to the
Supreme Court from a judgment or final order of the:
1) Court of Appeals.
2) Sandiganbayan.
3) Regional Trial Court, where the appeal raises only
questions of law.
4) Court of Tax Appeals en banc. (Sec. 19, R.A. 1125
as amended by R.A. 9282).
5) Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan, and Regional
Trial Court in a writ of amparo or writ of habeas
data case. (Sec. 19, Rule on the Writ of Amparo;
Sec. 19, Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data).
It is initiated by the filing of a verified petition.
Note that an appeal to the Supreme Court may
be taken only by a petition for review on certiorari,
except in criminal cases where the penalty imposed is
reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment. (S3 R56). A
judgment imposing the death penalty is subject to
automatic review.
An appeal from an arbitral award of the
Construction Industry Arbitration Commission (CIAC)
may be taken to the Supreme Court by way of a
petition for review on certiorari on pure questions of
law. CIAC awards may reasonably be considered as

768

Rule 45
Appeal By Certiorari To
The Supreme Court
an exemption to R45's exclusive contemplation of
lower courts. (Global Medical Center of Laguna, Inc.
v. Ross Systems International, Inc., 11 May 2021,
e.b., Caguioa, J.).
Q.

May a petition for review on certiorari raise
questions of fact?

A.

Generally, no. Si R45 states that "Mlle petition shall
raise only questions of law which must be distinctly
set forth." The exceptions wherein the petition may
raise questions of fact are:
1) An appeal from a final judgment or order in a writ
of amparo or writ of habeas data case may be
taken to the Supreme Court under Rule 45. The
appeal may raise questions of fact or law or both.
(Sec. 19, Rule on the Writ of Amparo; Sec. 19,
Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data).
2)

When the conclusion is grounded entirely on
speculation.

3) The inference is manifestly mistaken, absurd or
impossible.
4) There is grave abuse of discretion.
5) The judgment is based on a misapprehension of
facts.
6) The findings of facts are conflicting.
7) The Court of Appeals, in making its findings
went beyond the issues of the case and the same
is contrary to the admissions of both appellant
and appellee.
8) The findings are contrary to those of the trial court.

769

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
9) The findings of fact are conclusions without citations
of specific evidence on which they are based.
10) The facts set forth in the petition as well as in the
petitioner's main and reply briefs are not disputed
by the respondents.
11) The findings of fact of the Court of Appeals are
premised on the supposed absence of evidence
and contradicted by the evidence on record.
Q.

Distinguish a Petition for Review on Certiorari
from a Special Civil Action for Certiorari. (JNR
FIRM)

A.

AS TO GOVERNING RULE. A petition for review on
certiorari is governed by Rule 45, while a special civil
action for certiorari is governed by Rule 65.
AS TO NATURE OF PROCEEDING. A petition
for review on certiorari is a mode of appeal, while a
special civil action for certiorari is an original action.
AS TO JURISDICTION. A petition for review on
certiorari is under the exclusive appellate jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, while a special civil action for
certiorari is under the concurrent original jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, and the
Regional Trial Court, Sandiganbayan, and COMELEC.
AS TO REQUIREMENT OF A MOTION FOR
RECONSIDERATION. A petition for review on certiorari
does not require the filing of a motion for
reconsideration with the lower court, while the filing of
a motion for reconsideration is a condition precedent
to the filing of a special civil action for certiorari.
AS TO REGLEMENTARY PERIOD. A petition
for review on certiorari should be filed within 15 days
from notice of the judgment or final order being
770

Rule 45
Appeal By Certiorari To
The Supreme Court
appealed from, while a special civil action for certiorari
should be filed within 60 days from notice of the
judgment, order, or resolution.
AS TO FINDINGS OF FACTS. Findings of facts
of the Court of Appeals are binding upon the Supreme
Court in a petition for review on certiorari, while in a
special civil action for certiorari, the findings of fact of
the Court of Appeals are not binding.
AS TO IMPLEADING OF PARTIES. In appeal
by certiorari, the lower courts or judges are whose
decisions are subject of review are not impleaded
either as petitioners or respondents, while in a special
civil action for certiorari, the lower court or judge
whose orders or proceedings are subject to challenge
are impleaded as public respondents.
Q.

Defendant will appeal from RTC decision on
ground of RTC's lack of jurisdiction over action to
rescind memorial park lot purchase. How should
he appeal and to what court should he take
his appeal?

A.

He should appeal to the SC via a petition for review
on certiorari since the appeal raises only a question of
law. (52[c] R41; Park Developers Inc. v. Daclan, 27
November 2019, Inting, J.).

Q.

What is the remedy from a decision or final order
issued by the Court of Appeals in a petition for
freeze order filed by the Anti-Money Laundering
Council?

A.

A petition for review on certiorari to the Supreme
Court under R45. Any party aggrieved by the decision
or ruling of the court may appeal to the Supreme
Court by petition for review on certiorari under Rule
45 of the Rules of Court. The appeal shall not stay the
enforcement of the subject decision or final order
771

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
unless the Supreme Court directs otherwise. (Sec.
57, A.M. No. 05-11-04-SC, eff. 15 December 2005).
Q.

Within what time may a petition for review on
certiorari be filed?

A.

The petition shall be filed within 15 days from notice
of the judgment or final order or resolution appealed
from, or of the denial of the petitioner's motion for new
trial or reconsideration filed in due time after notice of
the judgment. On motion duly filed and served, with
full payment of the docket and other lawful fees and
deposit for costs before the expiration of the
reglementary period, the Supreme Court may for
justifiable reasons grant an extension of 30 days only
within which to file the petition.
In an appeal from a writ of amparo or writ of
habeas data case, the appeal period is 5 working
days from the date of notice of the adverse judgment
or order. (519, Rule on the Writ of Amparo; S19 Rule
on the Writ of Habeas Data).

Q.

P received an adverse decision of the CA on 2
September 2005. P thus had until 19 September
2005 within which to file his petition for review on
certiorari since 17 September 2005 was a Saturday.
On 16 September 2005 P filed a motion for a
30-day extension to file his petition. The same
was granted by the SC. Up to when may P file
the petition?

A.

Up to 17 October 2005. A.M. No. 00-2-14-SC
provides that any extension of time granted by a court
should be computed from the expiration of the original
period, regardless of the fact that said expiry date falls
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Hence the
30-day extension should be reckoned from 17 September
and not 19 September.
772

Rule 45
Appeal By Certiorari To
The Supreme Court
Q.

What are the contents of a petition for review on
certiorari?

A.

The petition shall:
1) State the full name of the appealing party as the
petitioner and the adverse party as the respondent,
without impleadinq the lower courts or iudges
thereof either as petitioners or respondents;
2)

Indicate the material dates when notice of the
judgment or final order or resolution subject
thereof was received, when a motion for new trial
or reconsideration, if any, was filed and when
notice of the denial thereof was received;

3)

Set forth concisely a statement of the matters
involved, and the reasons or arguments relied on
for the allowance of the petition;

4)

Be accompanied by a clearly legible duplicate
original or a certified true copy of the judgment or
final order or resolution certified by the clerk of
court of the court a quo and the requisite number
of plain copies thereof, and such material portions
of the record as would support the petition;

5) Contain a sworn certification against forum shopping
as provided in S2 42. (54 R45).
Proof of service of a copy of the petition on the
lower court concerned and on the adverse party shall
be submitted together with the petition. (S3 R45).

773

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the grounds for the outright dismissal or
denial of the petition?

A.
1) Failure of the petitioner to comply with the
requirements regarding payment of the docket
and other lawful fees, deposit for costs, proof of
service of the petition, and the contents of and
the documents which should accompany the
petition shall be a sufficient ground for the
dismissal thereof. Hence a petition which is not
verified or which contains a defective verification
may be dismissed outright.
2) The Supreme Court may on its own initiative deny
the petition on the ground that the appeal is
without merit, or is prosecuted manifestly for
delay, or that the questions raised therein are too
unsubstantial to require consideration. (S5 R45).
This is because review under R45 is not a matter
of right but of sound judicial discretion, granted
only when there are special and important
reasons therefor. (36 R45).
Q.

Is R45 applicable to both civil and criminal cases?

A.

Yes. The mode of appeal prescribed in R45 shall be
applicable to both civil and criminal cases, except in
criminal cases where the penalty imposed is death,
reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment. (S9 R45).
Hence if the judgment of the Court of Appeals or the
Sandiganbayan imposes the penalty of reclusion
perpetua or life imprisonment, appeal shall be taken
by filing a notice of appeal. If the Court of Appeals or
Sandiganbayan imposes the death penalty, the same
shall be automatically reviewed by the Supreme Court.

774

RULE 46. ORIGINAL CASES
Q.

In original actions for certiorari, prohibition,
mandamus, and quo warranto, how does the court
acquire jurisdiction over the person of the
respondent?

A.

The court shall acquire jurisdiction over the
respondent's person by the service on him of its order
or resolution indicating its initial action on the petition
or by his voluntary submission to such jurisdiction.
(S4 R46). Service of the order or resolution upon the
party's counsel of record is deemed service upon
such party. This is true even if the counsel had
withdrawn but no notice of withdrawal was filed with
the court prior to the service of the order or resolution.
(Francisco v. Loyola Plans Consolidated Inc., 1
February 2016, Peralta, J.).

Q.

May the court dismiss outright a petition for
certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, and quo warranto?

A.

Yes, the court may dismiss the petition outright with
specific reasons for such dismissal or require the
respondent to file a comment on the same within ten
days from notice. Only pleadings required by the court
shall be allowed. (85 R46).

775

RULE 47. ANNULMENT OF JUDGMENTS OR
FINAL ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS
Q.

What is the coverage of R47?

A.

R47 shall govern the annulment by the Court of
Appeals of judgments or final orders and resolutions
in civil actions of Regional Trial Courts for which the
ordinary remedies of new trial, appeal, petition for
relief or other appropriate remedies are no longer
available through no fault of the petitioner.

Q.

Plaintiffs spouses Domantay filed a petition for
consolidation against the defendants heirs of
spouses Alvarez. It was alleged that the spouses
Alvarez had executed a deed of sale with right to
repurchase over a parcel of land in favor of the
plaintiffs and that the defendants had failed to
repurchase the lot. Defendant Nora Alvarez and
some other defendants were not served with
summons. No answer having been filed, a default
judgment was rendered in favor of the plaintiffs.
No appeal or petition for relief from the judgment
was made. Subsequently Nora Alvarez and Edwin
Alvarez (an heir who was not impleaded in the
petition for consolidation) filed a petition for
annulment of the judgment with the Court of
Appeals. The spouses Domantay argued that the
petition should be dismissed since there was no
showing or allegation in the petition that the
ordinary remedies of new trial, appeal, or petition
for relief were no longer available through no fault
of Alvarez, as required by S1 R47. Should the
petition for annulment of judgment be dismissed?

776

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
A.

No. In a case where a petition for the annulment of a
judgment or final order of the RTC filed under R47 is
grounded on lack of jurisdiction over the person of the
defendant/respondent or over the nature or subject of
the action, the petitioner need not allege in the
petition that the ordinary remedy of new trial or
reconsideration of the final order or judgment or
appeal therefrom are no longer available through no
fault of her own. This is so because a judgment rendered
or final order issued by the RTC without jurisdiction is
null and void and may be assailed any time either
collaterally or in a direct action or by resisting such
judgment or final order in any action or proceeding
whenever it is invoked, unless barred by laches.
Here the judgment is null and void for lack of
jurisdiction over the person of Nora Alvarez, no
summons having been served upon her. (Alvarez v.
Domantay, 3 June 2019, Reyes, J.).146

Q.

Petitioners filed an action for specific performance to
compel a co-owner to transfer title over the coowned land to the petitioners. The other co-owners
of the property, however, were not impleaded. The
RTC rendered judgment in favor of the petitioners.
No appeal was interposed. When 0, another coowner, learned of the judgment, he filed an action
for its annulment pursuant to R47. Will the petition
for annulment prosper?

A.

Yes. A judgment which did not implead an
indispensable party is void and may be annulled for
lack of jurisdiction under R47. In a suit involving coowned property, all the co-owners of such property

146Note that Nora Alvarez is an indispensable party. Hence the failure to
serve summons upon her resulted in the judgment being void in toto and not only
insofar as Nora Alvarez was concerned. (See Pua V. Deyto, 26 November 2012).

777

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
are indispensable parties. Appeal is not an adequate
remedy since 0 was not a party to the suit for specific
performance. (Fernando v. Paguyo, 18 September
2019, Caguioa, J.).
Q.

Is Rule 47 applicable to criminal cases?

A.

No. Si R47 limits the scope of the remedy of
annulment of judgment to civil actions. The remedy
cannot be resorted to when the RTC judgment being
questioned was rendered in a criminal case. The 2000
Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure itself does not
permit such recourse, for it excluded R47 from the
enumeration in S18 R124 of the provisions of the
1997 Revised Rules of Civil Procedure which have
suppletory application to criminal cases. (People v.
Bitanga, 26 June 2007).

Q.

Is a petition for annulment of judgment available
against judgments or final orders of quasi-judicial
bodies, such as the SEC?

A.

No. (Imperial v. Armes, 30 Jan 2017, Jardeleza, J.)

Q.

Is a petition for annulment of judgment available
against a final judgment or final order of the Court
of Appeals? If so, what is the remedy of an
aggrieved party to set aside a final judgment or
final order of the Court of Appeals?

A.

No. Under R47 and B.P. Big. 129, an action for
annulment of judgment is available only against final
judgments or final orders of the RTC and MTC.
The remedy of an aggrieved party to set aside a
final judgment or final order of the CA on the ground
of lack of jurisdiction is a petition for certiorari under
R65. It is submitted that the petition may be filed at

778

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
anytime since the judgment is null and void for lack of
jurisdiction. (Laus v. Court of Appeals, 219 SCRA
688, 704 [1993]).
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
annulment of a judgment?

A.

If the judgment is that of a RTC, then original and
exclusive jurisdiction lies with the Court of Appeals.
(Si R47; Sec. 9[2], B.P. Big. 129). If the judgment is
that of the MTC, then the original and exclusive
jurisdiction lies with the RTC. (Sec. 19[6], B.P. Blg.
129). An action to annul a judgment or final order of a
MTC shall be filed in the RTC having jurisdiction over
the MTC. (S10 R47).

Q.

The Republic filed with the RTC of Parariaque City
an action for reversion against Yujuico involving a
land in Parafiaque with an assessed value of more
than P50,000. The Republic contended that the
judgment of the CFI of Pasig, acting as a land
registration court, which decreed the issuance of
an OCT over the land is a nullity since the land
was under water and thus part of the Manila Bay.
Does the RTC have jurisdiction over the action for
reversion?

A.

No. Under B.P. Blg. 129, the Court of Appeals has
exclusive original jurisdiction over actions for the
annulment of judgments of the RTC.
Here the action at bottom seeks to nullify the
judgment of the CFI, acting as a land registration
court, on the ground that a land registration court
cannot issue a title over property of the public domain.
Hence it is the Court of Appeals which has jurisdiction
pursuant to B.P. Blg. 129 and R47 of the Rules of
Court. (Yujuico v. Republic, G.R. No. 168861, 26
October 2007).
779

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The Republic filed with the RTC of Tanauan,
Batangas, an action for reversion and cancellation
of title against Malabanan (Civil Case No. C-192).
The Republic alleged that Malabanan's TCT No. T24268 had emanated from Original Certificate of
Title (OCT) No. 0-17421 of the Registry of Deeds of
Batangas, which was purportedly issued pursuant
to Decree No. 589383 in L.R.A. Record No. 50573;
that upon verification, the Land Registration
Authority could not find any copy of the judgment
rendered in LRC Record No. 50573; and that the
tract of land covered by TCT No. T-24268, being
within the unclassified public forest, remained
part of the public domain that pertained to the
State and could not be the subject of disposition
or registration.
Malabanan moved to dismiss Civil Case No.
C-192, arguing that the RTC had no jurisdiction
over the action because it sought the annulment
of the judgment and the decree issued in LRC
Record No. 50573 by the Court of First Instance,
and thus an action for annulment of judgment under
R47, the jurisdiction over which pertained to the
Court of Appeals pursuant to Yujuico v. Republic.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. The jurisdiction over an action for reversion is
with the RTC. The RTC may properly take cognizance
of reversion suits which do not call for an annulment
of judgment of the RTC acting as a Land Registration
Court.147

147The decision cited Section 19(2) of BR Big. 129 as the basis of the
RTC's jurisdiction where the assessed value of the real property exceeded
P20,000. It is submitted that the more precise basis of the RTC's jurisdiction is
Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1948 and thus the RTC would
have jurisdiction over actions for reversion regardless of the assessed value of
the property.

780

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
Yujuico is not apropos since here the Republic is
not seeking the annulment of the judgment from
which Decree No. 589383 was derived inasmuch as
such judgment did not exist in the first place.
(Malabanan v. Republic, 19 September 2018, FeriasBernabe, J.).
Q.

Remedios, claiming that she is the adopted
daughter of the deceased Toribio, filed with the
RTC an action for partition of Toribio's estate.
Petitioner filed an answer alleging that Remedios
was not validly adopted as the adoption decree
issued by the then Court of First Instance (CFI)
was fraudulently secured. The RTC dismissed the
action for partition on the ground that Remedios
was not validly adopted. Did the RTC act properly
in dismissing the action on that ground?

A.

No. The RTC did not have the jurisdiction to determine
or to review the validity of the decree of adoption
issued by the erstwhile CFI by virtue of the equal rank
and category between the RTC and the CFI. The
proper court with jurisdiction to do so was the CA,
which has been vested by Section 9 of Batas
Pambansa Blg. 129 with the exclusive original jurisdiction
over actions for the annulment of the judgments of the
RTC. (Or/bell v. CA, 5 August 2015, Bersamin, J.)

Q.

What are the grounds for the annulment of a
judgment under R47?

A.

The annulment may be based only on the grounds of
extrinsic fraud and lack of jurisdiction. Extrinsic fraud
shall not be a valid ground if it was availed of, or could
have been availed of, in a motion for new trial or
petition for relief. (S2 R47).

781

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Jurisprudence also recognizes denial of due
process as an additional ground. Where a court
approved a commissioner's project of partition when
only three of the nine heirs were notified of the
meeting to discuss the project, the aggrieved heirs
could resort to R47 in order to nullify the court's order
of approval. (Benatiro v. Heirs of Cuyos, 560 SCRA
478 [2008]).
Q.

What does lack of jurisdiction in S2 R47 mean?

A.

Lack of jurisdiction in S2 R47 involves the want of
jurisdiction over the person of the defending party or
over the subject matter of the case. It does not refer
to cases where the court has personal or subjectmatter jurisdiction but acted beyond such jurisdiction.
(Teatio v. Municipality of Navotas, 15 February 2016).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for specific performance
with the RTC against the defendant corporation.
The sheriff served summons upon the receptionist of
the corporation. Judgment was rendered against
the defendant corporation. The defendant filed a
petition for certiorari with the CA to set aside the
RTC judgment on the ground that it is void for
lack of personal jurisdiction. The CA dismissed
the petition for certiorari stating that the defendant
corporation should have availed of a petition for
annulment of judgment under R47. Was the
dismissal proper?

A.

No. A void RTC judgment may be attacked by R47 or
by R65. R47 does not preclude resort to R65. A void
judgment is in legal effect no judgment. (Titan Dragon
Properties Corp. v. Veloso-Galenzoga, 28 April 2021,
Zalameda, J.).

782

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
Q.

Lessors filed an action for ejectment against the
lessees. The MeTC rendered judgment in favor of
the lessors. On appeal, the RTC reversed the
MeTC and dismissed the ejectment complaint.
The RTC also ordered the lessors to execute a
deed of absolute sale in favor of the lessees. The
RTC judgment became final and executory because
the motion for reconsideration of the lessors was
filed out of time. The lessors then filed an action
for annulment of the RTC judgment with the Court
of Appeals. The CA rendered judgment nullifying
the RTC judgment on the ground that in an
appealed ejectment case, the RTC is without
jurisdiction to make a conclusive determination of
ownership by ordering the conveyance of the land
to the lessees. Did the CA correctly nullify the
RTC judgment?

A.

No. Lack of jurisdiction as a ground for annulment of
judgment under R47 refers to either lack of personal
or subject-matter jurisdiction. It does not refer to
excess of jurisdiction, that is, the court had jurisdiction
over the case but acted in excess of such jurisdiction.
In a petition for annulment of judgment based on lack
of jurisdiction, petitioner must show not merely an
abuse of jurisdictional discretion but an absolute lack
of jurisdiction.
Here the RTC had appellate jurisdiction over the
ejectment case. Its conclusive determination of
ownership was merely an abuse of jurisdictional
discretion, not an absolute lack of jurisdiction. The
lessor's remedy was an appeal, which however they
lost through their own fault. (Manila v. Manzo, 7
September 2011, Villarama, J.).

783

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Respondent, the registered owner of a parcel of
land covered by an original certificate of title, filed
with the RTC an action for recovery of possession
(accion publiciana) against the petitioners. The
petitioners interposed the defense that they were
in adverse possession and cultivation of the land.
They likewise asked for the reconveyance of the
property, alleging that respondent and his father
fraudulently titled the land in respondent's name.
The RTC rendered a decision dismissing the
complaint and ordering the respondent to
reconvey the land to the petitioners. Respondent
failed to appeal. Respondent then filed a petition
for relief from judgment wherein he alleged that
his counsel's negligence in handling his case
prevented him from participating therein and from
filing his appeal. However, the same was denied
by the RTC for having been filed out of time.
Subsequently, respondent filed with the
Court of Appeals a petition for annulment of
judgment on the ground of extrinsic fraud and
lack of jurisdiction. May the CA nullify the RTC
judgment?

A.

Yes. The RTC was bereft of jurisdiction to rule with
finality on the issue of ownership and consequently
was without the power to order the reconveyance of
the subject land to the petitioners because the original
complaint was only an accion publiciana. The RTC
was without any power or jurisdiction to order the
reconveyance of the land because that would amount
to a conclusive determination of ownership which can
be done only in an accion reivindicatoria. Moreover,
the order of reconveyance would amount to a

784

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
proscribed collateral attack on the certificate of title.
(Heirs of Cu//ado v. Gutierrez, 30 July 2019, e.b.,
Caguioa, J.).148
Q.

What is the period for filing the action for
annulment of judgment under R47?

A.
1) If based on extrinsic fraud, the action must be filed
within 4 years from its discovery.
2)

If based on lack of jurisdiction, the action is
imprescriptible and may be filed at any time
unless it is barred by !aches or estoppel. (53 R47).

The action is commenced by the filing of a
verified petition alleging the matters set forth in S4
R47. It shall be accompanied by a certification against
forum shopping.
Q.

Is it necessary in R47 that one be a party to the
judgment sought to be annulled?

A.

No. One need not be a party to the judgment sought
to be annulled. What is essential is that he can prove
his allegation that the judgment was obtained by the
use of fraud and collusion and he would be adversely
affected thereby. Even where there was no fraud and
collusion, however, the Supreme Court has allowed
persons to file petitions for annulment of judgment to
question precisely their non-inclusion as parties to the
original case. (Intestate Estate of the Sian v. Philippine
National Bank, 513 SCRA 662, 671 [2007])

1481t is submitted that the ruling be re-examined because it in effect
overturns the settled rule that in R47, lack of jurisdiction refers to lack of subjectmatter or personal jurisdiction, not to excess of jurisdiction. The RTC had
jurisdiction over the accion publiciana; albeit, it exceeded that jurisdiction when it
ruled conclusively on ownership. Respondent should have appealed instead of
taking refuge in R47. (See Manila v. Manzo, 7 September 2011).

785

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Due to Philip's abuse and sexual infidelity, Viveca
abandoned their conjugal dwelling in Pasig City
together with her children. Viveca filed a petition
for legal separation against her husband Philip. In
the petition for legal separation, Viveca revealed that
she residing at her parents' house in Mandaluyong
City. Subsequently Viveca went to the U.S.A. with
her children and lived there. Philip filed an action
for declaration of nullity of his marriage with
Viveca before the RTC of Balayan, Batangas.
Philip moved for leave to effect extraterritorial
service under S17 R14. Philip stated in his
Petition and motion that the last known address
of Viveca was at their conjugal home in Pasig
City. Summons was served by publication and a
copy of the summons and court order was sent by
registered mail to the indicated last known
address. Viveca was unaware of the petition for
declaration of nullity and the later judgment of the
court nullifying her marriage with Philip. She filed
an action for annulment of judgment under R47
on the ground of extrinsic fraud. Will the action
for annulment of judgment prosper?

A.

Yes. There was extrinsic fraud committed by Philip
when he indicated the last known address of Viveca
as their conjugal home when she had already
abandoned it and when she had already moved in
with her parents in Mandaluyong City. Clearly there
was an intent on the part of Philip to prevent Viveca
from acquiring knowledge of the nullity case and
depriving her of her day in court. The judgment of the
Batangas court should be annulled on the ground of
extrinsic fraud. (Yu V. Yu, 20 June 2016, Peralta, J.).

786

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
Q.

Tom Wallis filed with the Regional Trial Court
(RTC) a Petition for Declaration of Nullity of his
marriage with Debi Wallis on the ground of
psychological incapacity of the latter. Before filing
the petition, Tom Wallis had told Debi Wallis that
he wanted the annulment of their marriage
because he was already fed up with her irrational
and eccentric behaviour. However, in the petition
for declaration of nullity of marriage, the correct
residential address of Debi Wallis was deliberately
not alleged and instead, the residential address of
their married son was stated. Summons was
served by substituted service at the address
stated in the petition. For failure to file an answer,
Debi Wallis was declared in default and Tom
Wallis presented evidence ex-parte. The RTC
rendered judgment declaring the marriage null
and void on the ground of psychological incapacity
of Debi Wallis. Three (3) years after the RTC
judgment was rendered, Debi Wallis got hold of a
copy thereof and wanted to have the RTC
judgment reversed and set aside. If you are the
lawyer of Debi Wallis, what judicial remedy or
remedies will you take? Discuss and specify the
ground or grounds for said remedy or remedies.
(14 Bar Q20)

A.

If I were the lawyer of Debi Wallis, the judicial remedy
I would take is to file with the Court of Appeals an
action for annulment of the RTC judgment under R47.
An action for annulment of judgment may be resorted
to since the remedies of appeal and petition for relief
are no longer available through no fault of Debi
Wallis. [Si R47]
The grounds for annulment of judgment would be
lack of jurisdiction and extrinsic fraud. Lack of
jurisdiction also covers lack of jurisdiction over the
787

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
person of the defendant since the judgment would be
void. [1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
th
COMPENDIUM 558 (7 rev. ed., 3rd printing)]
Here the court did not acquire jurisdiction over
the person of Debi since there was no valid
substituted service of summons. Substituted service
of summons should have been made at Debi's
residence. (S7 R14). Hence the judgment of the RTC
was void. Since the judgment is void, the petition for
annulment thereof is imprescriptible. (53 R47).
Also there was extrinsic fraud when Tom deliberately
indicated a wrong address for Debi thus preventing
her from having her day in court and contesting Tom's
petition. [See Yu v. Yu, 20 June 2016]
Q.

In 2001 Private Respondent filed with the RTC a
petition for issuance of new owner's duplicate
title alleging the loss of his owner's duplicate title.
The RTC issued an order for the issuance of a
new owner's duplicate in the name of the Private
Respondent. Since no appeal was made, the
judgment was entered in the book of entries.
Private Respondent then sold the property to a
Mr. Marty. The Private Respondent's title was
cancelled and a new TCT issued in the name of
Mr. Marty. Later the Petitioners who had bought
the property of the Private Respondent in 1986
and were in possession of the property, filed with
the Court of Appeals an action to annul the RTC's
judgment on the ground that the duplicate title
was not lost but was in their possession after it
had been delivered by the late spouse of the
Private Respondent in 1986. The Court of Appeals
denied the petition on the ground that the RTC
had jurisdiction to issue the order and that the

788

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
Petitioners did not acquire any vested right since
the sale in their favor was not registered. May the
RTC's decision be nullified under R47?
A.

Yes. The RTC has no jurisdiction to issue an order for
the issuance of new owner's duplicate title if the
owner's duplicate title was not actually lost but was in
the possession of a person who had bought the
property. The order of the RTC may be set aside
under R47 of the Rules of Court and cannot become
final and executory as the order is void for lack of
jurisdiction. (Villanueva v. V//or/a, G.R. No. 155804,
14 March 2008).

Q.

A transferee in a deed of sale filed with the RTC a
petition for issuance of duplicate certificate of
title. No notice of hearing, however, was given to the
heirs of the registered owner. The RTC rendered
judgment granting the petition. What would be the
remedy of the heirs of the registered owner?

A.

They may file a petition under R47 to nullify the
judgment. Notice to the interested parties is
jurisdictional and non-compliance therewith means
the court did not acquire jurisdiction over the petition.
(Heirs of Ramirez v. Abon, 24 July 2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant for collection of a
P45,000 loan plus interest of 12% per annum from
2 March 1991 until full payment Defendant's
counsel did not file an answer and Defendant was
accordingly declared in default After Plaintiff
presented his evidence ex parte, the RTC rendered
judgment ordering Defendant to pay Plaintiff
P45,000 plus interest of 5% per month from 2
March 1991 until full payment. Defendant's counsel
failed to file an appeal in behalf of his client.
Subsequently Defendant filed a petition for
annulment of judgment regarding the portion thereof
789

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
that awarded 5% per month interest rather than
12% per annum interest The Plaintiff contends
that the judgment has already become final and
executory and that there are only two grounds for
a petition for annulment, that is, extrinsic fraud
and lack of jurisdiction, none of which is present.
The Plaintiff also argues that the remedy of
annulment of judgment is not available to Defendant
since the remedy of appeal was no longer
available because of Defendant's fault May the
petition for annulment of judgment prosper?
A.

Yes. A petition for annulment of judgment is an
exception to the final judgment rule, which states that
final and executory judgments can no longer be
set aside.
While under S2 R47 a Petition for Annulment of
Judgment may be based only on the grounds of
extrinsic fraud and lack of jurisdiction, jurisprudence
recognizes lack of due process as additional ground
to annul a judgment. A final and executory judgment
may still be set aside if, upon mere inspection thereof,
its patent nullity can be shown for having been issued
without jurisdiction or for lack of due process of law.
Here the grant of 5% monthly interest is way beyond
the 12% per annum interest sought in the Complaint
and smacks of violation of due process. The reason is
that under 33(d) R9, a judgment rendered against a
party in default shall not exceed the amount or be
different in kind from that prayed for.
While Si R47 requires that annulment of
judgment may be availed of in instances where the
ordinary remedies of new trial, appeal, petition for
relief or other appropriate remedies are no longer
available through no fault of the petitioner, the Plaintiff
may be excused here since the remedy of appeal was
not lost due to his fault but to the fault of his lawyer
790

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
who was grossly negligent. The lawyer's gross
negligence started from his failure to file an answer
right up to his failure to file an appeal. Defendant
cannot be blamed for relying too much on his former
counsel. Clients have reasonable expectations that
their lawyer would amply protect their interest during
the trial of the case. Here Defendant is a plain and
ordinary person who is totally ignorant of the intricacies
and technicalities of law and legal procedures. Being
so, he completely relied upon and trusted his former
counsel to appropriately act as his interest may
lawfully warrant and require. (Diona v. Balangue, 7
January 2013, Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

May the Court of Appeals dismiss outright a
petition for annulment of judgment?

A.

Yes. Should the Court of Appeals find no substantial
merit in the petition, the same may be dismissed
outright with specific reasons for such dismissal. (55
R47). Take note however that S5 R47 is not
applicable to annulment of judgments or final orders
of the MTC. (510 R47). Hence the RTC cannot
dismiss outright the action if it finds no substantial
merit in the action.

Q.

What action is taken by the court if it finds prima
fade merit in the petition?

A.

The court shall give due course to the petition
and summons shall be served on the respondent/s.
(S5 R47).

Q.

What is the procedure to be observed under R47?

A.

The procedure in ordinary civil cases shall be
observed. Should a trial be necessary before the
Court of Appeals, the reception of the evidence may
be referred to a member of the CA or a judge of the
RTC. (56R47).
791

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect of a judgment of annulment
under R47?

A.

The judgment of annulment shall set aside the
questioned judgment or final order or resolution and
render the same null and void, without prejudice to
the original action being reified in the proper court.
However, where the judgment or final order or
resolution is set aside on the ground of extrinsic fraud,
the court may on motion order the trial court to try the
case as if a timely motion for new trial had been
granted therein. (S7 R47).
The prescriptive period for the refiling of the
original action shall be deemed suspended from the
filing of such original action until the finality of the
judgment of annulment. The exception would be
where the extrinsic fraud is attributable to the plaintiff
in the original action. (S8 R47).

Q.

Aside from the annulment of the judgment, final
order, or resolution, what other relief is available
under R47?

A.

The judgment of annulment may include the award of
damages, attorney's fees, and other relief.
If the questioned judgment or final order or
resolution had already been executed, the court may
issue such orders of restitution or other relief as justice
and equity may warrant under the circumstances.
(S9 R39).

Q.

Teodora Salera borrowed P350,000 from A-1
Investors Inc. As the loan remained unpaid for a
long time, A-1 filed an action for collection with
the MeTC of Quezon City against Teodora,
impleading her husband Saturnino pursuant to S4
R3. Summons was served on Teodora's son at the
family's residential house in Cebu City. Subsequently
792

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
a default judgment was entered against Teodora
and Saturnino and the sheriff levied upon the
house. Saturnino then filed with the RTC of Cebu
City an action for injunction with prayer for TRO
and preliminary injunction seeking to restrain the
judicial sale of the property. In his complaint,
Saturnino alleges that he was not properly served
with summons and was denied due process.
(a) Did Saturnino avail of the proper remedy?
(b) May the RTC of Cebu City nonetheless treat
the action for injunction as one for annulment
of judgment and take cognizance of the same?
A.
(a) No. Saturnino sought to permanently enjoin the
public auction of property levied pursuant to a writ
of execution issued in the MeTC case on the
ground that he was not served with summons and
was denied due process. In doing so, Saturnino
was actually seeking the annulment of the MeTC
decision for lack of jurisdiction or for extrinsic
fraud. The proper remedy for Satumino's predicament
is therefore not an action for injunction, but for
annulment of judgment.
(b) No. Even if we were to treat the action before the
RTC of Cebu City as an action for annulment
rather than for injunction, said RTC could not take
cognizance of the same. 510 R47 provides that
an action to annul a judgment or final order of an
MTC shall be filed in the RTC having jurisdiction
over the former. It is therefore the RTC of
Quezon City which has jurisdiction over a case
seeking annulment of the final decision of the

793

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Metropolitan Trial Court of Quezon City. (Salera
v. A-1 Investors, Inc., G.R. No. 141238, 15
February 2002, Puno, J.).
Q.

Discuss a direct attack and a collateral attack on a
final and executory judgment.

A.

A direct attack on a final and executory judgment is
made through an action or proceeding the main object
of which is to annul, nullify, set aside, or enjoin the
enforcement of such judgment. This is necessary
where the nullity of a judgment does not appear on its
face. Examples are R47 and R65.149
A collateral attack on the other hand is made
when in another action or proceeding to obtain a
different relief, an attack on the judgment is made as
an incident on the action. This is proper only when the
judgment is on its face void, as where it is patent that
the court had no jurisdiction. (1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 403404 [7th rev. ed. 3rd printing, 1999], citing Reyes v.
Barreto-Datu, 26 February 1959). The Supreme Court
has laid down a stiff requirement to collaterally
overthrow a judgment. In Reyes v. Datu, the Supreme
Court ruled that it is not enough for the party seeking
the nullity to show a mistaken or erroneous decision;
he must show to the court that the judgment
complained of is utterly void. In short, the judgment
must be void upon its face. (Go v. Chavez, 3 August
2015, Brion, J.).

" 9Makabingkil v. People's Homesite & Housing Corp., 72 SCRA 326
(1976), appears to state that R65 may be used to directly attack a final and
executory judgment only if its nullity appears on its face. The better view is that
R65 may be used to directly attack a judgment whether or not the nullity is
apparent from its face. See Alviar v. CFI, 30 March 1937. There is nothing in 51
R65 which requires that the defect of the judgment assailed must be apparent
from its face.

794

Rule 47
Annulment Of Judgments or
Final Orders And Resolutions
Q.

Aside from a direct attack under R47, may a void
judgment or final order be attacked collaterally
or resisted in any action or proceeding in which it
is invoked?

A.

Yes. It may be said to be a lawless thing which can be
treated as an outlaw and slain at sight, or ignored
wherever and whenever it exhibits its head. Thus it
may be assailed anytime, collaterally or in a direct
action or by resisting such judgment or final order in
any action or proceeding whenever it is invoked.
(Benatiro v. Heirs of Cuyos, 560 SCRA 478 [20081). It
is understood however that a collateral attack may be
made only if the judgment is on its face void. (See
immediately preceding Q&A).

795

RULE 51. JUDGMENT
Q.

Petitioner Multi-Realty Development Corporation
is the developer of the Makati Tuscany Condominium.
In 1975, the Master Deed over the condominium
was executed. Multi-Realty Development Corporation
was of the impression that it was the owner of the
unassigned parking lots and the Respondent
condomimium corporation seemed to think likewise
since it even offered to buy some of the parking
lots. In 1989 however the Respondent claimed
ownership of the unassigned parking lot and it
was then that the Petitioner discovered that the
Master Deed did not indicate the ownership of the
unassigned lots. In 1990 Petitioner filed an action
for reformation of instrument against the Respondent
The RTC ruled in favor of the Petitioner but on
appeal the CA reversed the RTC holding that the
Petitioner's action had already prescribed. The
issue of prescription was not raised before the
lower court nor even before the CA on appeal.
Was it proper for the CA to rule that the action
had prescribed?

A.

No. Settled is the rule that no questions will be raised
on appeal unless they have been raised below.
Points of law, theories, issues and arguments not
adequately brought to the attention of the lower court
need not be considered by the reviewing court as they
cannot be raised for the first time on appeal. Basic
considerations of due process impel this rule. Also
under 38 R51 no error which was not assigned and
argued in the brief may be considered on appeal.
(Multi-Realty Dev't Corp. v. Makati Tuscany Condominium
Corp., G.R. 146726, 16 June 2006).

796

Rule 51
Judgment
Q.

What errors may be passed upon on appeal?
(JA VP)

A.
1) Those assigned as errors closely related to or
dependent on an assigned error.
2) Those which affect subject-matter jurisdiction or
the validity of the judgment.
3) Plain and clerical errors. (88 R51; 84 R56).
Q.

In an appeal from the MTC to the RTC under R40,
may the RTC pass upon errors which were not
assigned or errors which are not closely related
or dependent on an assigned error?

A.

Yes. S8 R51 does not apply to appeal under R40
because of 87(c) R40 which provides that the RTC
shall decide the case on the basis of the entire record
of the proceedings had in the court of origin and such
memoranda as are filed. (Adora v. Zamora, 30 May
2011, Bersamin, J.))50

Q.

D obtained a loan from a bank secured by the
property of T. D defaulted in the payment of the
loan so the bank demanded payment from T. T
filed with the RTC a complaint for annulment of
the mortgage and damages against the bank and
D. The RTC rendered a judgment upholding the
validity of the mortgage but ordering D to pay
damages to T. T appealed the decision to the CA
while the bank and D did not. In its decision, the
CA modified the RTC judgment by deleting the
award of damages against D. Although D did not

150See also S18 R70 to the same effect as S7(c) R40.

797

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
appeal, it was argued that the issue concerning
D's liability is closely related to the error assigned
by T concerning the bank's liability. Did the CA
act properly in deleting the award of damages
against D?
A.

No. It should be noted that D did not appeal. The
exception to the general rule which states that an
unassigned error may be considered if closely related
to or dependent on an assigned error is for the benefit
of the appellant and not of the appellee. (HiponiaMayuga v. Metro Bank, 22 June 2015, Mendoza, J.).

Q.

What is the harmless error rule?

A.

The rule which provides that no error in either the
admission or the exclusion of evidence and no error
or defect in any ruling or order or in anything done or
omitted by the trial court or by any of the parties is
ground for granting a new trial or for setting aside,
modifying, or otherwise disturbing a judgment or
order, unless refusal to take such action appears to
the court inconsistent with substantial justice. The
court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard
any error or defect which does not affect the substantial
rights of the parties. (S6 R51).
For example an error by the court in admitting
hearsay evidence is harmless if there are other pieces
of evidence sufficient to support the judgment
rendered by it.

798

RULE 56. PROCEDURE IN
THE SUPREME COURT
Q.

What action does the Supreme Court take on an
improper appeal?

A.

The Supreme Court shall dismiss the improper appeal.
The exception is an appeal by certiorari to the
Supreme Court from the RTC which involves issues
of fact. The appeal may be referred to the Court of
Appeals for decision or appropriate action. (S6 R56).

Q.

What is the procedure if the Supreme Court en
banc is equally divided in opinion?

A.

Where the court en banc is equally divided in opinion,
or the necessary majority cannot be had, the case
shall again be deliberated on, and if after such
deliberation no decision is reached, the original action
commenced in the court shall be dismissed; in
appealed cases, the judgment or order appealed from
shall stand affirmed; and on all incidental matters, the
petition or motion shall be denied. (S7 R56).

799

PROVISIONAL REMEDIES
Q.

What are provisional remedies?

A.

These are remedies to which the parties may resort to
for the preservation or protection of their rights or
interest, during the pendency of the litigation.

Q.

What are the provisional remedies?

A.

(Keyword: ARIRS)
1) Preliminary injunction
2) Preliminary attachment
3) Receivership
4) Replevin (Delivery of personal property)
5) Support

Q.

Are provisional remedies available in criminal cases?

A.

Yes. The provisional remedies in civil actions may
likewise be availed of in connection with the civil
action deemed instituted with the criminal action,
insofar as they are applicable. (Si R127).

Q.

Alleging fraud, the buyer in a contract to sell filed
with the RTC an action for annulment of the
contract. The buyer moved in open court that the
seller be ordered to deposit the P10 million
downpayment with the cashier of the trial court,
which was granted. The seller moved to set aside
the order on the ground that deposit is not among
the provisional remedies enumerated in the Rules
of Court. Should the order be set aside?

800

Provisional Remedies

A.

No. The trial court in the exercise of its equity
jurisdiction may validly order the deposit of the P10
million down payment in court, despite the hiatus in
the Rules of Court. The purpose of the exercise of
equity jurisdiction in this case is to prevent unjust
enrichment and to ensure restitution. Article 9 of the
Civil Code provides that "[n]o judge or court shall
decline to render judgment by reason of the silence,
obscurity or insufficiency of the laws." (Reyes v. Lim,
408 SCRA 560, 566 [2003]).

801

RULE 57. PRELIMINARY ATTACHMENT
Q.

What is preliminary attachment?

A.

It is the provisional remedy wherein at the
commencement of the action or at any time before
entry of judgment, a plaintiff or any proper party may
have the property of the adverse party taken into the
custody of the court as security for the satisfaction of
any judgment that may be recovered. (S1 R57). A
provisional remedy, auxiliary or incidental to the main
action, whereby the debtor's property capable of
being taken under levy and execution is placed under
custody of the law pending the determination of the
cause, to secure the payment of any judgment that
may be recovered therein. (Davao Light & Power Co.
v. Court of Appeals, 204 SCRA 343).

Q.

Who may avail of the remedy of preliminary
attachment?

A.

The plaintiff or the defendant in respect of his
counterclaim. Cross-claimants and third-party claimants
may likewise avail of preliminary attachment.

Q.

Will the withdrawal or dismissal of the main
complaint dissolve the writ of preliminary attachment
issued therein?

A.

Yes. Attachment is an ancillary remedy. It is not
sought for its own sake but rather to enable the
attaching party to realize upon relief sought and
expected to be granted in the main or principal action.
The remedy of attachment is adjunct to the main
suit; therefore, it can have no independent existence
apart from a suit on a claim of the plaintiff against the
defendant. Here, the writ of preliminary attachment
issued is already dissolved and rendered non-existent
802

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
in view of the withdrawal of the complaint by the
plaintiff. (UEM Mara Phi/s. Corp. v. Ng Wee, 14
October 2020, Gaerlan, J.).
Q.

What are the kinds of attachment?

A.

The kinds of attachment are:
1) Preliminary attachment.
2) Garnishment.
3) Levy on execution or final attachment.

Q.

Briefly define each.

A.

Preliminary attachment. (See first question under R57).
Garnishment. The process in which money or
goods in the hands of a third person which are due to
the defendant, are attached by the plaintiff.
Levy on execution or final attachment. The
attachment issued to enforce a judgment which has
become final and executory.

Q.

When may a writ of preliminary attachment be
applied for?

A.

A writ of preliminary attachment may be applied for at
the commencement of the action or at any time before
entry of judgment. After entry of judgment, a motion
for the issuance of a writ of execution is the proper
remedy for the prevailing party.

Q.

What are the grounds upon which an attachment
may issue?

A.

(D FRENDS)
FRAUD. In an action against a party who has
been guilty of fraud in the incurrence or the performance
of an obligation.
803

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
RECOVER POSSESSION. In an action to
recover possession of property unjustly taken and
which has been concealed or disposed of to prevent
its being found or taken by the applicant.
DISPOSED OF PROPERTY. In an action
against a party who has disposed of his property, or is
about to do so, with intent to defraud his creditors.
EMBEZZLEMENT. In an action for embezzlement
against a person acting in a fiduciary capacity or for
willful violation of duty.
NON-RESIDENT. In an action against a nonresident party not found in the Philippines.
DEPART. In an action for sum of money or
damages (other than moral or exemplary) against a
party who is about to depart from the Philippines with
intent to defraud his creditors. (Note: If already departed
from the Philippines, then a non-resident).
SUMMONS BY PUBLICATION. In an action
against a party on whom summons may be served by
publication. (Si R57). These are the defendant whose
identity or whereabouts are unknown (516 R14) and
the defendant who is temporarily out of the Philippines
(518 R14). .
Q.

Are the grounds for attachment provided for in S1
R57 exclusive?

A.

Yes. (Chamorro v. Ready-Mix Co., L-6572, 14 May 1954).

Q.

MIS Maritime Corporation (MIS) engaged Tsuneishi
Heavy Industries to dry dock and repair its
vessels. The vessel was dry-docked and repaired
and returned to MIS but it refused to pay the
service and repair fee to Tsuneishi stating that the

804

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
latter had damaged the vessel during repair and
demanding set-off for the damage caused by
the faulty repair and the delay in the return of
the vessel.
In April 2008, Tsuneishi filed a complaint against
MIS before the RTC. This complaint stated that it
is invoking the admiralty jurisdiction of the RTC to
enforce a maritime lien under Section 21 of the
Ship Mortgage Decree. It also alleged as a cause
of action MIS' unjustified refusal to pay the
amount it owes Tsuneishi under their contract.
The complaint included a prayer for the issuance
of arrest order/writ of preliminary attachment. To
support this prayer, the complaint alleged that
Section 21 of the Ship Mortgage Decree as well as
R57 on attachment authorize the issuance of an
order of arrest of vessel and/or writ of preliminary
attachment. Is a maritime lien in favor of the
applicant a ground for the issuance of a writ of
preliminary attachment?
A.

No. A maritime lien exists in accordance with the
provision of the Ship Mortgage Decree. It is enforced
by filing a proceeding in court. When a maritime lien
exists, this means that the party in whose favor the
lien was established may ask the court to enforce it by
ordering the sale of the subject property and using the
proceeds to settle the obligation.
On the other hand, a writ of preliminary
attachment is issued precisely to create a lien. Hence,
where a lien already exists, as in this case a maritime
lien, the same is already equivalent to an attachment.
Clearly, because it claims a maritime lien in
accordance with the Ship Mortgage Decree, all
Tsuneishi had to do is to file a proper action in court
for its enforcement. The issuance of a writ of
805

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
preliminary attachment on the pretext that it is the
only means to enforce a maritime lien is superfluous.
The reason that the Ship Mortgage Decree does not
provide for a detailed procedure for the enforcement
of a maritime lien is because it is not necessary.
Section 21 already provides for the simple procedurefile an action in rem before the court. (Tsuneishi
Heavy Industries v. MIS Maritime Corp., 4 April 2018,
Jardeleza, J.).
Q.

May an order of attachment issue ex parte?

A.

Yes pursuant to 32 R57. However the court may in
its sound discretion require that the application for
preliminary attachment be made by motion with notice
and hearing to the adverse party.

Q.

What is the reason for allowing the ex parte
issuance of an order of preliminary attachment?

A.

To avoid the possibility of the adverse party disposing
of his property or absconding while the application is
being heard. (Davao Light & Power Co. v. Court of
Appeals, 204 SCRA 343).

Q.

Give the stages of a preliminary attachment as set
forth in R57. (FOBOER)

A.
1) Filing of the application for issuance of writ of
preliminary attachment in the form of an affidavit.
2) Court issues the order granting the application.
The order fixes the amount of the attachment
bond (34 R57) but does not yet require the sheriff
to attach the property of the person against whom
it is issued.

806

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
3) The applicant must thereafter file the attachment
bond in the amount fixed by the court.
4)

The court issues the order of attachment, with
corresponding writ of attachment, requiring the
sheriff to attach the properties of the adverse
party as may be sufficient to satisfy the applicant's
demand. Several writs may be issued at the
same time to the sheriffs of the courts of different
judicial regions.

5) The writ of attachment is enforced by the sheriff
pursuant to 55&7 R57.
6) After enforcing the writ, the sheriff must make a
return thereon to the court from which the writ
issued. (S6 R57).
Q.

What does the order of attachment require the
sheriff to do?

A.

The order of attachment must require the sheriff of the
court to attach so much of the property in the
Philippines of the party against whom it is issued, not
exempt from execution, as may be sufficient to satisfy
the applicant's demand.

Q.

What are the requirements for the issuance of an
order of attachment? (AB)

A.
1) AFFIDAVIT. Affidavit of the applicant, or of some
other person who personally knows the facts that:
(COSA)
a) A sufficient cause of action exists,
b) The case is one of those mentioned in Si R57,

807

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
c) There is no other sufficient security for the
claim sought to be enforced by the action, and
d) The amount due to the applicant, or the value
of the property the possession of which he is
entitled to recover, is (deducting all legal
counterclaims) as much as the sum for which
the order is granted.
2) APPLICANT'S BOND OR ATTACHMENT BOND.
A bond executed to the adverse party in the
amount fixed by the court in its order granting the
issuance of the writ, conditioned that the
applicant will pay all the costs which may be
adjudged to the adverse party and all damages
which the adverse party may sustain by reason of
the attachment, if the court shall finally adjudge
that the applicant was not entitled to the
attachment (S4 R57).
The affidavit and the bond must be duly filed with
the court before the order of attachment issues.
(S3 R57).
Q.

A verified complaint with prayer for preliminary
attachment contained the allegations required
under S4 R57 but without a separate affidavit The
trial court denied the application for preliminary
attachment on the ground that there was no
affidavit. Was the denial correct?

A.

No. It is well-settled that a verified statement
incorporated in the complaint alleging the matters
under S4 R57 even without a separate affidavit is
sufficient and valid to obtain a preliminary attachment.
(Manacop v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 104875, 13
November 1992). Moreover, a verification itself is an
affidavit. (De/a Rosa v. Carlos, G.R. No. 147549, 23
October 2003). 54 R7 provides that "[a] pleading is
808

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
verified by an affidavit that the affiant has read the
pleading and that the allegations therein are true and
correct of his personal knowledge or based on
authentic records."
Q.

Is attachment available to a mortgagee in an
action to recover the mortgage debt where any
one of the grounds in S1 R57 exists?

A.

Generally no, for a requirement of the issuance of an
order of attachment is that "Mere is no other
sufficient security for the claim sought to be enforced
by the action." However in the following instances
attachment is available to the mortgagee.
1) When the mortgagee abandons his security and
brings an ordinary action for recovery of the debt,
in which case he may cause attachment to be
levied upon the very property on which the mortgage
was constituted. (Pepperel v. Taylor, 5 Phil. 536).
2) In foreclosure proceedings, if the mortgagee shows
by affidavit or otherwise that the proceeds from
the sale of the property mortgaged would not be
sufficient to pay the mortgage debt. (De los Reyes
v. CFI of Batangas, 55 Phil. 408).

Q.

What is the manner by which the sheriff shall
attach property?

A.

The sheriff enforcing the writ shall without delay and
with all reasonable diligence attach, to await judgment
and execution in the action, only so much of the
property in the Philippines of the party against
whom the writ is issued, not exempt from execution.
(S5 R57).

809

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the requirements for the enforcement of
a levy on attachment?

A.

No levy on attachment shall be enforced unless it is
preceded or contemporaneously accompanied by
service of summons together with (CABAWO) a copy
of the complaint, the application for attachment, the
applicant's affidavit and bond, and the order and writ
of attachment, on the defendant within the Philippines.

Q.

What are the exceptions to the requirement of
prior or contemporaneous service of summons?

A.

The requirement of prior or contemporaneous service
of summons shall not apply where: (SNIT)
1) The summons could not be served personally or
by substituted service despite diligent efforts.
2) The defendant is a Philippine resident temporarily
absent therefrom.
3) The defendant is a non-resident of the Philippines.
4) The action is one in rem or quasi in rem. (35 R57).

Q.

Perpetual Lumber, the supplier of construction
materials of Acme Builders, which has a running
account with the former, was paid by the latter
P500,000 in check. The check bounced due to
closed account. Despite timely written notice of
dishonor, Acme refused to pay Perpetual. Hence,
Perpetual filed a collection suit against Acme and
simultaneously applied ex parte for a writ of
attachment on the ground of fraud. No service of
summons and complaint was made upon Acme
Builders.
a)

Could the judge grant the application for writ
of attachment based on the ground cited by
Perpetual?
810

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
b)

Assume that the application was granted.
Could the sheriff forthwith proceed to levy on
the properties of Acme?

a)

Yes. Under the 1997 Rules (Sec. 1[d], Rule 57),
the grounds cover not only fraud in contracting
the debt but also to fraud in the performance of
the obligation.

b)

No. No levy on attachment shall be enforced
unless it is preceded or contemporaneously
accompanied by service of summons, together
with a copy of the complaint, the application for
attachment, the applicant's affidavit and bond,
and the order and writ of attachment. (S5 R57).

A.

Q.

Katy filed an action against Tyrone for collection
of P1 million in the RTC with an ex parte
application for a writ of preliminary attachment.
Upon posting of the attachment bond, the court
granted the application and issued a writ of
preliminary attachment.
Apprehensive that Tyrone might withdraw his
savings deposit with the bank, the sheriff immediately
served a notice of garnishment on the bank to
implement the writ of preliminary attachment The
following day, the sheriff proceeded to Tyrone's
house and served him the summons, with copies
of the complaint containing the application for
writ of preliminary attachment, Katy's affidavit,
order of attachment, writ of preliminary attachment,
and attachment bond.
Within 15 days from service of summons,
Tyrone filed a motion to dismiss and to dissolve
the writ of preliminary attachment on the following
grounds: (i) the court did not acquire jurisdiction
811

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
over his person because the writ was served
ahead of the summons; (ii) the writ was improperly
implemented; and (iii) said writ was improvidently
issued because the obligation in question was
already fully paid. Resolve the motion with reasons.
(05 Bar Q7)
A.

The motion to dismiss and to dissolve the writ of
preliminary attachment should be denied.
The motion to dismiss on the ground that the
court did not acquire jurisdiction over Tyrone's person
because the writ was served ahead of the summons
should be denied. The trial court already acquired
jurisdiction over Tyrone upon the service of the
summons upon him. Any irregularity in the service of
the writ of attachment would only affect the enforceability
of the attachment but has no effect on the acquisition
of jurisdiction over Tyrone's person since preliminary
attachment is only ancillary to the main action.
The motion to dissolve the writ on the ground
that the same was improperly implemented should be
denied. The improper implementation of the writ does
not affect the validity of the writ itself although it
affects the validity of the enforcement of the writ.
(See &late v. Abrogar, G.R. No. 107303, 23 February
1995). The proper remedy for Tyrone is to file a
motion to discharge the attachment on his bank
deposit on the ground that the attachment was
irregularly or improperly enforced. Under S13 R57 an
attachment may be discharged on the ground that the
same was improperly or irregularly enforced. Here the
attachment was improperly or irregularly enforced
since the notice of garnishment was served on the
bank without any prior or contemporaneous service of

812

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
summons. The subsequent service of summons does
not cure the invalidity of the garnishment of the bank
deposit. (Onate v. Abrogar, G.R. No. 107303, 23
February 1995).
The motion to dissolve the writ on the ground of
payment should also be denied. It is not proper to
move for the dissolution of a writ on the ground of
payment. Such a ground should be raised in a motion
to dismiss or in the answer as an affirmative defense.
In both cases, Tyrone should adduce evidence of the
fact of payment. For the court to dissolve the writ of
preliminary attachment on the ground of payment
would be tantamount to resolving the main action
already. (See Davao Light & Power Co. v. Court of
Appeals, 204 SCRA 343).
Q.

In a case for sum of money, the trial court granted
ex parte the prayer for issuance of a writ of
preliminary attachment The writ was immediately
implemented by the sheriff. The defendant filed a
motion to discharge the writ of preliminary attachment
on the ground that it was issued and implemented
prior to service of summons. Plaintiffs opposed
arguing that under the Rules of Court, the writ can
be applied for and granted at the commencement
of the action or at any time thereafter. In any
event, plaintiff argues that the summons which
was eventually served cured whatever irregularities
that might have attended the enforcement of the
writ How would you rule on the conflicting
contentions of the parties? (96 Bar Q9.4).

A.

I would rule on the conflicting contentions of the
parties as follows.
The defendant's ground that the writ of
attachment was issued prior to service of summons
was not meritorious since the writ can be applied for
813

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
and granted at the commencement of the action. (Si
R57). The ground however that the writ was
implemented prior to the service of summons is
meritorious since the enforcement of the writ as a rule
can only be done after or during the service of
summons. (S5 R57).
The plaintiff's argument that the eventual service
of summons cured the irregularity in the enforcement
is without merit. The Supreme Court has held that the
subsequent service of summons will not cure the
irregularities that attended the enforcement of the writ.
(Onate v. Abrogar, 23 February 1995).
I would grant the defendant's motion. Since the
attachment was improperly or irregularly enforced, it
may be discharged. (S13 R57). Properly speaking
what should be discharged is the attachment, i.e., the
enforcement of the writ, not the writ of attachment
itself which was validly issued. This semantic
imperfection should be overlooked and defendant's
motion treated as one to discharge the attachment
rather than the writ of attachment.
Q.

A sues B for collection of a sum of money.
Alleging fraud in the contracting of the loan, A
applies for preliminary attachment with the court.
The Court issues the preliminary attachment after
A files a bond. While summons on B was yet
unserved, the sheriff attached B's properties.
Afterwards, summons was duly served on B. B
moves to lift the attachment. Rule on this. (12 Bar
Essay Q8a)

A.

Motion to lift attachment granted. The rule is that an
attachment cannot be enforced unless done prior to
or simultaneous with the service of summons and
other accompanying papers. (S5 R57).
814

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Here the summons was not yet served at the
time of the attachment. The subsequent service of
summons will not cure the irregularities that attended
the enforcement of the writ. (Onate v. Abrogar, 23
February 1995).
Q.

Outline the manner by which the sheriff shall
attach real and personal property.

A.
1) Real property, or growing crops thereon, or any
interest therein. This is attached by filing with the
registry of deeds a copy of the order of attachment,
together with a description of the property
attached and a notice that it is attached, and by
leaving a copy of such order, description, and
notice with the occupant of the property. Note that
even if the real property is not registered with the
registry of deeds, the attachment may be registered
pursuant to Sec. 113(d) of P.D. No. 1529.
2)

Personal property capable of manual delivery.
Attached by taking and safely keeping it in his custody,
after issuing the corresponding receipt therefor.

3)

Stocks or shares in a company. Attached by
leaving with the president or managing agent
thereof, a copy of the writ, and a notice stating
that the stock or interest of the party against
whom the attachment is issued is attached in
pursuance of such writ.

4) Debts and credits, and other personal property not
capable of manual delivery. Debts and credits,
including bank deposits, financial interest, royalties,
commissions and other personal property not
capable of manual delivery, are attached by leaving
with the person owing such debts, or having in his
possession or under his control, such credits or
815

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

•
5)

other personal property, or with his agent, a copy
of the writ and notice that the debts owing by him
to the party against whom attachment is issued,
and the credits and other personal property in his
possession, or under his control, belonging to
said party, are attached in pursuance of the writ.
Interest in estate of the decedent. Attached by
serving the executor or administrator or other
personal representative of the decedent with a
copy of the writ and notice that said interest is
attached. A copy of the writ and notice shall also
be filed in the office of the clerk of the court in
which said estate is being settled and served upon
the heir, legatee or devisee concerned. (S7 R57).

Q.

May property in custodia legis be attached?

A.

Yes. In such a case, a copy of the writ of attachment
shall be filed with the proper court or quasi-judicial
agency, and notice of the attachment served upon the
custodian of such property. (S7 R57).

Q.

What is the effect of attachment of debts, credits
and all other similar personal property (garnishment)?

A.

All persons having in their possession or under their
control any credits or other similar personal property
belonging to the party against whom attachment is
issued, or owing any debts to him, at the time of service
upon them of the copy of the writ of attachment and
notice as provided in S7(d) R57, shall be liable to the
applicant for the amount of such credits, debts or
other similar personal property, until the attachment is
discharged, or any judgment recovered by him is
satisfied, unless such property is delivered or transferred,
or such other debts are paid, to the clerk, sheriff, or
other proper court officer of the court issuing the
attachment. (38 R57).
816

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Q.

A writ of preliminary attachment was issued by
the trial court and, on the basis thereof, defendant's
credit balance with a stockholder was garnished.
Can the court order the stockbroker to surrender
that credit balance to plaintiff or to the sheriff?
(80 Bar Q7ed).

A.

The court may order the stockbroker to surrender the
credit balance to the sheriff. This is sanctioned by the
last part of S8 R57 which provides that the garnished
debt may be paid to the clerk, sheriff, or other proper
court officer of the court issuing the attachment. The
evident purpose is to secure the garnished credit.
The court however may not order the
stockbroker to surrender the credit balance to the
plaintiff. Preliminary attachment is merely provisional
and problems could arise if the plaintiff were to lose in
the main action. Compare this with garnishment on
execution under S9(c) R39 wherein the garnishee
must deliver directly to the judgment obligee the
garnished amount.

Q.

Does the attachment of an interest in property
belonging to the estate of a decedent impair the
powers of the executor, administrator, or other
personal representative over the property belonging
to the estate?

A.

The attachment of the interest of an heir, legatee, or
devisee in the property belonging to the estate of a
decedent shall not impair the powers of the executor,
administrator, or other personal representative of the
decedent over such property for the purpose of
administration. (S9 R57).

817

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May the executor, administrator, or other personal
representative of the decedent distribute the
property attached?

A.

Yes. Distribution may be awarded to the heir, legatee,
or devisee, but the property attached shall be ordered
delivered to the sheriff making the levy, subject to the
claim of the heir, legatee, or devisee. (S9 R57).

Q.

What remedies are available to a party when a writ
of attachment is issued or enforced against him?

A.
1) He may prevent the enforcement of the writ of
attachment or move for its lifting if he makes a
cash deposit or gives a counterbond in an
amount equal to that fixed in the order of
attachment, which may be the amount sufficient
to satisfy the applicant's demand or the value of
the property to be attached. (32 & 5 R57). No
notice and hearing is required.
2) He may move to discharge the attachment which
has been enforced if he makes a cash deposit or
files a counterbond executed to the attaching
party with the clerk of court where the application
is made, in an amount equal to that fixed by the
court in the order of attachment, exclusive of
costs. (S12 R57).
3) He may move to discharge the attachment on the
ground that the same was improperly or
irregularly issued or enforced, or that the bond is
insufficient, or that the attachment is excessive.
(S13 R57). In 2 & 3, the court may discharge the
attachment only after notice and hearing.

818

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Q.

May the adverse party against whom a writ of
attachment has been issued move for its lifting by
depositing real property instead of depositing
cash or filing a counter-bond?

A.

No. The word "deposit" in S2 & 5 R57 can only be
construed to refer to cash. A broader interpretation
thereof is not justified in the present case for the
reason that a party seeking a stay of the attachment
under S5 is required to make a deposit in an amount
equal to the bond fixed by the court in the order of
attachment or to the value of the property to be
attached. The proximate relation of the word "deposit"
and "amount" is unmistakable in 85 R57. Plainly, in
construing said words, it can be safely concluded that
85 requires the deposit of money as the word
"amount" commonly refers to or is regularly associated
with a sum of money. (Luzon Dev't Bank v. Krishnan,
13 April 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

D sold an Amorsolo painting to P for P10 million.
P later filed an action for annulment of the
contract on the ground that D had defrauded him
by selling a fake Amorsolo painting. P was able
to obtain the issuance of a writ of attachment
against D on the ground of fraud. D moved to
discharge the attachment on the ground that there
was no fraud since the painting was a genuine
Amorsolo. May the court entertain the motion?

A.

No. The Supreme Court has held that an attachment
may not be dissolved by a showing of its irregular or
improper issuance if it is upon a ground which is at
the same time the applicant's cause of action in the
main case since an anomalous situation would result
if the issues of the main case would be ventilated and
resolved in a mere hearing of a motion. Here the

819

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
issue of fraud is determinative of whether P is entitled
to the annulment of the contract of sale. Hence the
resolution of the motion to discharge would in effect
pre-empt the trial on the merits of the case. (See
Davao Light & Power Co. v. Court of Appeals, 204
SCRA 343). D's remedy is to file a counterbond.
Q.

Petitioner filed a complaint before the RTC
against the private respondents for sum of money
plus damages with a prayer for the issuance of a
writ of preliminary attachment. The application for
preliminary attachment alleged that the private
respondents induced petitioner to grant the loan
by issuing postdated checks to cover the installment
and interest payments. The RTC issued an order
granting the issuance of the writ of preliminary
attachment and the same was enforced against
the property of the private respondents. The
private respondents filed a motion to discharge
the attachment on the ground that the same was
improperly or irregularly issued. They contended
that there was no fraud since the Petitioner was
aware that the postdated checks were unfunded
at the time of issuance and were merely issued for
the purpose of creating an evidence of a preexisting obligation. May the RTC entertain the
motion to discharge the attachment?

A.

No. An attachment may not be dissolved by a
showing of its irregular or improper issuance if it is
upon a ground which is at the same time the
applicant's cause of action in the main case since an
anomalous situation would result if the issues of the
main case would be ventilated and resolved in a mere
hearing of a motion. Here the issue of fraud is clearly
within the competence of the trial court in the main
case. (Cuartero v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
102448, 5 August 1992).
820

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Q.

Wolfe was an employee of Watercraft Venture
Corporation who was subsequently dismissed
from work. During his employment, Wolfe stored
the sailboat, Knotty Gull, within Watercraft's boat
storage facilities, but never paid for the storage
fees. Sometime in June 2002, Wolfe pulled out his
sailboat from Watercraft's storage facilities after
signing a Boat Pull-Out Clearance where he
allegedly acknowledged the outstanding obligation
of US$16,324.82 representing unpaid boat storage
fees for the period of June 1997 to June 2002.
Despite repeated demands, he failed to pay the
said amount. Thus, Watercraft filed against Wolfe
a Complaint for Collection of Sum of Money with
Damages with an Application for the Issuance of a
Writ of Preliminary Attachment.
Wolfe filed a Motion to Discharge the Writ of
Attachment, arguing that Watercraft failed to
show the existence of fraud and that the mere
failure to pay or perform an obligation does not
amount to fraud. The motion was opposed by
Watercraft on the ground that when the
preliminary attachment is issued upon a ground
which is at the same time the applicant's cause of
action; e.g., fraud, the defendant is not allowed to
file a motion to dissolve the attachment under S13
R57 by offering to show the falsity of the factual
averments in the plaintiffs application and affidavits
on which the writ was based — and consequently
that the writ based thereon had been improperly
or irregularly issued — the reason being that the
hearing on such a motion for dissolution of the
writ would be tantamount to a trial of the merits of
the action. May the trial court dissolve the
attachment?

821

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes. The rule cited by Watercraft is not applicable in
this case because when Wolfe filed a motion to
dissolve the writ of preliminary attachment, he did not
offer to show the falsity of the factual averments in
Watercraft's application and affidavit on which the writ
was based. Instead, he sought the discharge of the
writ on the ground that Watercraft failed to particularly
allege any circumstance amounting to fraud.
No trial on the merits of the action at a mere
hearing of such motion will be had since only the
sufficiency of the factual averments in the application
and affidavit of merit will be examined in order to find
out whether or not Wolfe was guilty of fraud in
contracting the debt or incurring the obligation upon
which the action is brought, or in the performance
thereof Here the allegation in the application for
preliminary attachment that Wolfe pulled out his
sailboat from Watercraft's storage facilities after signing a
Boat Pull-Out Clearance where he allegedly acknowledged
the outstanding obligation but did not pay it despite
demands did not particularly allege any circumstance
amounting to fraud but was simply an averment of a
non-payment of an obligation. The applicant for a writ
of preliminary attachment must sufficiently show the
factual circumstances of the alleged fraud because
fraudulent intent cannot be inferred from the debtor's
mere non-payment of the debt or failure to comply
with his obligation. (Watercraft Venture Corp. v.
Wolfe, 9 September 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Upon failure of X to pay the promissory note for
P500,000 which he executed in favor of Y, the
latter filed a complaint for sum of money with
application for the issuance of a writ of preliminary
attachment alleging therein that X is about to
dispose of his properties in fraud of his creditors.

822

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
a) May the court issue the writ immediately upon
the filing of the complaint and before service
of summons?
b) Is hearing on the application necessary?
c) If the writ was issued and X filed a motion to
quash the attachment, may the motion be
granted ex parte? (91 Bar Q6ed).
A.
a) Yes, because Si R57 provides that attachment
may issue at the commencement of the action.
b) No, because S2 R57 provides that the order of
attachment may be issued ex pane. The ex parte
issuance of the writ would be justified since there
was an allegation that X, is about to fraudulently
dispose of his property.
c) No, because under S12 and S13 R57, notice and
hearing is required before an attachment is
quashed or discharged upon motion.
Q.

Petitioner filed an action for collection of
P2,160,000 against the Respondents arising from
the issuance by the latter of checks which were
later dishonored. The complaint was accompanied
by an application for preliminary attachment
which was granted by the RTC. Subsequently in
2006 the Petitioner and the Respondents entered
into a compromise agreement wherein the
Respondents agreed to pay their obligation by
way of installments from 2006 to 2013. The
compromise agreement was approved by the RTC
which thus rendered a compromise judgment.
The Respondents forthwith moved for the discharge
of the preliminary attachment. The RTC granted
823

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the motion holding that since the main case had
already been closed and terminated by the
compromise judgment, the preliminary attachment,
which is merely ancillary, should be lifted or
discharge. Was the lifting or discharge of the
preliminary attachment proper?
A.

No. While the provisions of R57 are silent on the
length of time within which an attachment lien shall
continue to subsist after the rendition of a final
judgment, jurisprudence dictates that the said lien
continues until the debt is paid, or the sale is had
under execution issued on the judgment or until
the judgment is satisfied, or the attachment
discharged or vacated in the same mannerprovided
by law. Here, while the parties have entered into a
compromise agreement which had already been
approved by the RTC in its compromise judgment, the
obligations thereunder have yet to be fully complied
with. Hence, given that the foregoing debt remains
unpaid, the attachment of Respondents' properties
should have continued to subsist. (Lim v. Lazaro, 3
July 2013, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

What is a third-party claim?

A.

A remedy afforded to a third-party with a claim to
property levied, attached, or seized by virtue of court
order, wherein the third-party makes an affidavit of his
title or right of possession to the property and serves
the affidavit upon the court officer and a copy upon
the party procuring the levy, attachment, or seizure. It
is available to a third-party in cases of levy on
execution (S16 R39), attachment (S14 R57), and
replevin (Si R60). It is also referred to as terceria.

824

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Q.

Discuss briefly the procedure for making a thirdparty claim under S14 R57.

A.
1) The third-party shall make an affidavit showing his
title to or right of possession over the property.
2) He shall serve the affidavit upon the court officer
and a copy upon the attaching party.
3) Thereafter the officer is not bound to keep the
property, unless the attaching party, on demand
of the officer, files a bond approved by the court
to indemnify the third-party claimant in a sum not
less than the value of the property levied. The
officer shall not be liable for damages for the
taking or keeping of the property to any thirdparty claimant if the indemnity bond is filed.
4) A claim for damages for the taking or keeping of
the property may be enforced by the third-party
against the bond provided he files an action
within 120 days from the filing of the bond.
Q.

What are the remedies available to a third-party
with a claim to title or possession of property
which is attached?

A.

The remedies of the third-party are:
1) Third-party claim or terceria under S14 R57.
2.)

Motion to intervene. This is because the third
party "is so situated as to be adversely affected
by a distribution or other disposition of property in
the custody of the court, or of an officer thereof."
(S1 R19). Also under 814 R57 on third-party
claim, it is provided that "nothing herein contained

825

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
shall prevent such claimant or any third person
from vindicating his claim to the property ... in the
same or a separate action."
3) An action to claim damages on the indemnity bond if
one is filed.
4) A separate action to recover possession of the
property from the officer or the purchaser at the
execution sale.
Q.

If a third-party claimant has availed of a thirdparty claim but is unable to recover the property,
may he still file a separate action to recover
possession?

A

Yes. Nothing contained in S14 R57 shall prevent the
third-party claimant from vindicating his claim to the
property in the same or a separate action. (S16 R39).

Q.

What is the remedy of the judgment obligee
against a third-party claimant who filed a frivolous
or plainly spurious claim?

A.

He may claim damages against the third-party
claimant in the same case or he can file a separate
action for damages. (S14 R57).

Q.

What are the instances when a party whose
property was attached may obtain damages against
the attaching patty on account of the attachment?

A.

When the attachment is improper, irregular, or
excessive. Improper means that there was no valid
ground for attachment. Irregular means that although
there was a valid ground for attachment, the proper
procedure was not followed as when the attachment
was effected even prior to service of summons.
Excessive means that more property than is necessary
to secure a favorable judgment was attached.
826

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
Q.

May the defendant recover damages on account
of the attachment even if the judgment was in
favor of the plaintiff?

A.

Yes, if the attachment was improper, irregular, or
excessive. Thus in a sum of money case, even if the
plaintiff wins, defendant can seek damages if the
attachment enforced against him was not supported
by any of the grounds upon which attachment may issue
as set forth in Si R57. (Baron v. David, 51 Phil. 1).

Q.

From whom may the party recover damages in
case of improper, irregular, or excessive attachment?

A.

From the attaching party or from the surety which
issued the applicant's bond. The party seeking damages
must file an application for damages. The application
may be in the form of a counterclaim in the answer or
by way of motion.

Q.

When and where should the application for
damages on account of attachment be filed?

A.

An application for damages on account of improper,
irregular, or excessive attachment must be filed
before the trial or before appeal is perfected or before
the judgment becomes executory, with due notice to
the attaching party and his surety or sureties, setting
forth the facts showing his right to damages and the
amount thereof Such damages shall be awarded
only after proper hearing and shall be included in the
judgment on the main case. (S20 R57).
If the judgment of the appellate court be
favorable to the party against whom the attachment
was issued, he must claim damages sustained durind
the pendency of the appeal by filing an application in
the appellate court, with notice to the party in whose
favor the attachment was issued or his surety or
sureties, before the judgment of the appellate court
827

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
becomes executory. The appellate court may allow
the application to be heard and decided by the trial
court. (520 R57). Take note that the procedure in the
2 nd paragraph of 520 R57 applies only to damages
sustained during the pendency of the appeal. If the
aggrieved party did not file an application with the trial
court, he cannot seek damages sustained during the
pendency of the trial by filing an application with the
appellate court.
Q.

Is the liability of the attaching party on account of
improper, irregular, or excessive attachment limited
to the amount of the bond?

A.

No. S20 R57 states that nothing contained therein by
prevent the party against whom attachment was
issued from recovering in the same action the
damages awarded to him from any property of the
attaching party not exempt from execution should the
bond or deposit given by the attaching party be
insufficient or fail to fully satisfy the award.
Note that the surety's liability however is limited
to the amount of the bond. Under Article 2055 of the
Civil Code a guaranty cannot extend to more than
what is stipulated therein.

Q.

Distinguish between the applicant's bond and the
counterbond.

A.

AS TO WHO POSTS. The applicant's bond is posted
by the applicant while the counterbond is posted by
the party against whom attachment is issued.
AS TO PURPOSE. The purpose of the applicant's
bond is to obtain a writ of preliminary attachment
while the counterbond aims to prevent or discharge a
preliminary attachment.

828

Rule 57
Preliminary Attachment
AS TO LIABILITY OF BOND. The applicant's
bond shall answer for all the costs which may be
adjudged to the adverse party and all damages which
he may sustain by reason of the attachment, if the
court shall finally adjudge that the applicant was not
entitled thereto, while the counterbond secures the
payment of the judgment which the applicant may be
entitled to.
AS TO REQUIREMENT OF NOTICE AND
HEARING TO SURETY. The liability of the sureties
under the applicant's bond must be enforced by an
application after motion with due notice has been
given to the applicant and the sureties and after
proper hearing, while in a counterbond, the sureties
thereon are forthwith charged under the judgment and
their liability may be recovered after notice and
summary hearing in the same action.
Q.

S20 R57, which governs the procedure for
recovering on the attachment bond, requires
notice and hearing before the finality of judgment
in an application for damages, while S17 R57,
which governs the procedure for recovering on
the counterbond, allows the notice and hearing to
the surety after the judgment has become executory.
What is the reason for the difference?

A.

The answer lies in the kind of damages sought to be
enforced against the bond. Under 320 R57, in relation
to 84 R57, the surety bond shall answer for all the
costs which may be adjudged to the adverse party
and all damages which he may sustain by reason of
the attachment. In other words, the damages sought
to be enforced against the surety bond are
unliquidated. Necessarily, a notice and hearing
before the finality of judgment must be undertaken to
properly determine the amount of damages that was
829

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
suffered by the defendant due to the improper
attachment. These damages to be imposed against
the attaching party and his sureties are different from
the principal case, and must be included in the
judgment.
On the other hand, under 317 R57, in relation to
312 R57, the cash deposit or the counter-bond shall
secure the payment of any judgment that the
attaching party may recover in the action. Stated
differently, the damages sought to be charged against
the surety bond are liquidated. The final judgment
had already determined the amount to be awarded to
the winning litigant on the main action. Thus, there is
nothing left to do but to execute the judgment against
the losing party, or in case of insufficiency, against its
sureties. (Excellent Quality Apparel, Inc. v. Visayan
Surety& Insurance Corp., 1 July 2015, Mendoza, J.).
Q.

Is there a need for execution to be returned
unsatisfied so that the surety on the counterbond
shall become charged thereon?

A.

No. Unlike the 1964 Rules, there is no more need for
execution to be returned unsatisfied in order that the
surety on the counterbond shall become charged
thereon. It is enough that the judgment against the
party on whom attachment was issued has become
executory and that there is notice to the sureties and
a summary hearing. (S17 R57). This amendment
brings R57 in line with Article 2059(2) of the Civil
Code which provides that the benefit of excussion is
not available to a surety.

830

RULE 58. PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION
Q.

Define a preliminary injunction.

A.

A preliminary injunction is an order granted at any
stage of an action or proceeding prior to the judgment
or final order, requiring a party or a court, agency,
or a person to refrain from a particular act or acts.
(S1 R58)

Q.

Define a preliminary mandatory injunction.

A.

A preliminary mandatory injunction is an order
granted at any stage of an action or proceeding prior
to the judgment or final order, requiring a party or a
court, agency, or a person to perform a particular act
or acts. (S1 R58)

Q.

Can injunction be a main action?

A.

Yes injunction, aside from being a provisional remedy,
may also be an action by itself. Jurisdiction over an
action for injunction is vested exclusively in the
Regional Trial Court as the subject of the litigation is
incapable of pecuniary estimation. (See also Sec.
21[1], B.P. Blg. 129). In the main action for injunction,
the petitioner may apply for the issuance of a writ of
preliminary injunction.

Q.

Distinguish
injunction.

A.

Preliminary injunction is one issued prior to judgment
or final order, while a final injunction is issued if after
the trial of the action it appears that the applicant is
entitled to have the act or acts complained of permanently
enjoined, in which case the court shall grant a final
injunction perpetually restraining the party or person

preliminary

831

injunction

from final

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
enjoined from the commission or continuance of the
act or acts or confirming the preliminary mandatory
injunction. (S9 R58). Preliminary injunction is thus
provisional while final injunction is permanent.
Q.

Distinguish injunction from prohibition.

A.

Injunction is generally directed against a person not
exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions,
while prohibition is directed against a tribunal,
corporation, board, officer or person exercising judicial,
quasi-judicial or ministerial functions.
Injunction may be the main action itself, or just a
provisional remedy in the main action, whereas
prohibition is always a main action.
Where an action for prohibition is filed, the
petitioner may seek the provisional remedy of preliminary
injunction against the respondent.

Q.

Distinguish mandatory injunction from mandamus.

A.

The purpose of mandatory injunction is to compel a
party to do a particular act in order to restore the last
actual peaceable uncontested status which preceded
the pending controversy, while mandamus seeks the
to compel the performance of a ministerial duty.
Mandamus is always a main action while
mandatory injunction may be a main action or a
provisional remedy. Thus in an action for mandamus
the petitioner may pray for the issuance of a writ of
preliminary mandatory injunction.

Q.

What is a status quo ante order? How is it
distinguished from a temporary restraining order?

A.

A status quo ante order is an equitable remedy
intended to maintain the status quo ante, i.e. the last
actual, peaceable, uncontested state of things which
832

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
preceded the controversy. It is distinguished from a
TRO in that it is issued by the court motu proprio, that
is, there is no application therefor or the allegations of
the pleadings do not make out a case for the issuance
of a TRO. Also unlike a TRO, no bond is required for
the issuance of a status quo ante order. (Mega-World
Properties & Holdings Inc. v. Majestic Finance &
Investment Co., 9 December 2015, Bersamin, J.).
Q.

In a dispute between a developer and the
landowner, the trial court issued a status quo ante
order directing the developer to post security guards
on the property subject of the joint-venture
agreement. Was the issuance of the status quo
ante order proper?

A.

No. The purpose of a status quo ante order is to
maintain the status quo ante, that is, the last actual,
peaceable, uncontested state of things prior to the
controversy. Here the last actual, peaceable, uncontested
status prior to the controversy was that there were no
security guards in the premises. Furthermore a status
quo ante order by its nature cannot require the doing
(or undoing) of acts. (Mega-World Properties &
Holdings Inc. v. Majestic Finance & Investment Co., 9
December 2015, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

Give some instances when the law bars the
issuance of a preliminary injunction or temporary
restraining order. (CATE FLAGS)

A.
1) COLLECTION OF TAXES. No court shall have the
authority to enjoin the collection of any tax, fee, or
charge imposed under the National Internal
Revenue Code. (R.A. No. 8424).

833

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) LABOR DISPUTE. A court cannot issue a
temporary or permanent injunction in cases growing
out of a labor dispute. (Art. 254, Labor Code).
3) GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS.
No court, except the Supreme Court may issue a
temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, or
preliminary mandatory injunction against the
implementation or completion of government
infrastructure projects. (R.A. No. 8975).
4) ASSET PRIVATIZATION TRUST. An injunction
cannot be issued against the Asset Privatization
Trust. (Proclamation No. 50-A [1986]). The
functions of the APT have now been taken over
by the Privatization and Management Office of
the Department of Finance.
5)

AGRARIAN REFORM. No court shall issue any
restraining order or preliminary injunction against
the Presidential Agrarian Reform Council or any
of its duly authorized or designated agencies in
any case arising from, necessary to, or in
connection with the application, implementation,
enforcement, or interpretation of the Comprehensive
Agrarian Reform Law and other pertinent laws on
agrarian reform. (Sec. 55, Comprehensive Agrarian
Reform Law).

6) FORECLOSURE BY GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION. No restraining order or preliminary
injunction can be issued against a government
financial institution in connection with the
foreclosure of any collateral unless 20% of the
arrears have been paid after the filing of the
foreclosure proceeding. (Sec. 2, P.D. No. 385).

834

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
7) EXTRAJUDICIAL FORECLOSURE. No TRO or
WPI against the extrajudicial foreclosure of real
estate mortgage shall be issued on the allegation
that the loan secured by the mortgage has been
paid or is not delinquent unless the application is
verified and supported by evidence of payment.
No TRO or WPI against the extrajudicial
foreclosure of real estate mortgage shall be
issued on the allegation that the interest on the
loan is unconscionable, unless the debtor pays
the mortgagee at least six percent per annum
interest on the principal obligation as stated in the
application for foreclosure sale, which shall be
updated monthly while the case is pending. (A.M.
No. 99-10-05-0; BSP Circular No. 799, S. of
2013; Tumon v. Radiowealth Finance Co., 18
March 2021).
8) CONSERVATORSHIP, RECEIVERSHIP, AND
LIQUIDATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE
NEW CENTRAL BANK ACT. The actions of the
Monetary Board in respect of conservatorship,
receivership, and liquidation proceedings shall
not be restrained except on petition for certiorari
on the ground that the action taken was in excess
of jurisdiction or with such grave abuse of
discretion as to amount to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction. The petition for certiorari may only be
filed by the stockholders of record representing
the majority of the capital stock within 10 days
from receipt by the board of directors of the
institution of the order directing conservatorship,
receivership, or liquidation. (Sec. 30, New Central
Bank Act).

835

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
9) SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION. No
court below the Court of Appeals shall have
jurisdiction to issue a restraining order, preliminary
injunction, or preliminary mandatory injunction in
any case, dispute, or controversy that directly or
indirectly interferes with the exercise of the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the SEC
that falls exclusively within its jurisdiction. (Sec.
179, Revised Corporation Code).
Q.

Petitioners filed an action for injunction against
the DPWH to stop the elevation of the national
highway which would cause flooding and other
damage to their property. Upon the DPWH's
motion, the RTC dismissed the case stating that it
is without jurisdiction to try the case. The RTC
invoked Section 3 of R.A. No. 8975 which provides
that no court, except the Supreme Court, shall
issue any temporary restraining order, preliminary
injunction or preliminary mandatory injunction
against national government infrastructure projects.
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. The preclusion under R.A. No. 8975 applies only
to the issuance of a TRO or writ of preliminary
injunction, not to the filing of an action seeking the
issuance of a final injunction. (SoIler v. Singson, 3
February 2020, Reyes, J.).

Q.

A complaint-affidavit was filed with the Office of
the Ombudsman against Mayor Jejomar Binay Jr.
charging him with plunder and violation of the
Anti-Graft Law in connection with the construction
of the Makati City Hall Parking Building. The OMB
issued an order placing Binay under preventive
suspension without pay for not more than 6
months during the pendency of the investigation.

836

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
Binay filed a petition for certiorari with the Court
of Appeals seeking the nullification of the preventive
suspension order and praying for the issuance of
a TRO and/or writ of preliminary injunction to
enjoin its implementation. The CA issued a TRO
enjoining the implementation of the preventive
suspension order. The Ombudsman argued that
the CA cannot issue the TRO, invoking the first
paragraph of Section 14 of R.A. No. 6770 or the
Ombudsman Act which reads as follows:
Section 14. Restrictions. — No writ of injunction
shall be issued by any court to delay an
investigation being conducted by the Ombudsman
under this Act, unless there is a prima facie
evidence that the subject matter of the investigation
is outside the jurisdiction of the Office of the
Ombudsman.
Was the Ombudsman correct?
A.

No. When Congress passed the first paragraph of
Section 14, RA 6770 and, in so doing, took away from
the courts their power to issue a TRO and/or writ of
preliminary injunction to enjoin an investigation
conducted by the Ombudsman, it encroached upon
this Court's constitutional rule-making authority under
Section 5(5), Article VIII. Clearly, these issuances,
which are, by nature, provisional reliefs and auxiliary
writs created under the provisions of the Rules of
Court, are matters of procedure which belong
exclusively within the province of this Court. R58 did
not create, define, and regulate a right but merely
prescribed the means of implementing an existing
right since it only provided for temporary reliefs to
preserve the applicant's right in ease which is threatened
to be violated during the course of a pending litigation.

837

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Hence the first paragraph of Section 14 of RA 6770 is
unconstitutional and void. (Carpio Morales v. Court of
Appeals, 10 November 2015, e.b., Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
The policy against the issuance of provisional
injunctive writs by courts other than the Supreme
Court to enjoin an investigation conducted by the
Office of the Ombudsman under the first paragraph of
Section 14 of RA 6770 is declared INEFFECTIVE
until the Court adopts the same as part of the rules of
procedure through an administrative circular duly
issued therefor. (Id.).151
Q.

Can a Regional Trial Court issue a TRO or writ of
preliminary injunction against decisions of the
Ombudsman in administrative disciplinary cases?

A.

No, the RTC has no power to issue a TRO or writ of
preliminary injunction to interfere with or restrain the
decisions of the Ombudsman in disciplinary cases.
Where the decisions of quasi-judicial bodies are
appealable to the Court of Appeals, such as decisions
of the Ombudsman in administrative disciplinary
cases, these quasi-judicial bodies are co-equal to the
RTC. (DILG v. Gatuz, 14 October 2015; OCA Circular
No. 221-2019 dated 5 December 2019).

Q.

The residents of Dasmarifias Village, Makati City,
filed against the NAPOCOR a complaint for
damages with a prayer for the issuance of a writ of
preliminary injunction and/or temporary restraining
order. The Plaintiffs sought to enjoin NAPOCOR
from energizing and transmitting high voltage

151The Carpi° Morales ruling by its express terms covers the ban on TROs
and writs of injunction issued against investigations by the OMB under Section
14 of R.A. No. 6770. The applicability of the ratio decidendi to other laws barring
the issuance of TROs and writs of preliminary injunction, i.e., the ban on the
issuance of court injunctions against the collection of taxes imposed under the
National Internal Revenue Code, needs further examination.

838

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
electric current through its cables erected from
Sucat, Paranaque to Araneta Avenue, Quezon
City. The Plaintiffs allege that NAPOCOR failed to
comply with Section 27 of the Local Government
Code requiring prior consultation prior to the
implementation of a government project and that
the electromagnetic fields are harmful to their
health. They allege that unless the restraining
order is issued, grave and irreparable injury to
their health would ensue. NAPOCOR argues that
the court is prohibited from issuing a temporary
restraining order and preliminary injunction
against an infrastructure project by virtue of PD
1818. May the trial court issue a restraining order
against NAPOCOR?
A.

Yes. While PD 1818 prohibits any court from issuing
injunctions or restraining orders in cases involving
infrastructure projects, the prohibition extends only to
the issuance of injunctions in administrative acts in
controversies involving facts or the exercise of
discretion in technical cases. The issues of whether
there is a violation of the plaintiffs' constitutionally
protected right to health under Section 15, Article II
and whether NAPOCOR had violated Section 27 of
the Local Government Code are questions of law
which divest the case from the protective mantle of
PD 1818. (Hernandez v. National Power Corp., G.R.
145328, 23 March 2006).

Q.

In a decision in Civil Case No. 93-1000 which
became final and executory, the RTC of Manila
(Branch 21) issued a writ of execution for its
enforcement. The sheriff levied upon certain
chattels and scheduled the auction sale thereof.

839

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
However, Santamaria filed a third-party claim
with the sheriff asserting that the chattels levied
upon by the latter belong to him and not to the
judgment debtor. Because the judgment obligee
posted an indemnity bond in favor of the thirdparty claimant, the sheriff refused to release the
chattels and stated that he would proceed with
the auction sale.
Hence Santamaria filed with the RTC of
Bulacan (Branch 8) an action against the
judgment obligee and the sheriff for the recovery
of the chattels and seeking to enjoin the auction
sale. The RTC of Bulacan in due course issued a
writ of preliminary injunction enjoining the sheriff
from proceeding with the auction sale. The
judgment creditor and the sheriff filed a motion to
dismiss stating that Santamaria can no longer file
a separate action since he had already filed a
third-party claim and that the auction sale cannot
be enjoined since a court cannot interfere with the
judgment of a coordinate court. How should the
motion to dismiss be resolved? (93 Bar Q8 ed).
A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied. Nothing
contained in S16 R39 shall prevent the third-party
claimant from vindicating his claim to the property in a
separate action. (S16 R39). There is no interference
with the processes of a coordinate and co-equal
court, since the sheriff was improperly implementing
the writ of execution. (Abiera v. Court of Appeals, 45
SCRA 314).

840

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
Q.

Who may grant preliminary injunction?

A.

A preliminary injunction may be granted by the court
where the action or proceeding is pending. If the
action or proceeding is pending in the Court of
Appeals or in the Supreme Court, it may be issued by
said court or any member thereof. (S2 R58).

Q.

P, a Makati resident, filed a petition for prohibition
with the RTC of Makati seeking to enjoin the
Department of Justice from proceeding with the
preliminary investigation of a syndicated estafa
case against him. P applied for a writ of preliminary
injunction to restrain the DOJ from continuing
with the preliminary investigation. Upon the DOJ's
motion, the RTC dismissed the petition on the
ground of improper venue saying that the case
should have been filed in Manila which has
territorial jurisdiction over the Department of Justice
at Padre Faura, Manila.
a) Was the dismissal proper?
b) What if P were a Pasig City resident. Would
your answer be the same.

A.

a) No the dismissal was not proper.
Under Section 3(b) of the Interim Rules on B.P.
Blg. 129, a writ of injunction issued by the RTC may
be enforced within the judicial region to which the
RTC belongs.
Here Manila is within the National Capital
Judicial Region to which the Makati RTC belongs.
Hence the Makati RTC could issue a writ of injunction
and the same could be enforced in Manila.

841

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b) If P were a Pasig City resident, my answer would
not be the same. The dismissal would then be proper.
An action for prohibition is a personal action.
Hence the action should have been filed either in
Pasig City, where P resides, or in Manila, where the
DOJ holds office, pursuant to R4.
Q.

What is the territory in which a writ of injunction
may be enforced?

A.

A writ of injunction issued by the Supreme Court or
the Court of Appeals may be served and enforced
anywhere in the Philippines. A writ of injunction
issued by the Regional Trial Court may be enforced
only within the judicial region to which the RTC
belongs. (Sec. 3[b] Interim Rules on B.P. Blg. 129). A
writ of preliminary injunction issued by the Municipal
Trial Court may be enforced outside of its territorial
jurisdiction but within the judicial region to which it
belongs. There is no need of a certification by a RTC
judge for the enforcement of a writ of preliminary
injunction outside of the MTC's territorial jurisdiction.
(Sec. 38[2] B.P. Blg. 129; 1 Regalado 607).

Q.

What are the grounds for the issuance of
preliminary injunction?

A.

A preliminary injunction may be granted when it is
established that: (VVER)
a) The applicant is entitled to the relief demanded
and the whole or part of such relief consists in
restraining the commission or continuance of the
act or acts complained of, or in requiring the
performance of an act or acts, either for a limited
period or perpetually;

842

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
b)

The commission, continuance or non-performance
of the act or acts complained of during the
litigation would probably work injustice to the
applicant; or

c)

A party, court, agency or a person is doing,
threatening, or is attempting to do, or is procuring
or suffering to be done, some act or acts probably
in violation of the rights of the applicant respecting
the subject of the action or proceeding, and tending
to render the ludqment ineffectual. (S3 R58).

Q.

Private Respondent obtained a P3 million loan
from Petitioner Union Bank secured by a real
estate mortgage on their real property. Upon nonpayment of the loan, Petitioner extrajudicially foreclosed
the mortgage. A week before the expiration of the
redemption period, Private Respondent filed an
action for annulment of the mortgage and
foreclosure sale and for reconveyance with prayer
for temporary restraining order and preliminary
injunction seeking to enjoin the consolidation of
title by Petitioner. The Private Respondent forthwith
registered a notice of lis pendens on the property.
Should the preliminary injunction be granted?

A.

No. The consolidation of title by Petition and the
issuance of a new title in its name will not cause
irreparable injury to the Private Respondent. This is
because the purchaser at the auction sale merely
steps into the shoes of the judgment debtor or
mortgagor. Hence the consolidation and issuance of
new title to Petitioner will not render ineffectual the
judgment in the main case for reconveyance.
More importantly, the notice of lis pendens which
despite consolidation will remain annotated on the
property sufficiently protects the rights of the Private
Respondent. Any transferee pendente lite steps into
843

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the shoes of the transferor and is bound by the
judgment in the pending case. (See Union Bank v.
Court of Appeals, 311 SCRA 795 [1999]).
Q.

W, X, Y, and Z are co-heirs of a land. Y and Z
executed a deed of extrajudicial partition wherein
they claimed that they are the sole heirs and were
able to obtain a certificate of title in their names.
W and X, who were in possession of the land
covered by the certificate of title, caused the
annotation of an adverse claim over the certificate
of title. W and X later filed an action for annulment
of extrajudicial partition and caused the annotation
of a notice of lis pendens on the certificate of title.
Later Y and Z sold the land to P Corporation and a
new certificate of title was issued in the name of P
Corporation. P Corporation demands that W and
X turn over possession to it and threatening to
wrest possession from them. Are W and X entitled
to the issuance of a writ of preliminary injunction
to restrain P Corporation from dispossessing
them of the land?

A.

Yes. There is no question that when P corporation
purchased the property, W and X were in actual
possession of the property and their adverse claims
and notice of us pendens were annotated in the
titles of the property. Hence a writ of preliminary
injunction was proper since W and X have clearly
shown that they are entitled to the right of possession.
(See Lukang v. Pagbilao Dev't Corp., 10 March 2014,
Mendoza, J.).

844

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
Q.

ABC Cattle Corporation is the holder of a pasture
lease agreement since 1990 covering 1,000
hectares of pasture land surrounded with fences.
In 1992, D was issued a pasture lease agreement
covering 930 hectares of land adjacent to ABC's.
A relocation survey showed that the boundaries
of D's land extended 580 hectares into ABC's
pasture land. Thereupon, D removed ABC's fence
and started to set up his own boundary fence 580
hectares into ABC's pasture area. As ABC
persistently blocked D's advances into its property,
D filed a complaint with preliminary injunction to
enjoin ABC from restricting him in the exercise of
his lease rights.
If you were the judge, would you issue a
preliminary injunction? Explain. (96 Bar 09[3]).

A.

If I were the judge I would not issue a writ of
preliminary injunction.
The Supreme Court has held that the purpose of
preliminary injunction, whether prohibitory or mandatory,
is to maintain or restore the status quo or the last
actual peaceable uncontested status. (Liberty Broadcasting
Network, Inc. v. Atlocom Wireless Systems, Inc., 30
June 2015).
Here the last actual peacable uncontested status
was that before D removed ABC's fence and started
to set up his own boundary fence 580 hectares into
ABC's pasture area. Hence D is not entitled to a writ
of preliminary injunction.

Q.

What are the requirements for the grant of a
preliminary injunction or a temporary restraining
order? (VeBoNS)

845

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.
a) VERIFIED APPLICATION. The application in the
action or proceeding is verified, and shows facts
entitling the applicant to the relief demanded.
b) BOND. Unless exempted by the court, the
applicant files with the court where the action or
proceeding is pending, a bond executed to the
party or person enjoined, in an amount to be fixed
by the court, to the effect that the applicant will
pay to such party or person all damages which he
may sustain by reason of the injunction or
temporary restraining order if the court should
finally decide that the applicant was not entitled
thereto. Upon approval of the requisite bond, a
writ of preliminary injunction shall be issued.
c) NOTICE OF RAFFLE. When an application for a
writ of preliminary injunction or a temporary
restraining order is included in a complaint or any
initiatory pleading, the case, if filed in a multiplesala court, shall be raffled only after notice to and
in the presence of the adverse party or the
person to be enjoined. In any event, such notice
shall be preceded, or contemporaneously accompanied,
by service of summons, together with a copy of
the complaint or initiatory pleading and the
applicant's affidavit152 and bond, upon the adverse
party in the Philippines. (Summons + CAB).
However, where the summons could not be
served personally or by substituted service despite
diligent efforts, or the adverse party is a resident of

I62The term "applicant's affidavit" appears to be a drafting oversight since
preliminary injunction is sought by a verified application. The term should be
changed to "verified application."

846

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
the Philippines temporarily absent therefrom or is a
non-resident thereof (TSN), the requirement of
prior or contemporaneous service of summons shall
not apply.153
d) SUMMARY HEARING. The application for a TRO
shall thereafter be acted upon only after all the
parties are heard in a summary hearing which
shall be conducted within 24 hours after the sheriffs
return of service and/or the records are received
by the branch selected by raffle and to which the
records shall be transmitted immediately.
The period within which to conduct a summary
hearing is not 24 hours after the case has been raffled
but 24 hours after the records are transmitted to the
branch to which it is raffled. (Bagong West Kabulusan
1 Neighborhood Assocation v. Lerma, A.M. No. RTJ05-1904, 18 February 2005).
Q.

Give an instance wherein the applicant may be
exempted from the filing of an injunction bond for
the issuance of a preliminary injunction.

A.

In the case of a citizen suit under Section 41 of the
Clean Air Act of 1999. The court shall exempt, upon
a prima facie showing of the non-enforcement or
violation complained of, the plaintiff from filing an injunction
bond for the issuance of a preliminary injunction.

153 It is opined that what the rule intends is that the requirement of notice
of raffle to the adverse party or person to be enjoined is dispensed with, not just
the prior or contemporaneous service of summons. If a person cannot be served
with summons, chances are that he could not also be served with the notice of
raffle. The purpose of the notice of raffle is to ensure that the adverse party or
person to be enjoined will have an opportunity to attend the raffle.

847

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a writ of preliminary injunction issue ex parte?

A.

Never. No preliminary injunction shall be granted
without hearing and prior notice to the party sought to
be enjoined. (55 R58).

Q.

May a temporary restraining order issue ex parte?

A.

As a rule no. There must be a summary hearing.
54(d) R58 provides that an application for a
temporary restraining order shall be acted upon only
after all parties are heard in a summary hearing which
shall be conducted 24 hours after sheriffs return of
service (if not a multi-sala court) or after the records
are received by the branch selected by raffle and to
which the records shall be transmitted immediately.
However there are exceptional circumstances
where a TRO may issue ex parte.

Q.

What are the instances when a TRO may be
issued ex parte or without hearing?

A.

GREAT/IRREPARABLE INJURY. If it shall appear
from facts shown by affidavits or by the verified
application that great or irreparable injury would result
to the applicant before the matter can be heard on
notice, the court to which the application for
preliminary iniunction was made, may issue ex parte
a TRO to be effective only for 20 days from service
on the party or person sought to be enjoined. Within
the 20-day period, the court must order said party or
person to show cause why the injunction should not
be granted and determine whether or not the
preliminary injunction shall be granted.
EXTREME URGENCY + GRAVE INJUSTICE +
IRREPARABLE INJURY. (EGI) If the matter is of
extreme urgency and the applicant will suffer grave
injustice and irreparable injury, the executive judge of
848

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
a multiple-sala court or the presiding judge of a
single-sala court may issue ex parte a TRO effective
for only 72 hours from issuance but he shall
immediately comply with the provisions of S4 R58 as
to service of summons and the complaint, affidavit,
and bond. Within the 72 hours, the judge before
whom the case is pending shall conduct a summary
hearing to determine whether or not the TRO shall be
extended until the application for preliminary injunction
can be heard.
Q.

An application for a writ of preliminary injunction
with a prayer for a temporary restraining order is
included in a complaint and filed in a multi-sala
Regional Trial Court consisting of Branches 1, 2,
3, and 4. Being urgent in nature, the Executive
Judge, who was sitting in Branch 1, upon the
filing of the aforesaid application immediately
raffled the case in the presence of the judges of
Branches 2, 3, and 4. The case was raffled to
Branch 4 and the judge thereof immediately issued
a temporary restraining order. Is the temporary
restraining order valid? Why? (01 Bar 09)

A.

The temporary restraining order is not valid.
When an application for a writ of preliminary
injunction or a temporary restraining order is included
in a complaint or any initiatory pleading, the case, if
filed in a multiple-sala court, shall be raffled only after
notice to and in the presence of the adverse party or
the person to be enjoined. (S4 R58).
Here the raffle to Branch 4 was made without
notice to and in the presence of the adverse party or
the person to be enjoined. Hence the raffle to Branch
4 was invalid and the temporary restraining order
issued by its judge was not valid.
849

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the period of effectivity of a temporary
Is such period of
restraining order (TRO)?
effectivity inclusive of non-working days?

A.

A TRO issued by executive judge of a multiple-sala
court and the presiding judge of a single-sala court in
cases of extreme urgency shall be effective only for a
period of 72 hours from its issuance.
A TRO issued by a trial court is effective only for
a period of 20 days from service on the party or
person to be enjoined. The 20-day period includes
the 72 hours of the TRO issued by the executive or
presiding judge, if one had been issued.
A TRO issued by the Court of Appeals or a
member thereof is effective for a period of 60 days
only, counted from service on the party or person to
be enjoined.
A TRO issued by the Supreme Court or a member
thereof shall be effective "until further orders."
The effectivity period is inclusive of non-working
days. A non-working day is excluded only when the
last day of the TRO falls on a non-working day, in
which case the TRO is still effective on the next
succeeding working day. (BPI v. CA, G.R. 142731, 8
June 2006, Azcuna, J.)

Q.

Is the effectivity of a TRO extendible?

A.

As a rule no. Even the TRO issued by the Court of
Appeals or a member thereof is non-extendible.
Note however that a TRO issued by the Supreme
Court or a member thereof shall be effective until
further orders.

850

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
However a TRO may be renewed or extended on
a ground different from the one on which it was first
issued. This is because what S5 R58 provides is that
"[t]tle effectivity of a temporary restraining order is not
extendible without need of any judicial declaration to
that effect and no court shall have authority to extend
or renew the same on the same ground for which it
was issued." (Underscoring supplied, see 1 REGALADO
654). The renewal or extension may or may be
without hearing depending upon the exigencies of the
situation and in accordance with S5 R58.
Q.

May a status quo ante order be used to extend the
effectivity of a TRO?

A.

No. (First Sarmiento Holdings, Inc. v. Phil. Bank of
Communications, 19 June 2018, Leonen, J.).

Q.

P filed a complaint against B with the RTC of Las
Pinas City. Alleging extreme urgency, grave
injustice, and irreparable damage, P applied ex
parte with the executive judge for the issuance of
a 72-hour TRO. The executive judge issued the
TRO effective 72 hours from issuance. The case
was forthwith raffled to Branch 256 of the RTC.
On the 72" hour and at the conclusion of the
summary hearing in which the parties were
present, the RTC judge issued a TRO effective 20
days from issuance. Was there any defect in the
TRO issued?

A.

Yes. A TRO's validity should be for 20 days only,
inclusive of the original 72 hours. Since the original
72 hours had lapsed, the TRO issued herein can be
valid for only 17 days. (S5 R58).

851

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the grounds for preventing or dissolving
a preliminary injunction?

A.

INSUFFICIENCY. The application for injunction or
restraining order may be denied, upon a showing of
its insufficiency.
OTHER GROUNDS UPON AFFIDAVITS. The
injunction or restraining order may also be denied, or,
if granted, may be dissolved, on other grounds upon
affidavits of the party or person enjoined, which may
be opposed by the applicant also by affidavits. An
example would be where the applicant's bond is
insufficient or defective. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 657 [7th rev. ed., 3'd
printing, 1999]).
RULE OF RELATIVE OR COMPARATIVE
INCONVENIENCE/DAMAGE. The injunction or restraining
order may be denied or dissolved, if it appears after
hearing that although the applicant is entitled to the
injunction or restraining order, the issuance or
continuance thereof, as the case may be, would
cause irreparable damage to the party or person
enjoined while the applicant can be fully compensated
for such damages as he may suffer, and the former
files a bond in an amount fixed by the court
conditioned that he will pay all damages which the
applicant may suffer by the denial or the dissolution of
the injunction or restraining order. (IFB) (S6 R58).

Q.

Respondent filed with the RTC a complaint
against Petitioners for the establishment of a
permanent right of way, with application for
preliminary injunction to prevent the Petitioners
from closing off a private road within their
property which Respondent has been using in
order to go to and from the public highway in
order to access his poultry farm. The writ of
852

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
preliminary injunction was issued. Subsequently
the RTC dismissed Respondent's complaint holding
that the Respondent was unable to establish the
requirements for a right of way under Article 649
of the Civil Code. Respondent appealed to the CA.
Pending the appeal, the Petitioners closed the
private road. The RTC noting that the decision
had not yet become final and executory cited the
Petitioners in contempt. Are the Petitioners liable
for contempt?
A.

No. A writ of preliminary injunction is deemed dissolved
or lifted upon the dismissal of the main case, even if
such dismissal is appealed. Hence the defendants
cannot be cited for contempt if they close the right of
way. (Buyco v. Baraquia, 21 December 2009).

Q.

Petitions for certiorari with application for
preliminary injunction were filed with the Supreme
Court challenging the planned burial of former
President Marcos in the Libingan ng mga Bayani.
The SC issued a SQA0 enjoining the burial. In
due course, the SC rendered a decision
dismissing the petitions. Nothing was said in the
decision regarding the SQAO. The remains of
Marcos were buried in the LNMB right after the
promulgation of the decision and before the filing
of motions for reconsideration by the petitioners.
The petitioners moved to cite the respondents in
contempt for burying Marcos in the LNMB. Will
the motion prosper?

A.

No. The SC cited Buyco v. Baraquia (21 December
2009), which ruled that the lifting of a writ of
preliminary injunction due to the dismissal of the
complaint is immediately executory even if the dismissal
of the complaint is pending appeal.

853

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
By nature, a SQAO is similar to the provisional
remedies of TRO and writ of preliminary injunction.
Thus, when the Court dismissed the petitions, the
SQAO, in effect, became functus officio; it could not
stand independent of the main proceeding. Such
dismissal necessarily carried with it the lifting of the
SQAO issued during the pendency of the action.
Being interlocutory and ancillary in character, the
order automatically dissolved upon dismissal of the
main case. The lifting of the SQAO is effective
immediately despite the existence of the right to file
and the actual filing of a MR or appeal. (Ocampo V.
Enriquez, 8 August 2017, e.b., Peralta, J.).
Q.

When may a preliminary injunction or restraining
order be modified?

A.

If it appears that the extent of the preliminary
injunction or restraining order is too great, it may be
modified. (Id.).

Q.

What is the procedure for claiming, ascertaining,
and awarding damages upon the bond of the
adverse party?

A.

At the trial, the amount of damages to be awarded to
either party, upon the bond of the adverse party, shall
be claimed, ascertained, and awarded under the
same procedure prescribed for preliminary attachment
under S20 R57. (S8 R58). In fine, there should be an
application for damages filed with due notice to the
adverse party and his surety, and the damages shall
only be awarded after proper hearing and shall be
included in the judgment on the main case.

854

Rule 58
Preliminary Injunction
Q.

When is a final injunction granted? (06 Bar 09.
lb ed.)

A.

A final injunction is granted if after the trial of the
action it appears that the applicant is entitled to have
the act or acts complained of permanently enjoined.
The final injunction shall perpetually restrain the party
or person enjoined from the commission or continuance
of the act or acts or confirm the preliminary mandatory
injunction. (S9 R58).

855

RULE 59. RECEIVERSHIP
Q.

What is a receivership?

A.

It is a provisional or ancillary remedy wherein the
court appoints a receiver to receive and preserve the
property or fund in litigation pendente lite, when it
does not seem reasonable to the court that either
party should hold it.

Q.

Is the receiver an agent of either party?

A.

No he is not an agent or representative of a party but
is regarded as an officer of the court. (Teal Motor Co.
v. CFI of Manila, 51 Phil. 563).

Q.

May a party to the action be appointed receiver?

A.

No. The receiver should be a neutral or impartial
person and hence a party to the litigation should not
be appointed a receiver unless the other party consents.
(Alcantara v. Abbes, G.R. 14890, 30 September 1963).

Q.

Who may appoint a receiver?

A.
1) The court where the action is pending.
2) The Court of Appeals or a member thereof
3) The Supreme Court or a member thereof.
Q.

In what cases may a receiver be appointed?
(I FPJ)

A.

Upon a verified application, one or more receivers of
the property which is the subiect of the action or
proceeding may be appointed by the court where the
action is pending, or by the Court of Appeals or by the
Supreme Court, or a member thereof, in the following
cases:
856

Rule 59
Receivership
1) When it appears from the verified application and
such other proof as the court may require that the
applicant has an interest in the property or fund
which is the subject of the action or proceeding
and that such property or fund is in danger of
being lost, removed, or materially injured unless a
receiver be appointed to administer and preserve
it. (RIL)
2) When it appears in an action for foreclosure of a
mortgage that the property is in danger of being
wasted or dissipated or materially injured, and
that its value is probably insufficient to discharge
the mortgage debt, or that the parties have so
stipulated in the mortgage contract. (WID + I/S)
3) After judgment to preserve the property during
the pendency of an appeal, or to dispose of it
according to the judgment, or to aid execution
when the execution has been returned unsatisfied
or the judgment obligor refuses to apply his
property in satisfaction of the judgment, or
otherwise to carry the judgment into effect. (PDEC)
Under S41 R39, the court may during the execution
stage appoint a receiver of the judgment obligor's
property.' 54
4)

Whenever in other cases it appears that the
appointment of a receiver is the most convenient
and feasible means of preserving, administering,
or disposing of the property in litigation. (S1 R59).
Under the Family Code, if a spouse without just
cause abandons the other or fails to comply with his
or her obligations to the family, the aggrieved spouse

1541h1s is a unique situation wherein a provisional remedy
may be availed
of even after the judgment has become final and executo
ry.

857

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
may petition the court for receivership of the
community or conjugal property. (Articles 101 & 128,
Family Code).
Q.

P files an action for collection of P2 million
against D. During the pendency of the case, P
learns that D is disposing of some of his property
and that the rest of D's property is deteriorating
rapidly.
a) May P apply for the appointment of a receiver
of D's property?
b) Judgment was rendered in favor of P and the
same becomes final and executory. May P
apply for the appointment of a receiver of
D's property?

A.
a)

No. A receiver may be appointed only over
property which is the subject of the action or
proceeding. (Si R59). Where the action is merely
to obtain a money judgment on unpaid credits
and not to enforce a lien upon specific property or
funds in the defendant's possession, the appointment
of a receiver is improper. (Bonaplata v. Ambler, 2
Phil. 392).

b) Yes. Under 541 R39 on execution, the court may
appoint a receiver of the property of the judgment
obligor, especially where the defendant has been
disposing of or concealing his property to avoid
its application to the satisfaction of the judgment.
(Philippine Trust Co. v. Santamaria, 53 Phil. 463).

858

Rule 59
Receivership
Q.

In a suit for the collection of a sum of money, the
plaintiff applied for the appointment of a receiver
of the defendant's property to assure the payment
of the obligation. Should the court grant the
application?

A.

No. Receivership may be applied for only in respect
of the property or fund subject of the action or
proceeding or in respect of the property in litigation.
In a sum of money case, the defendant's property or
fund is not the subject of the action or litigation.

Q.

May an application for the appointment of a
receiver be availed of in extrajudicial foreclosure?

A.

No since 81(b) R59 speaks of an "action by the
mortgagee for the foreclosure of the mortgage." An
extrajudicial foreclosure is not an action. Note however
that a stipulation allowing the mortgagee to take
possession of the property mortgaged upon foreclosure
is valid. (DBP v. Sps. Doyon, 25 March 2009).

Q.

During the pendency of an appeal where should
the application for appointment of a receiver
be filed?

A.

With the appellate court. However the appellate court
may allow the application to be filed in and decided by
the court of origin and the receiver appointed to be
subject to the control of the court of origin. (Id.).

Q.

If an appeal has been perfected and the trial court
deprived of its jurisdiction, may it still appoint
a receiver?

A.

Yes if the order is necessary for the protection and
preservation of the rights of the parties and provided
the original record or the record on appeal has not yet
been transmitted to the appellate court. (S9 R41).
859

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a receiver be appointed ex parte?

A.

Justice Feria writes that the new rule does not
authorize an ex parte appointment of a receiver and
that a hearing is necessary. (JUSTICE JOSE Y.
FERIA, 1997 RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 230
[1997]). Prof. Bautista writes that "apparently" a
receiver may be appointed ex parte. (ANTONIO R.
BAUTISTA, BASIC CIVIL PROCEDURE 108 [2003
ed.] It is believed that a receiver may be appointed ex
parte especially where there is a danger of the
property being removed, lost, or materially injured.

Q.

What are the bonds required under R59?

A.
1) APPLICANT'S BOND. (S2 R59)
2) COUNTERBOND. (53 R59).
3) RECEIVER'S BOND. (S4 R59).
Q.

What is an applicant's bond?

A.

It is the bond which the court shall require the
applicant to file before issuing the order appointing a
receiver. It is executed to the party against whom the
application is presented, in an amount to be fixed by
the court, to the effect that the applicant will pay such
party all damages he may sustain by reason of the
appointment of such receiver in case the applicant
shall have procured such appointment without
sufficient cause; and the court may in its discretion, at
any time after the appointment, require an additional
bond as further security for such damages. (S2 R59).

860

Rule 59
Receivership
Q.

What are the grounds for the denial of the
application or the discharge of the receiver?

A.
1) FILING OF COUNTERBOND. The application may
be denied or the receiver discharged, when the
adverse party files a bond executed to the
applicant, in an amount to be fixed by the court
to the effect that such party will pay the applicant
all damages he may suffer by reason of the acts,
omissions, or other matters specified in the
application as ground for such appointment.
2) NO SUFFICIENT CAUSE. The receiver may also
be discharged if it is shown that his appointment
was obtained without sufficient cause. (33 R59).
Q.

What is a receiver's bond?

A.

The bond filed by the receiver before entering upon
his duties executed to such person and in such sum
as the court may direct, to the effect that he will
faithfully discharge his duties in the action or
proceeding and obey the orders of the court. (S4 R59).

Q.

Give the general powers of a receiver. (RAP CCT
PDA)

A.
1) The power to bring and defend actions in his own
name in his capacity as receiver.
2) To take and keep possession of the property in
controversy.
3) To receive rents.
4) To collect debts due to himself as receiver or to
the fund, property, estate, person, or corporation
of which he is the receiver.
861

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
5) To compound for and compromise such debts.
6) To make transfers.
7) To pay outstanding debts.
8) To divide the money and other property that shall
remain among the persons legally entitled to
receive the same.
9) Generally, to do such acts respecting the property
as the court may authorize.
Q.

What acts of the receiver need court approval?
(IAC)

A.

Funds in the hands of a receiver may be invested only
by order of the court upon written consent of all the
parties to the action.
No action may be filed by or against the receiver
without leave of the court which appointed him.155
(S6 R59).
A receiver cannot enter into a contract without
the approval of the court. (Pacific Merchandising
Corp. v. Consolacion Insurance & Surety Company,
73 SCRA 564).

Q.

When may the court order termination of the
receivership?

A.

Whenever the court, motu proprio or on motion of
either party, shall determine that the necessity for a
receiver no longer exists, it shall, after due notice to
all interested parties and hearing, settle the accounts

155It is submitted that the rule which prohibits the filing of an action against
the receiver without leave of court applies only to the parties to the case, not to a
third person. There is no good reason why a third person who is prejudiced by
the acts of a receiver should seek leave to file a case against the receiver from
the court which appointed the receiver.

862

Rule 59
Receivership
of the receiver, direct the delivery of the funds and
other property in his possession to the person
adjudged to be entitled to receive them, and order the
discharge of the receiver from further duty as such.
(S8 R59).
Q.

Who pays for the compensation of the receiver?

A.

The court shall allow the receiver such reasonable
compensation as the circumstances warrant, to be
taxed as costs against the defeated party, or apportioned,
as justice requires. (S8 R59).

Q.

The Asean Banking Corporatoin retained the
services of Atty. Victor Mamon in connection with
its contemplated suit against Dap Textile Mills,
Inc. (DAPO) for the collection of the latter's loan in
the amount of P650 million. Payment of the loan
was secured by a real estate mortgage on the
textile plant and the land it occupied, both owned
by DAPO.
At the time that the services of Atty. Mamon
were retained, the appraised value of the mortgaged
property was P256 million as compared to the
loan of P650 million. DAPO defaulted on its loan
after the union of its employees had declared a
strike which prevented everyone from entering
the factory premises. As a consequence, DAPO
ceased operations and its textile plant had since
then been exposed to the elements and risk of fire
due to the presence of highly combustible
materials consisting of synthetic fibers.
The Asean Banking Corporation requested
Atty. Mamon to pursue a cause of action that
would realize two principal objectives: (a) obtain
a judgment for the payment of any deficiency
arising from the foreclosure of the mortgage lien;
863

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
(b) procure the possession and operation of a
textile plant, either by Asean Banking Corporation
or by a third party during the pendency of the
foreclosure proceedings and until the expiration
of the redemption period after the foreclosure
sale, so that that income derived therefrom could
be applied in partial payment of the loan.
What are the judicial remedies that Atty.
Mamon should pursue to accomplish the two principal
objectives of the Asean Banking Corporation?
(83 Bar 015).
A.

Atty. Mamon in behalf of Asean Banking Corporation
should file a judicial action for foreclosure of real
estate mortgage and then after the sale, file a motion
for deficiency judgment. (S6 R68).
Upon filing of the foreclosure suit, Atty. Mamon
should in behalf of his client file a verified application
for the appointment of a receiver since the textile
plant is in danger of being wasted or dissipated or
materially injured and its value is insufficient to
discharge the mortgage debt. The receiver would be a
third person except if there is a written stipulation in
the mortgage agreement that Asean Banking
Corporation may be appointed as a receiver. (S1[c]
R59). The receiver would have the power to take and
keep possession of the property in controversy and to
collect debts due to the corporaton of which he is the
receiver and thus can apply any income from the
textile plant to the payment of the loan. (S6 R59).

864

RULE 60. REPLEVIN
Q.

What is replevin?

A.

A provisional remedy wherein a party praying for the
recovery of possession of personal property may
apply for an order for the delivery to him of such
property wrongfully detained by the adverse party.
(81 R60).
Replevin may also refer to the main action for the
recovery of personal property wrongfully detained by
the defendant.

Q.

Distinguish the provisional remedy of replevin
from attachment under Sl(c) R57.

A.

Replevin extends only to personal property, while
attachment covers both real and personal property.
Replevin may be availed of to recover personal
property even if it is not being concealed, removed or
disposed of, while attachment presupposes that the
property has been concealed, removed, or disposed
of to prevent its being found or taken by the applicant.
In replevin, the personal property is delivered to
the applicant, while in 31(c) R57, the personal
property is not delivered to the applicant but merely
attached.
In replevin, the application may be made at the
commencement of the action or at any time before
answer, while 81(c) R57 may be applied for at the
commencement of the action or at any time before
entry of judgment. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 436 [5th rev. ed.]).

865

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the remedy of a car owner whose vehicle
was impounded by the police on the mere
suspicion that the car's original registration and
certificate of registration were spurious?

A.

The car owner may file an action for replevin against
the police officers and apply for a writ of replevin to
recover the car. The reason is that the car was
wrongfully taken by the police officers. (Uy V. Jacalan,
3 February 2021, Inting, J.).

Q.

A sold 5,000 piculs of sugar to B, payable on
demand. Upon delivery of the sugar to B,
however, the latter did not pay its purchase price.
After the lapse of some time from the date of
delivery of the sugar to B, A brought an action for
the rescission of the contract of sale and as
incident of this action, asked for the manual
delivery (replevin) of the sugar to him. May the
remedy of replevin prayed for by A be granted?
(96 Bar 09[2]).

A.

No. Replevin is available only where the personal property
is being unlawfully detained by the adverse party.
Here A delivered the sugar to B upon a perfected
contract of sale. Until rescission is actually decreed by
the court, the buyer cannot be said to be wrongfully
detaining the personal property since the delivery had
transferred ownership to him. (Ocejo, Perez & Co. v.
International Banking Corp, 37 Phil. 631, 642-643
[1918]).

Q.

When may a party apply for a writ of replevin?

A.

At the commencement of the action or at any time
before answer.

866

Rule 60
Replevin
Q.

After the filing of an answer, may the plaintiff
apply for a writ of replevin?

A.

No more since replevin may be applied for only before
answer. The possible remedy of the plaintiff would be
to move for a preliminary attachment under Si(c) R57.

Q.

In what actions may replevin be availed of as a
provisional remedy?

A.

It may be availed of only in actions for recovery of
possession of personal property.

Q.

If the debtor in a chattel mortgage refuses to deliver
the chattel so it can be sold at a foreclosure sale,
what is the remedy of the creditor? Explain.
(80 Bar Q8)

A.

The creditor may file an action for replevin to recover
the chattel and apply for a writ of replevin under R60
as a preliminary step to extrajudicial foreclosure under
Section 14 of the Chattel Mortgage Law. The reason
is that upon default, the mortgagee is already entitled
to the possession of the chattel. (Northern Motors Inc.
V. Herrera, 49 SCRA 392 [1973]).
Note, however, that the Personal Property
Security Act, which took effect on 9 February 2019,
repealed the provisions of the Chattel Mortgage Law.
Under the PPSA, the procedure for the secured
creditor to take possession of the collateral is
governed by Section 47 of the PPSA on expedited
repossession of the collateral.

Q.

What are the requirements for the issuance of a
writ of replevin?

A.

AFFIDAVIT. The applicant must show by his own
affidavit or that of some other person who personally
knows the facts: (AWTO)
867

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) That the applicant is the owner of the property or is
entitled to its possession.
b) That the property is wrongfully detained by the
adverse party.
c) That the property has not been distrained or taken
for a tax assessment or a fine, or seized under a
writ of execution or preliminary attachment, or
otherwise placed in custodia legis, or if so seized,
that it is exempt form such seizure or custody.
d) The actual market value of the property.
BOND. The applicant must give a bond,
executed to the adverse party in double the value of
the property as stated in the affidavit for the return of
the property if such return be adjudged, and for the
payment to the adverse party of such sum as he may
recover from the applicant in the action.
Q.

Outline the steps in replevin. (AO SRDR)

A.
1) The applicant files the affidavit and the bond.
2) Upon the approval of the applicant's bond, the
court shall issue the order and the writ of replevin.
3) Upon receipt of the order of replevin, the sheriff
must serve a copy thereof on the adverse party
together with a copy of the application, affidavit,
and bond and must forthwith take the property
and retain it in his custody. (o aba)
4) The adverse party may at any time before the
delivery of the property to the applicant, require
the return of the property by filing a redeliveni bond
executed to the applicant in double the value of
the property as stated in the applicant's affidavit.
868

Rule 60
Replevin
5) If within 5 days after the taking of the property by
the sheriff, the adverse party does not object to
the sufficiency of the bond; or if the adverse party
objects and the court affirms its approval of the
applicant's bond or approves a new bond, or if
the redelivery bond is objected to and found
insufficient and the adverse party does not
forthwith file an approved bond, the property shall
be delivered to the applicant.
6) If for any reason the property is not delivered to
the applicant, the sheriff must return it to the
adverse party.
Q.

Enriquez tiled with the RTC an action for replevin
with application for a writ of replevin against
Asuten to recover a van allegedly unlawfully taken
by Asuten. Upon the filing of a bond in the amount
of P600,000 (double the value of the van), the
sheriff seized the van pursuant to a writ of
replevin issued by the court. Subsequently however
the court dismissed the replevin case for failure of
Enriquez to prosecute. The court ordered Enriquez
to return the car to Asuten but she failed to do so.
The court thus ordered the forfeiture of the entire
bond in Asuten's favor.
a) Was the order of the court proper?
b) May the surety recover the P600,000 from Enriquez?

A.

a) No. Forfeiture of the replevin bond, requires first, a
judgment on the merits in the defendant's favor, and
second, an application by the defendant for damages.
Neither circumstance appears in this case. When
Enriquez failed to produce the van, equity demanded
that Asuten be awarded only an amount equal to the
value of the van. The Regional Trial Court erred in

869

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
ordering the forfeiture of the entire bond in Asuten's
favor, considering that there was no trial on the merits
or an application by Asuten for damages.
b) Yes, by virtue of the indemnity agreement between
Enriquez and the surety wherein Enriquez bound
herself to indemnify the surety for whatever
amount the surety may have paid on account of
the bond. (Enriquez v. Mercantile Insurance Co.,
15 August 2018, Leonen, J.)
Q.

Is prior demand a condition precedent to the filing
of an action for a writ of replevin?

A.

No. Prior demand is not a condition precedent to an
action for a writ of replevin, since there is nothing in
32 R60 that requires the applicant to make a demand
on the possessor of the property before an action for
a writ of replevin could be filed. (Agner v. BPI Family
Bank, 3 June 2013).

Q.

Defendant Makati Textile Mills obtained a loan
from a finance company and in order to secure
the loan executed a chattel mortgage in favor of
the lender over the textile drying machines which
are located in its premises. For failure of
Defendant to pay, the Plaintiff finance company
seized under a writ of replevin the textile
machines in its premises. The Defendant objected
on the ground that the textile machines are real
property under Art. 415(5) of the Civil Code. Is the
Defendant's objection valid?

A.

No. When Defendant executed a chattel mortgage
over the machines, it treated the same as personal
property. Hence the Defendant is estopped from
contending that the same are real property. (Makati
Leasing & Finance Corp. v. Wearever Textile Mills,
G.R. No. 58469, 16 May 1983).
870

Rule 60
Replevin
Q.

PCI Leasing filed with the RTC a complaint for
sum of money with an ex parte application for a
writ of replevin against Serg's Products Inc.
Pursuant to the writ of replevin issued by the
court, the sheriff went to the factory of Serg's and
seized machinery found therein. Records show
that a lease agreement had been executed between
PCI Leasing and Serg's whereby the machinery
was considered as personal property and leased
by Serg's from PCI Leasing.
a) Serg's contends that the seizure of the
machinery under a writ of replevin was invalid
since the machinery is real property under
Article 415(5) of the Civil Code. Is Serg's
contention correct?
b)

Serg's also moved to discharge the writ of
replevin on its contention that it was the
owner of the machinery. May the court take
cognizance of the motion to discharge the
writ on this ground?

A.
a) No. While the machinery is real property under
Article 415(5) of the Civil Code being essential to
the chocolate-making industry of Serg's, the latter
is estopped from arguing that the machinery is
not personal property. This is because it had
executed a lease agreement with PCI Leasing
wherein it treated the machinery as personal
property. Under the principle of estoppel, a party
to a contract is ordinarily precluded from denying
the truth of any material averment of fact found
therein. (Serg's Products Inc. v. PCI Leasing &
Finance Co., G.R. 137705, 22 August 2000).

871

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b)

No. The policy under R60 is that questions
involving title to the movable should be determined
during the trial proper. The defendant's remedy
is either to post a counter-bond or to question the
sufficiency of the applicant's bond or of the
surety/sureties thereon. The defendant however
cannot invoke title to the movable seized in order
to discharge or dissolve the writ of replevin. (Id.).

Q.

Plaintiff filed an action for replevin against the
defendant The court subsequently issued a writ
of replevin against the defendant and his car was
seized. Later, the court dismissed Plaintiffs replevin
suit for failure to prosecute. The dismissal became
final and unappealable. The order of dismissal
however failed to provide for the return of the car
to the defendant. Should the car be returned to
the Defendant?

A.

Yes. The dismissal of the main action of replevin
means that the ancillary writ of replevin becomes
functus officio and without force. Hence, the car
earlier seized must be ordered returned to the
defendant. (Advent Capital Corp. v. Young, 3 August
2011, Carpi°, J.).

Q.

May an application for damages against replevin
bond be filed after the judgment has become final
and executory?

A.

No. The application must be filed before the judgment
becomes final and executory, pursuant to S10 R60 in
relation to 520 R57. (DBP v Carpio, 1 Feb 2017,
Mendoza, J.).

872

RULE 61. SUPPORT PENDENTE LITE
Q.

What is support pendente lite?

A.

It is support provided a party during the pendency of
the litigation.

Q.

In what actions may support pendente lite be
applied for?

A.
1) In an action for support.
2) In criminal actions where the civil liability includes
support for the offspring as a consequence of the
crime and the civil aspect thereof has not been
waived, reserved or instituted prior to its filing.
(S6 R60).
Q.

What courts may grant support pendente lite?

A.

In civil cases the Family Court may grant support
pendente lite since an action for support falls within
the jurisdiction of the Family Court.
In criminal actions, the regional trial court or the
municipal trial court may grant support pendente lite
in cases where the civil action is instituted with the
criminal action and where the civil liability includes
support for the offspring as a consequence of the
crime. (clisoac)
The Court of Appeals may also grant support
pendente lite where proper in an appealed case.

873

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Outline the procedure in support pendente lite.
(VC HGE)

A.
1) The party with the claim for support files a verified
application for support pendente lite.
2)

A copy of the application and all supporting
documents shall be served on the adverse party,
who shall have 5 days to comment thereon. The
comment shall be verified and shall be accompanied
by affidavits, depositions or other authentic documents.

3) After the filing of the comment or the expiration of
the time therefore, the application shall be set for
hearinq not more than 3 days thereafter.
4)

The court shall make a provisional determination
of the facts and may grant the application. If
granted, the court issue an order granting support
and shall fix the amount of money to be
provisionally paid or such other forms of support
as should be provided, taking into account the
necessities of the applicant and the resources or
means of the adverse party, and the terms of
payment or mode for providing support. (nrt) If the
application is denied, the principal case shall be
tried and decided as early as possible.

5) If the adverse party fails to comply with the order
granting support, the court shall, motu proprio or
upon motion, issue an order of execution against
him, without prejudice to his liability for contempt.
When the party ordered to give support pendente
lite refuses or fails to do so, any third person who
furnished that support to the applicant may, after
notice and hearing in the same case, obtain a writ
of execution to enforce his right of reimbursement.
874

Rule 61
Support Pendente Lite
Q.

Husband Masiba was ordered by the court to give
support pendente lite to wife Kawawa and minor
son, Munti, based on Kawawa's testimony supported
by her documentary evidence that Masiba has
failed to give a single centavo of support inspite
of constant requests and demands for support.
Masiba filed an appeal questioning the order
stating that there were no hearings and reception
of evidence before the order was issued and that
given his day in court, he could prove beyond
doubt that his wife is much richer than he is and
could well afford to support herself and their son.
Resolve the appeal. Explain. (86 Bar Q18).

A.

The appeal should be dismissed.
No appeal may be taken from an interlocutory
order. (S1[b] R41). Here the order granting support
pendente lite is an interlocutory order since it does not
completely dispose of the case. The court still has to
render its judgment in the principal case. (S4 R61).

875

PROVISIONAL REMEDIES
AND INTERIM RELIEFS UNDER
SPECIAL LAWS AND RULES
Provisional Remedies of the Family Courts
Q.

What are the special provisional remedies that
may be issued by Family Courts?

A.

In cases of violence among immediate family members
living in the same domicile or household, the Family
Court may issue a restraining order against the
accused or defendant upon verified application by the
complainant or the victim for relief from abuse.
The court may order the temporary custody of
children in all civil actions for their custody. The court
may also order support pendente lite, including
deduction from the salary and use of conjugal home
and other properties in all civil actions for support.
(Section 7, Family Courts Act of 1997).

Human Security Act
Q.

What are the provisional remedies under the Human
Security Act of 1997?

A.

The following are the provisional remedies under the
Human Security Act of 1997 (HSA):
1) Inspection and examination of bank and financial
institution accounts of terrorists, terrorist organizations,
and suspected terrorists pursuant to Sections 27
to 31.
2)

Seizure, sequestration, and freezing of bank and
financial institution accounts and assets of terrorists,
terrorist organizations, and suspected terrorists
pursuant to Section 39.
876

Provisional Remedies And Interim Reliefs
Under Special Laws And Rules
3)

Restriction on the right to travel of a person
charged with terrorism or conspiracy to commit
terrorism pursuant to Section 26.

R.A. No. 9262 (VOWCHI)
Q.

What are the provisional remedies under R.A.
9262 (VOWCHI)?

A.

Barangay protection order (BP0) and temporary
protection order under Section 8 et seq. of the
VOWCHI. A protection order is an order issued for the
purpose of preventing further acts of violence against
a woman or her child specified in Sec. 5 and granting
other necessary relief. The relief granted under a
protection order serve the purpose of safeguarding
the victim from further harm, minimizing any disruption
in the victim's daily life, and facilitating the opportunity
and ability of the victim to independently regain
control over her life. The provisions of the protection
order shall be enforced by law enforcement agencies.

Anti-Money Laundering Act
Q.

What is the provisional remedy under the AntiMoney Laundering Act?

A.

The Anti-Money Laundering Council (AMLC) may
issue a freeze order. Upon a verified ex parte petition
by the AMLC and after determination that probable
cause exists that any monetary instrument or property
is in any way related to an unlawful activity as defined
in Section 3(i) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, the
Court of Appeals may issue a freeze order which shall
be effective immediately, for a period of 20 days.

877

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Financial Rehabilitation & Insolvency Act (FRIA)
Q.

What are the provisional remedies under the FRIA?

A.

The following are the provisional remedies under the
FRIA.
1) STAY OR SUSPENSION ORDER. An order issued
in conjunction with the commencement order that
shall suspend all actions or proceedings, in court
or otherwise, for the enforcement of claims
against the debtor.
2) RECEIVERSHIP. The court shall appoint a rehabilitation
receiver pursuant to the FRIA with the principal
duty of preserving and maximizing the value of
the assets of the debtor, determining the viability
of the debtor's rehabilitation, preparing and
recommending a rehabilitation plan, and implementing
the same.

Precautionary Hold Departure Order
Q.

What is a precautionary hold departure order?

A.

A precautionary hold departure order is an order in
writing issued by a court commanding the Bureau of
Immigration to prevent any attempt by a person
suspected of a crime to depart from the Philippines,
which shall be issued ex-parte in cases involving
crimes where the minimum of the penalty prescribed
by law is at least 6 yrs and 1 day or when the offender
is a foreigner regardless of the imposable penalty.

Q.

Where is the application for a precautionary hold
departure order (PHDO) filed?

A.

The application for a PHDO may be filed by a
prosecutor with any RTC within whose territorial jurisdiction
the alleged crime was committed: Provided, that for
878

Provisional Remedies And Interim Reliefs
Under Special Laws And Rules
compelling reasons, it can be filed with any regional
trial court within the judicial region where the crime
was committed if the place of the commission of the
crime is known; Provided, further, that the RTCs in
the City of Manila, Quezon City, Cebu City, Iloilo City,
Davao City, and Cagayan de Oro City shall also have
the authority to act on applications filed by the
prosecutor based on complaints instituted by the NBI,
regardless where the alleged crime was committed.
Upon motion by the complainant in a criminal
complaint filed before the office of the city or provincial
prosecutor, and upon a preliminary determination of
probable cause based on the complaint and attachments,
the investigating prosecutor may file an application in
the name of the People of the PH for a PHDO with the
proper RTC.
Q.

What are the grounds for the issuance of a PHDO?

A.

A PHDO shall not issue except upon determination by
the judge, in whose court the application is filed, that
probable cause exists, and there is a high probability
that respondent will depart from the Philippines to
evade arrest and prosecution of crime against him or
her. The judge shall personally examine under oath or
affirmation, in the form of searching questions and
answers in writing, the applicant and the witnesses he
or she may produce on facts personally known to them
and attaching to the record their sworn statements.

879

SPECIAL CIVIL ACTIONS
Q.

What is a special civil action?

A.

A special civil action is a civil action which aside from
being governed by the rules for ordinary civil actions
is subject to specific rules provided for it.

Q.

Distinguish an ordinary civil action from a special
civil action.

A.

An ordinary civil action is governed by the rules for
ordinary civil actions while a special civil action is
governed by the rules for ordinary civil actions and by
specific rules.
Every ordinary civil action must be based on a
cause of action, while not every special civil action
must be based on a cause of action, as for instance,
declaratory relief.

Q.

What are the special civil actions?

A.

(QC FID CREEP)
1) Quo warranto.
2) Certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus.
3) Foreclosure.
4) Interpleader.
5) Declaratory Relief and Similar Remedies.
6) Contempt.
7) Review of decisions of the COA and the COMELEC.
8) Expropriation.
9) Ejectment.
10) Partition.
880

Special Civil Actions

Q.

In a series of related transactions, P lent P200,000
to D which is unsecured and another P300,000
secured by a real estate mortgage over a land
with an assessed value of P75,000. D defaulted in
the payment of both loans. P filed a complaint
with the RTC joining his action to recover
P200,000 and another for foreclosure of mortgage.
Is the joinder of actions proper?

A.

No. Under S5 R2, the joinder of causes of action shall
not include special civil actions. Here the action for
foreclosure is a special civil action. Hence its joinder
is improper.

881

RULE 62. INTERPLEADER
Q.

What is interpleader?

A.

Interpleader is a special civil action whereby a person
who claims no interest whatsoever in a property or
right, or an interest which in whole or in part is not
disputed by the claimants, brings an action against
the conflicting claimants to compel them to interplead
and litigate their several claims among themselves.
(Si R62). lnterpleader is used to avoid double or
multiple liability on the part of the obligor.

Q.

Outline the procedure in interpleader. (CIS MAD)

A.
1)

The stakeholder files a complaint against the
conflicting claimants.

2) Upon the filing of the complaint, the court shall
issue an order requiring the conflicting claimants
to interplead with each other.
3) Summons shall be served upon the the conflicting
claimants, together with a copy of the complaint
and order.
4) Within the time for filing an answer, each claimant
may file a motion to dismiss on the ground of
impropriety of the interpleader or on other
grounds in S16.
5) Each claimant shall file his answer setting forth his
claim within 15 days from service of summons,
serving a copy upon each of the other conflicting
claimants who may file their reply thereto. A
claimant who fails to timely file his answer may,
on motion, be declared in default and thereafter
882

Rule 62
Interpleader
the court may render judgment barring him from
any claim regarding the subject matter.
6) The court shall proceed to determine the respective
rights of the conflicting claimants and to adjudicate
their several claims.
Q.

Plaintiff engaged X to construct a water tank for
him for a price of P1,000,000. Plaintiff withheld
delivery of the last payment of P30,000 to X since
X's supplier S had made a claim to the same.
Unable to determine who between X and S is
entitled to the P30,000 payment, Plaintiff filed with
the RTC of Las Pinas City an action for
interpleader against X and S to determine who
between them is entitled to the P30,000. X filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground that the RTC has
no jurisdiction over the action. Should the motion
to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. The MeTC has no jurisdiction over the case
since the amount subject of the interpleader does not
exceed P400,000. Under B.P. Big. 129, the MTC has
jurisdiction over civil actions where the value of the
personal property, estate, or amount of the demand
does not exceed P400,000. (See Makati Dev't Corp.
v. Tanjuatco, 27 SCRA 401 [1969]).156
However where the subject of the interpleader is
not the possession or title of real or personal property
but the performance of a service, it is clear that the
RTC has jurisdiction as the subject thereof is incapable
of pecuniary estimation.

1561he ruling is arguable. In interpleader, the plaintiff has no interest in
and is not making any demand or asserting any right on the property but is
seeking only to compel the defendants to interplead among themselves. In
essence, the suit is among the conflicting claimants, the plaintiff not making any
demand against them. Hence, it is opined that the subject of the litigation is
incapable of pecuniary estimation.

883

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Raphael, a warehouseman, filed a complaint
against V Corporation, X Corporation, and Y
Corporation to compel them to interplead. He
alleged therein that the three corporations claimed
title and right of possession over the goods
deposited in his warehouse and that he was
uncertain which of them was entitled to the goods.
After due proceedings, judgment was rendered by
the court declaring that X Corporation was
entitled to the goods. The decision became final
and executory.
Raphael filed a complaint against X
Corporation for the payment of P100,000 for storage
charges and other advances for the goods. X
Corporation filed a motion to dismiss the complaint
on the ground of res judicata. X Corporation
alleged that Raphael should have incorporated in
his complaint for interpleader his claim for
storage fees and advances and that for his failure
he was barred from interposing his claim. Raphael
replied that he could not have claimed storage
fees and other advances in his complaint for
interpleader because he was not yet certain as to
who was liable therefor. Resolve the motion with
reasons. (05 Bar Q4).

A.

I would deny the motion to dismiss grounded on res
judicata.
7An interpleader suit is not based on a cause of
action since there is no act or omission by which the
defendants violated the right of the complainant. 7
The complainant is simply seeking to compel the
defendants to interplead among themselves. Hence
res judicata and splitting of cause of action would
not apply since the complaint is not based on a cause
of action.
884

Rule 62
Interpleader
X Corporation's allegation that Raphael should
have incorporated in his complaint for interpleader his
claim for storage fees and advances is incorrect since
joinder of causes of action shall not include special
civil actions like interpleader. (S5 R2).

Q. Bliss Development Corporation (BDC) is the
registered owner of Lot No. 27. In 1984, BDC
executed a deed of sale over the property in favor
of the Spouses Melgazo. The Spouses Melgazo
allegedly transferred their rights to Nacua. Further
assignments of rights were made and eventually
the rights were transferred to Diaz. BDC executed
a contract to sell in favor of Diaz and received
payments for Lot 27 from Diaz.
Later, Arreza claimed that the Spouses
Melgazo had sold the rights over the property to
him. To resolve the conflicting claims of Arreza and
Diaz, BDC filed a complaint for interpleader against
them before the RTC of Makati City. In March
1996, the RTC ruled that the signatures of Sps.
Melgazo transferring their rights to Nacua were
forged and thus Arreza had a better right over the
property. This decision became final and executory.
In August 1996, Diaz filed a complaint for
sum of money against BDC and Arreza before the
RTC of Makati City. Diaz argued that BDC's
representations led him to believe that he had a
good title over the property, but due to the court's
ruling in the interpleader case, he was constrained to
transfer the property to Arreza. Diaz prayed for
reimbursement from BDC and Arreza. In their
respective answers, BDC and Arreza argued that
Diaz's complaint for reimbursement is barred by
res judicata since it should have been raised in
the interpleader suit. Are BDC and Arreza correct?
885

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Arreza is correct in his argument that Diaz' complaint
for reimbursement is barred by res judicata. Diaz'
complaint is in the nature of a compulsory
counterclaim which should have been raised in the
interpleader suit. Not having been raised, the same is
barred pursuant to 32 R9.
However, BDC is not correct in its argument that
Diaz' complaint for reimbursement is barred by res
judicata. The essential elements of res judicata are
not present. First, the interpleader case was between
Arreza and Diaz. While it was BDC that initiated the
interpleader case, the opposing parties in that prior
case are, in fact, Arreza and Diaz. Second, the issues
resolved in the interpleader case revolved around the
conflicting claims of Arreza and Diaz, and not whatever
claim either of them may have against BDC. Thus,
there is no identity of parties, nor identity of subject
matter, between the interpleader case and the
complaint for sum of money. (Bliss Dev't Corp. v.
Diaz, 5 August 2015, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Lessee Zuellig Pharma filed an action for
interpleader against Petitioner and Philippine Bank
of Communications to determine who between
them is entitled to the rental payments. Petitioner
failed to file its answer and was declared in default
upon motion of Zuellig. Petitioner argued that
Zuellig filed the interpleader case to compel Petitioner
and the Philippine Bank of Communications to
litigate their claims. Thus, "Kneclaring a claimant
in default would ironically defeat the very purpose
of the suit." Is the argument of Petitioner correct?

A.

No. In this case, Zuellig filed the interpleader case to
extinguish its obligation to pay rent. Its purpose in
filing the interpleader case "was not defeated" when
the Makati trial court declared Petitioner in default. At
886

Rule 62
lnterpleader
any rate, an adverse claimant in an interpleader case
who fails to answer within the required period may, on
motion, be declared in default pursuant to 55 R62.
The consequence of the default is that the court may
"render judgment barring [the defaulted claimant] from
any claim in respect to the subject matter." The Rules
would not have allowed claimants in interpleader
cases to be declared in default if it would "ironically
defeat the very purpose of the suit." (Lui Enterprises
v. Zueffig Pharma, 12 March 2014).
Q.

Who pays the docket fees on the conficting claims
subject of the interpleader suit?

A.

The conflicting claimants themselves. Since the
defendants-in-interpleader are actually the ones who
make a claim - only that it was extraordinarily done
through the procedural device of interpleader - then to
them devolves the duty to pay the docket fees
prescribed under S7 R141. S7 R62 pertains only to
the docket fees for initiating the interpleader suit itself
not the claims subject thereof since the one who
initiated the interpleader suit claims no interest whatsoever
in the subject matter. (Bank of Commerce v. Planters
Development Bank, 24 September 2012).

887

RULE 63. DECLARATORY RELIEF
& SIMILAR REMEDIES
Q.

What are the remedies provided for in Rule 63?

A.

The first is declaratory relief under the first paragraph
of Rule 63.
The second paragraph provides for "similar
remedies" or more specifically the remedies of: (QCR)
1) Action for reformation of an instrument.
2) Action to quiet title.
3) Action to consolidate ownership over the real property
by the vendee a retro pursuant to Article 1607 of
the Civil Code.

Q.

What is declaratory relief?

A.

A special civil action brought by a person interested
under a deed, will, contract or other written instrument,
or whose rights are affected by a statute, executive
order or regulation, ordinance, or any other governmental
regulation (serog) to determine any question of
construction or validity arising, and for a declaration of
his rights or duties thereunder. (Si R63). (IR CV RD)

Q.

Is the enumeration of the subject matter of a
declaratory relief proceeding exclusive?

A.

Yes. Hence sufficiency or probative value of evidence,
declaration of Philippine citizenship (Santiago v.
Commissioner of Immigration, 31 January 1963),
determination of hereditary rights and status (Edades
v. Edades, 52 0.G. 5149), a court decision (DILG v.
Gatuz, 14 October 2015), and orders, resolutions, or
decisions of quasi-judicial bodies (id.) may not be the
subject matter of an action for declaratory relief.
888

Rule 63
Declaratory Relief & Similar Remedies
Q.

When may the petition for declaratory relief be
brought?

A.

It should be brought before breach or violation of the
contract or written instrument or of the statute,
executive order or regulation, ordinance, or governmental
regulation. (Si R63).

Q.

Respondents mortgaged their land to CHF Inc.
Because Respondents had defaulted in their
obligations, CHF initiated foreclosure proceedings
but the same was restrained because of an
injunction suit filed by Respondents. The Respondents
then filed an action for declaratory relief with the
CFI of Caloocan City seeking a declaration of the
extent of their actual indebtedness to CHF. CHF
was declared in default and in due course
judgment was rendered fixing the Respondents'
liability at P15 million and authorizing them to
consign the amount in court. No appeal was
interposed from the decision. Subsequently CHF
initiated anew foreclosure proceedings. Respondents
argued that the same was barred by the judgment
in the declaratory relief case. Is the Respondents'
argument meritorious?

A.

No. An action for declaratory relief by a person
interested under a deed or written instrument should
be filed before breach or violation of the deed. Where
the contract has already been breached prior to the
filing of an action for declaratory relief, the court can
no longer assume jurisdiction over the action. Here
the loan contract had already been breached prior to
the filing of the declaratory relief petition. Hence the
judgment in the declaratory relief case was a nullity
and cannot stand as a bar to the foreclosure
proceeding. (Tambunting v. Baello, 16 September 2005).

889

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In June 2011, the respondent Mayor of Malay,
Aklan issued the assailed BD 10, ordering the
closure and demolition of Boracay West Cove's
hotel on the ground that its construction in a forest
area was illegal. BO 10 was partially implemented
on June 10, 2011. Thereafter, two more instances
followed wherein respondents demolished the
improvements introduced by Boracay West Cove,
the most recent of which was made in February
2014. Alleging that the order was issued and
executed with grave abuse of discretion, petitioner
filed a Petition for Certiorari with prayer for
injunctive relief with the Court of Appeals.
The CA dismissed the petition solely on a
procedural ground, i.e., the special writ of
certiorari can only be directed against a tribunal,
board, or officer exercising judicial or quasijudicial functions and since the issuance of BD 10
was done in the exercise of executive functions,
and not of judicial or quasi-judicial functions,
certiorari will not lie. Instead, the proper remedy
for the petitioner, according to the CA, is to file a
petition for declaratory relief with the Regional
Trial Court. Is a petition for declaratory relief the
proper remedy?

A.

No. An action for declaratory relief presupposes that
there has been no actual breach of the instruments
involved or of the rights arising thereunder.
In the case at bar, the petition for declaratory
relief became unavailable by EO 10's enforcement
and implementation. The closure and demolition of
the hotel rendered futile any possible guidelines that
may be issued by the trial court for carrying out the
directives in the challenged EO 10. Indubitably, the

890

Rule 63
Declaratory Relief & Similar Remedies
CA erred when it ruled that declaratory relief is the
proper remedy given such a situation. (Aquino v.
Municipality of Malay, Aklan, 29 September 2014).
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
declaratory relief?

A.

The Regional Trial Court since an action for
declaratory relief is incapable of pecuniary estimation.
(Office of the Ombudsman v. lbay, G.R. 137538, 3
September 2001). However if the petition has farreaching implications and raises questions that should
be resolved, the Supreme Court may treat the petition
as one for prohibition or mandamus and take cognizance
thereof. (Alliance of Gov't Workers v. Minister of
Labor and Employment, 124 SCRA 7).

Q.

Resources Unlimited, a well-financed foreign
corporation would like to engage in a tax-exempt
business venture in the Philippines. Its management,
however, entertains some doubts as to whether it
could, in the light of the provisions of the
Investments Incentive Act. To resolve all doubts
and to obtain a declaration of its rights and duties
under the said law, it filed a petition for declaratory
relief with the Supreme Court. How will you
resolve said petition? Discuss. (85 Bar Q17).

A.

I would resolve to dismiss the petition for lack of
jurisdiction.
It is the Regional Trial Court, not the Supreme
Court, which has jurisdiction since an action for
declaratory relief is incapable of pecuniary estimation.
(Office of the Ombudsman v. lbay, G.R. 137538, 3
September 2001).

891

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Even if the petition were filed in the RTC, it
should still be dismissed. In declaratory relief, there
must be an actual justiciable controversy or the
ripening seeds of one between persons whose interests
are adverse. (Tolentino v. Board of Accountancy,
G.R. No. L-3062, 28 September 1951). A petition for
judicial relief cannot be used to get an advisory
opinion from the court.
Q.

In January 2005, the City of Cagayan de Oro,
through its local legislative council, enacted an
ordinance which imposed an annual mayor's permit
fee of P500 on every electric or telecommunications
post belonging to public utility companies operating
in the city. The Cagayan Electric Power and Light
Company (CEPALCO) filed a Petition for Declaratory
Relief with Damages & Prayer for Temporary
Restraining Order & Preliminary Injunction before
the Cagayan RTC assailing the ordinance's
validity. CEPALCO contended that the imposition,
in the guise of police power, was unlawful for
violating the fundamental principle that fees, charges,
and other impositions shall not be unjust,
excessive, oppressive, or confiscatory. The RTC
dismissed the petition for failure of CEPALCO to
exhaust administrative remedies pursuant to
Section 187 of the Local Government Code. The
RTC stated that CEPALCO neglected to appeal the
ordinance to the Secretary of Justice. Was the
dismissal proper?

A.

No. Section 187 of the Local Government Code,
which outlines the administrative procedure for
questioning the constitutionality or legality of a tax
ordinance or revenue measure and which requires
that an appeal of a tax ordinance or revenue measure
should be made to the Secretary of Justice within 30
days from the effectivity of the ordinance, does not
892

Rule 63
Declaratory Relief & Similar Remedies
find application in cases where the imposition is in the
nature of a regulatory fee, not a tax or revenue
measure. Here the purpose of the ordinance was the
city's need to impose some form of regulation on the
construction of electric and telecommunications
poles. Hence there was no procedural barrier preventing
CEPALCO from instituting the instant petition for
declaratory relief before the RTC. (City of Cagayan de
Oro v. CEPALCO, 17 October 2018, Reyes, J.).
Q.

In August 1969, Daymiel (respondent) served as a
casual laborer of the Provincial Engineering Office
of the Provincial Government of Zamboanga del
Norte. Eventually, respondent assumed the position
of Accounting Clerk III until his retirement in July
2003. Thereupon, respondent applied for retirement
benefits before the Government Service Insurance
System (GSIS). A tentative computation was made
pursuant to respondent's application. Initially,
GSIS granted respondent a total of 33.6 years of
creditable service with a lump sum payment
equivalent to P542,325. However, a re-computation
was made wherein GSIS credited respondent only
with 23.8 years of service instead of the initial
33.6. Accordingly, respondent's lump sum payment
was decreased to P384,295.80. Unsatisfied with
the computation, respondent wrote a letter to the
GSIS and inquired as to the legal basis for such
computation.
It appears that the re-computation was made
as a result of the implementation of Policy and
Procedural Guidelines No. 171-03 (PPG No. 17103) dated 24 March 2003 issued by then GSIS
President and General Manager Winston F. Garcia.
PPG No. 171-03 was subsequently approved by
the GSIS Board of Trustees in Resolution No. 90
dated April 2, 2003.
893

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Respondent thus filed with the RTC a petition
for declaratory relief seeking the nullification of
PPG No. 171-03 and Resolution No. 90 on the
ground of illegality. He argued that PPG 171-03
pegged the starting point of the computation on
the date of payment of monthly contributions
whereas the GSIS Act pegged the starting point at
the date of original appointment GSIS filed a
motion to dismiss invoking the GSIS Act which
vests in the GSIS the original and exclusive
jurisdiction to hear disputes on laws administered
by it. The RTC granted the motion to dismiss.
Was the dismissal proper?
A.

No. What the respondent is seeking for is the
nullification of PPG No. 171-03 and Resolution No. 90
on the ground of illegality. While respondent's
contention deals with a dispute as to the computation
of his retirement benefits, his petition mainly attacks
the legality of the assailed issuances, that is, a mere
policy of the president of a GOCC or Board
Resolution cannot amend or modify a law passed by
Congress. The determination of whether a rule issued
by an administrative agency contravenes the law or
the Constitution is within the jurisdiction of the regular
courts via a petition for declaratory relief. (GSIS v.
Daymiel, 11 March 2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
reformation of an instrument?

A.

The Regional Trial Court since an action for
reformation of an instrument is incapable of pecuniary
estimation.

894

Rule 63
Declaratory Relief & Similar Remedies
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
quieting of title?

A.

As a rule the RTC since the action is one incapable of
pecuniary estimation. An example would be an action
to quiet title to remove a mortgage annotation which
has already been paid and cancelled157 or to cancel
an invalid deed purportedly establishing an easement
of natural drainage. However, where the principal
relief sought would affect possession or title to real
property or interest therein, e.g, to nullify a deed of
sale, the action would be a real one and jurisdiction
would depend on the assessed value of the real
property. (See Reterta v. Mores, 17 August 2011).

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action to
consolidate ownership over real property pursuant
to Article 1607?

A.

The MTC or RTC depending on the assessed value of
the subject real property. This is because the action to
consolidate ownership is a real action which affects
title over the land subject of the sale a retro. Note that
the action to consolidate ownership under Article
1607 is not a "mere" proceeding to register the
consolidation of ownership in the vendee a retro, but
an adversarial special civil action in which the vendor
a retro is given the opportunity to dispute the nature of
the contract by arguing, for instance, that it is actually
an equitable mortgage rather than a true sale a retro.
(See ARACELI BAVIERA, SALES 168 [1981 ed.]).

157While in Bank of Commerce v. San Pablo, 522 SCRA 713 (2007), it was
held that an action to quiet title by removing an invalid mortgage was a real
action, it is opined that such action was incapable of pecuniary estimation
because the action would not affect title to or possession of real property.

895

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is there a cause of action in proceedings for
declaratory relief?

A.

Yes because of the expanded concept of cause of
actions in proceedings for declaratory relief. The
concept of cause of actions in declaratory relief is not,
as in ordinary civil action, the wrong or delict by which
the Plaintiff's rights are violated, but is extended to a
mere denial, refusal or challenge raising at least an
uncertainty or insecurity which is injurious to plaintiff's
rights. (Id.). It is permitted on the theory that courts should
be allowed to act, not only when harm is actually done
and rights jeopardized by physical wrongs or physical
attack upon existing legal relation, but also when
challenge, refusal, dispute, or denial thereof is made
amounting to a live controversy. (Multi-Realty Dev't
Corp. v. Makati Tuscany Condominium Corp., G.R.
146726, 16 June 2006). In Multi-Realty Dev't Corp.,
there was a refusal of a condominium corporation to
recognize a condominium unit owner's right to
unassigned parking slots because of a dispute as to
the terms of the Master Deed. This gave rise to an
expanded cause of action on the part of the unit
owner to file a declaratory relief case. (Id.)

Q.

May the petitioner move for a summary judgment
in an action for declaratory relief?

A.

Yes. (Si R35).

Q.

Who should be made parties to a declaratory
relief proceeding?

A.

All persons who have or claim any interest which
would be affected by the declaration shall be made
parties; and no declaration shall prejudice the rights of
persons not parties to the action, unless otherwise
provided in the Rules of Court. (62 R63).

896

Rule 63
Declaratory Relief & Similar Remedies
Q.

What is the effect of the failure to include as
defendant a party who would be adversely affected
by the declaratory judgment of the court?

A.

The non-joinder of persons who claim any interest
which may be affected by a declaratory judgment is
not a jurisdictional defect as S2 R63 provides that said
declaration shall not prejudice their interests. Since
the judgment in a declaratory relief case is merely
declaratory and not executory, the rule on compulsory
joinder of indispensable parties does not apply.

Q.

When is notice to the Solicitor General or to the
prosecutor or attorney of a local government unit
involved required?

A.

In any action which involves the validity of a statute,
executive order or regulation, or any other governmental
regulation (serg), the Solicitor General shall be
notified by the party assailing the same and shall be
entitled to be heard upon such question. (S3 R63).
In any action which involving the validity of a local
government ordinance the corresponding prosecutor or
attorney of the local government unit involved shall be
similarly notified and entitled to be heard. If such
ordinance is alleged to be unconstitutional the
Solicitor General shall also be notified and entitled to
be heard. (S4 R63).

Q.

In a petition for declaratory relief questioning the
constitutionality of a law, is there a need to
implead the Republic?

A.

No, the Republic need not be impleaded. Mere notice
to the Office of the Solicitor General is sufficient under
S3 R63. (Zomer Dev't Co. v. Court of Appeals, 7
January 2020, e.b., Leonen, J.).

897

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May the court refuse to hear or try a declaratory
relief petition?

A.

Yes. The court motu proprio or upon motion, may
refuse to exercise the power to declare rights and to
construe instruments in any case where a decision
would not terminate the uncertainty or controversy
which gave rise to the action, or in any case where
the declaration or construction is not necessary and
proper under the circumstances. (85 R63). Note that
this provision does not apply to an action for reformation,
quieting of title, or consolidation of ownership. (Id.).

Q.

May a declaratory relief action be converted into
an ordinary action?

A.

Yes if before the final termination of the case, a
breach or violation of an instrument or a statute,
executive order or regulation, ordinance, or any other
governmental regulation should take place, the action
may thereupon be converted into an ordinary action,
and the parties shall be allowed to file such pleadings
as may be necessary and proper. (86 R63).

898

RULE 64. REVIEW OF JUDGMENTS AND
FINAL ORDERS OR RESOLUTIONS OF THE
COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS AND THE
COMMISSION ON AUDIT
Q.

What is nature and purpose of Rule 64?

A.

Rule 64 is a remedy available to a party who seeks
the review by the Supreme Court of a judgment or
final order or resolution of the Commission on Elections
and the Commission on Audit.
While a mode of review, R64 clearly provides
that it is governed by the provisions of R65 on
certiorari, except as provided in R64. Paradoxically,
R64 is a special civil action of certiorari which is not
an original action but a mode of review.

Q.

What is the basis of R64?

A.

Section 7 of Article IX of the Constitution which
provides that "[u]nless otherwise provided by this
Constitution or by law, any decision, order, or ruling of
each Commission may be brought to the Supreme
Court on certiorari by the aggrieved party within thirty
days from receipt of a copy thereof." In Dario v.
Mison, G.R. No. 81954, 8 August 1989, the Supreme
Court held that the word certiorari in this provision
refers to the special civil action of certiorari under R65
not the petition for review on certiorari under R45.

Q.

Why is the Civil Service Commission excluded
from the coverage of R64?

A.

Because R.A. No. 7902 provides that the appeal from
the CSC shall be to the Court of Appeals. Hence
judgments or final orders of the CSC should be
appealed to the Court of Appeals pursuant to R43.
899

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Esteves filed an election protest with the RTC of
Baler, Aurora. Bitong moved to dismiss the
election protest because it did not specify the
precincts where fraud and irregularities were allegedly
committed. The RTC issued an order denying the
motion to dismiss. Bitong assailed the denial in a
petition for certiorari and prohibition with the
COMELEC. The COMELEC (2 1d Division) rendered
a decision which nullified the RTC's denial order
and dismissed Esteves' election protest. Esteves
then filed a petition for certiorari under Rule 64
with the SC assailing the 2"d Division's decision.
May the petition of Esteves be dismissed?

A.

Yes. Under Article IX-C, Section 3 of the Constitution,
an aggrieved party must first file a motion for
reconsideration of a resolution of a Division to the
COMELEC en banc. This requirement of a motion for
reconsideration is mandatory and jurisdictional in
invoking the power of review of the High Court. Failure to
abide by this requirement constitutes a good ground
for the dismissal of the petition. (Esteves v. Sarmiento,
G.R. 182374, 11 November 2008).

Q.

Within what time should the petition for certiorari
under R64 be filed?

A.

The petition shall be filed within 30 days from notice
of the judgment or final order or resolution sought to
be reviewed. If a motion for new trial or reconsideration is
filed and denied, the movant shall have the remaining
period within which to file the petition but which shall
not be less than 5 days, reckoned from notice of the
denial. (S3 R64).

900

Rule 64
Review Of Judgments And Final Orders
Or Resolutions Of The Commission On Elections
And The Commission On Audit
Q. On 4 February 2008 the Petitioner received the
resolution of the COMELEC's First Division. On 8
February 2008, the Petitioner filed a motion for
reconsideration of the resolution which motion
was elevated to the COMELEC en banc for
resolution. On 22 September 2008 the Petitioner
received the resolution of COMELEC en banc
denying his motion for reconsideration. On 22
October 2008, Petitioner filed with the Supreme
Court his petition for certiorari under R64 to set
aside the COMELEC en banc's resolution.
Respondent moved to dismiss on the ground that
the petition was filed out of time. Petitioner
contended that pursuant to the Neypes rule, he
had a fresh 30-day period from 22 September, the
day when he received notice of the denial of his
motion for reconsideration. Was the petition for
certiorari under R64 timely filed?
A.

No. The petition was not timely filed and thus should
be dismissed. Under S3 R64, if a motion for
reconsideration of a judgment or final order of the
COMELEC is filed and denied, the movant shall file
the petition within the remaining period, but which
shall not be less than 5 days in any event, reckoned
from notice of denial. Since the Petitioner had used
up 3 days at the time he filed his motion for
reconsideration on 8 February, then his remaining
period was only 27 days, not 30 days.158 Hence the

158In the case, the Supreme Court committed an oversight in stating that
Petitioner had a remaining period of 26 days. The Petitioner actually had 27 days
left. The day when he filed his motion for reconsideration (February 8), which
interrupts the running of the period, is excluded in the computation of the period,
and forms part of the remaining period counted from notice of denial of the
motion. (See 52 R22; De las Alas v. CA, 83 SCRA 200). Hence the remaining
period is 27 (not 26) days and thus the last day of the remaining period fell on 19
October 2008 (Sunday) and not 18 October 2008 (Saturday). The oversight
nonetheless did not affect the correctness of the result since Petitioner had filed
his petition on 22 October 2008, which was still beyond the effective last day of
20 October 2008 (Monday).

901

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Petition which was filed on the 30th day from notice of
the denial of his motion for reconsideration was filed
out of time.
Petitioner's argument that he had a fresh 30-day
period from notice of denial of his motion for
reconsideration is without merit. The Neypes rule
does not apply to petitions under R64 since there is
an explicit provision in 53 R64 which states that the
movant has only the remaining period, which shall not
less than 5 days, to file his petition, reckoned from
notice of denial. (Pates v. COMELEC, G.R. 184915,
30 June 2009, e.b.).
Q.

Will the filing of the petition for certiorari under
R64 stay the execution of the judgment or final
order sought to be reviewed?

A.

No, unless the Supreme Court shall direct otherwise
upon such terms as it may deem just. (S8 R64).

902

RULE 65. CERTIORARI, PROHIBITION,
AND MANDAMUS
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over the special civil
actions for certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus?

A.

There is concurrent original jurisdiction among the
Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, the Regional Trial
Courts, the Sandiganbayan, and the COMELEC.
In City of Manila v. Grecia-Cuerdo, 4 February
2014 (e.b.), the Supreme Court held that it is the
Court of Tax Appeals, not the Court of Appeals, which
has jurisdiction over a special civil action for certiorari
assailing an interlocutory order issued by the RTC in
a local tax case, since such a case falls within the
CTA's exclusive appellate jurisdiction.

Q.

Does it mean then that a person has an unfettered
discretion to choose which among the aforesaid
courts he may file the special civil action under R65?

A.

No. The concurrence of jurisdiction should not be
taken to mean that the parties have an absolute,
unrestrained freedom of choice of the court to which
they will file their application or petition. There is an
ordained sequence of recourse to courts vested with
concurrent jurisdiction beginning from the lowest to
the highest. This hierarchy is determinative of the
venue of appeals and is likewise determinative of the
proper forum for petitions for extraordinary writs. A
direct invocation of the Supreme Court's original
jurisdiction to issue these writs should be allowed only
when there are special and important reasons therefor,
clearly and specifically set out in the petition. (Montes
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 143797, 4 May 2006).
This is known as the principle or doctrine of "hierarchy
of courts."
903

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

On 15 December 2014, the Department of
Transportation and Communication (DOTC) and
its attached agency, the Civil Aviation Authority of
the Philippines (CAAP), posted an Invitation to
Pre-qualify and Bid (Invitation) on the airport
development, operations, and maintenance of the
Bacolod-Silay, Davao, Iloilo, Laguindingan, New
Bohol (Panglao), and Puerto Princesa Airports
(collectively, Projects). On March 10, 2015, the
DOTC and the CAAP issued the Instructions to
Prospective Bidders (ITPB), which provided that
prospective bidders are to pre-qualify and bid for
the development, operations, and maintenance of
the airports, which are now bundled into two
groups (collectively, the Bundled Projects), namely:
Bundle 1: Bacolod-Silay and Iloilo; and Bundle 2:
Davao, Laguindingan, and New Bohol (Panglao).
The costs of Bundle 1 and Bundle 2 are P50.66
Billion and P59.66 Billion, respectively. The Puerto
Princesa Airport project was not included in
the bundling.
On 27 March 2015, petitioner GIOS-SAMAR,
Inc., suing as a taxpayer and invoking the
transcendental importance of the issue, filed a
petition for prohibition with the Supreme Court.
Petitioner argues that the bundling of the Projects
is unconstitutional because it will: (i) create a
monopoly; (ii) allow the creation and operation of
a combination in restraint of trade; (iii) violate
anti-dummy laws and statutes giving citizens the
opportunity to invest in public utilities; and (iv)
enable companies with shaky financial backgrounds
to participate in the Projects. Was the filing of
the petition for prohibition with the Supreme
Court proper?

904

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
A.

No. While the Supreme Court has original and
concurrent jurisdiction over petitions for certiorari,
prohibition, and mandamus with other courts, litigants
do not have unfettered discretion to invoke the SC's
original jurisdiction. The doctrine of hierarchy of courts
dictates that, direct recourse to this Court is allowed
only to resolve questions of law, notwithstanding
the invocation of paramount or transcendental
importance of the action. This doctrine is not mere
policy, rather, it is a constitutional filtering mechanism
designed to enable the Court to focus on the more
fundamental and essential tasks assigned to it by the
highest law of the land.
Petitioner's arguments against the constitutionality
of the bundling of the Projects are inextricably
intertwined with underlying questions of fact, the
determination of which require the reception of
evidence. The SC, however, is not a trier of fact. It
cannot resolve these factual issues at the first instance.
Hence the petition should be dismissed. (Gios-Samar
Inc. v. DOTC, e.b., 12 March 2019, Jardeleza, J.).

Sec. 1. Petition for certiorari
Q.

What is the special civil action of certiorari?

A.

An extraordinary remedy by which an aggrieved
person prays for a judgment annulling or modifying
the proceedings of a tribunal, board or officer
exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions on the
ground that such tribunal, board or officer has acted
without or in excess of its or his jurisdiction, or with
grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack of or
excess of jurisdiction. (Si R65).

905

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Define the phrase "without jurisdiction."

A.

It refers to a case where the court or quasi-court does
not have subject-matter jurisdiction over the case
or dispute.

Q.

Define the phrase "in excess of jurisdiction."

A.

It refers to a case where the court or quasi-court has
subject-matter jurisdiction but it issues an order which
it has no power or which is beyond its power to do so.
For instance the RTC of Manila issues a preliminary
injunction seeking to restrain a person in Batangas
from performing a particular act.

Q.

Define the phrase "with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction."

A.

When a court or quasi-court abuses its discretion in a
manner which is so patent and gross as to amount to
an evasion of positive duty or to a virtual refusal to
perform a duty enjoined by law, or to act at all in
contemplation of law. For instance a court grants a
motion for preliminary attachment on the sole ground
that the defendant is in imminent danger of insolvency.

Q.

May an administrative agency like the Department
of Agrarian Reform Adjudication Board issue
writs of certiorari?

A.

No. Administrative agencies, such as the Department
of Agrarian Refonn Adjudication Board (DARAB), are
not courts of law exercising judicial power. The power
to issue writs of certiorari is an incident of judicial
review. Thus, administrative agencies may not issue
writs of certiorari to annul acts of officers or state
organs even when they exercise supervisory authority
over these officers or organs. (Zoleta v. Land Bank, 9
August 2017, Leonen, J.).
906

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Q.

Petitioners, who are complainants before the
prosecutor's office in Davao City, filed a petition
for certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus against
the Secretary of Justice to set aside the issuance
of a department order which directed all prosecutors
to forward all cases already filed against Celso de
los Angeles of the Legacy Group to the
Secretariat of the Special Panel created by the
Department of Justice in Manila. Was the filing of
the petition proper?

A.

No. Petitions for certiorari and prohibition are directed
only to tribunals that exercise judicial or quasi-judicial
functions. The issuance of the department order was
a purely administrative or executive function of the
Secretary of Justice. Nor is mandamus proper to
control or review the exercise of discretion. (Dacudao
v. Secretary of Justice, 8 January 2013, e.b.,
Bersamin, J.).

Q.

Is a special civil action for certiorari against the
Secretary of Finance and the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue proper in order to set aside the
BIR's Revenue Regulation No. 2-2012 which imposed
value-added taxes on the importation of petroleum
into the freeport and special economic zones?

A.

No. Respondents do not fall within the ambit of a
tribunal, board, or officer exercising judicial or quasijudicial functions. They issued RR 2-2012 in the
exercise of their quasi-legislative or rule-making powers,
and not judicial or quasi-judicial functions. Respondents
did not adjudicate or determine the rights of the
parties. (Clark Investors & Locators Assoc. v.
Secretary of Finance, 6 July 2015, Villarama, J.)

907

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

The Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) issued
the Rules for Setting the Electric Cooperatives'
Wheeling Rates (RSEC-WR) and Resolution No. 14
which set the electric cooperatives' wheeling
rates and allowed the electric cooperatives to
collect contributions from members for capital
contributions. The Petitioners, who are members
of electric cooperatives, filed a special civil action
for certiorari with the Supreme Court to set aside
Resolution No. 14. Was the resort to a special civil
action for certiorari proper?

A.

No. The ERC did not exercise judicial or quasi-judicial
functions in issuing and implementing the RSEC-WR
and Resolution No. 14. It was not called upon to
adjudicate the rights of contending parties or to
exercise, in any manner, discretion of a judicial or
quasi-judicial nature. Instead, RSEC-WR and Resolution
No. 14 were done in the exercise of the ERC's quasilegislative and administrative functions. It was in the
nature of subordinate legislation, promulgated in the
exercise of its delegated power. Quasi-legislative
power is exercised by administrative agencies
through the promulgation of rules and regulations
within the confines of the granting statute and the
doctrine of non-delegation of powers flowing from the
separation of the branches of the government.
Particularly, the ERC applied its rule-making power as
expressly granted by Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9136
("Electric Power Industry Reform Act of 2001" or
EPIRA). (Rosales v. Energy Regulatoty Commission,
5 April 2016, e.b., Peralta, J.).

908

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Q.

The petitioner, who is gay, filed pro se before the
Supreme Court a Petition for Certiorari and
Prohibition under R65. His petition sought to
declare Articles 1 and 2 of the Family Code as
unconstitutional. Petitioner alleged that there is
no necessity to limit marriage as only between a
man and a woman, and thus Articles 1 and 2 of
the Family Code are unconstitutional for depriving
petitioner of his right to liberty without substantive
due process of law. Was the resort to a petition
for certiorari to challenge the constitutionality of
Articles 1 and 2 of the Family Code proper?

A.

No. R65 petitions are not per se remedies to address
constitutional issues. The Supreme Court has been
categorical that, in certain instances, declaratory relief
is proper should there be a question of the
constitutionality of a statute, executive order or
regulation, ordinance, or any other governmental regulation.
The remedy of declaratory relief acknowledges that
there are instances when questions of validity or
constitutionality cannot be resolved in a factual
vacuum devoid of substantial evidence on record for
which trial courts are better equipped to gather and
determine. Here, considering that there is an abysmal
dearth of facts to sustain a finding of an actual case or
controversy and the existence of a direct injury to
petitioner (no showing by petitioner that he had
applied for a marriage license), a petition for
declaratory relief resolved after full-blown trial in a trial
court would have been the more appropriate remedy.
(FaIds v. Civil Registrar General, 3 September 2019,
e.b., Leonen, J.).

909

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioner applied for the position of RTC Judge.
The JBC informed the petitioner that he was not
included in the list of candidates for the said
stations because of the JBC's long-standing
policy of opening the chance for promotion to
second-level courts to, among others, incumbent
judges who have served in their current position
for at least five years, and since the petitioner has
been a MTC judge only for more than a year, he
was excluded from the list. Petitioner filed a
petition for certiorari and prohibition with the SC
assailing the policy as unconstitutional and as
having been issued with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction.
May the SC take cognizance of the petition for
certiorari and prohibition?

A.

Yes. As a rule, the special civil actions for certiorari
would lie only as against judicial and quasi-judicial
acts, with respect to certiorari, and judicial, quasijudicial, and ministerial acts, with respect to prohibition.
With respect to the Supreme Court, however, the
remedies of certiorari and prohibition are necessarily
broader in scope and reach, and the writ of certiorari
or prohibition may be issued to correct errors of
jurisdiction committed not only by a tribunal,
corporation, board or officer exercising judicial, quasijudicial or ministerial functions but also to set right,
undo and restrain any act of grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction by any
branch or instrumentality of the Government, even if
the latter does not exercise judicial, quasi-judicial or
ministerial functions. This application is expressly
authorized by the text of the second paragraph of
Section 1, Article VIII of the Constitution on the
expanded judicial power of the SC. (Villanueva v.

910

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Judicial and Bar Council, 7 April 2015, e.b., Reyes, J.;
Council of Teachers and Staff of Colleges and
Universities of the Philippines v. Secretary of Education,
9 October 2018, e.b., Caguioa, J.).
See also Araullo v. Aquino, 1 July 2014, e.b.,
Bersamin, J., where the SC, invoking its expanded
jurisdiction, said that prohibition and certiorari were
proper to challenge the Disbursement Acceleration
Program (DAP) and related issuances of the Department
of Budget and Management implementing the DAP
notwithstanding that the same do not involve judicial,
quasi-judicial, or ministerial acts; and Private Hospitals
Assoc. v. MediaIdea, 6 Nov 2018, e.b., Tijam, J.,
where it was held that certiorari & prohibition were
proper to challenge the constitutionality of RA 10932
(Anti-Hospital Deposit Law) even if what was involved
was legislative and not judicial, quasi-judicial, or
ministerial function.
Q.

May the question on whether the Secretary of
Justice committed grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction in
affirming, reversing, or modifying the resolutions
of prosecutors be the subject of a petition for
certiorari under R65?

A.

Yes, even when an administrative agency does not
perform a judicial, quasi-judicial, or ministerial
function, the Constitution mandates the exercise of
judicial review when there is an allegation of grave
abuse of discretion. (De Lima v. Reyes, 11 January
2016, Leonen, J.).

911

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME
Q.

Distinguish a Petition for Review on Certiorari
from a Special Civil Action for Certiorari.

A.

AS TO GOVERNING RULE. A petition for review on
certiorari is governed by Rule 45, while a special civil
action for certiorari is governed by Rule 65.
AS TO NATURE OF PROCEEDING. A petition
for review on certiorari is a mode of appeal, while a
special civil action for certiorari is an original action.
AS TO JURISDICTION. A petition for review on
certiorari is under the exclusive appellate jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, while a special civil action for
certiorari is under the concurrent original jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, the
Regional Trial Court, the Sandiganbayan, and the
COMELEC.
AS TO REQUIREMENT OF A MOTION FOR
RECONSIDERATION. A petition for review on
certiorari does not require the filing of a motion for
reconsideration with the lower court, while the filing of
a motion for reconsideration is a condition precedent
to the filing of a special civil action for certiorari.
AS TO REGLEMENTARY PERIOD. A petition
for review on certiorari should be filed within 15 days
from notice of the judgment or final order being
appealed from, while a special civil action for certiorari
should be filed within 60 days from notice of the
judgment, order, or resolution.
AS TO FINDINGS OF FACTS. Findings of facts
of the Court of Appeals are binding upon the Supreme
Court in a petition for review on certiorari, while in a
special civil action for certiorari, the findings of fact of
the Court of Appeals are not binding upon the
Supreme Court.
912

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
AS TO IMPLEADING OF PARTIES. In appeal by
certiorari, the lower courts or judges whose decisions
are subject of review are not impleaded either as
petitioners or respondents, while in a special civil
action for certiorari, the lower court or judge whose
orders or proceedings are subject to challenge are
impleaded as public respondents.
Q.

Why is certiorari an extraordinary remedy?

A.

Because it is only available where there is no appeal,
or any plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the
ordinary course of law. (Si R65).

Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from a
judgment declaring presumptive death under Article
41 of the Family Code?

A.

A special civil action for certiorari. Judgment declaring
presumptive death under Article 41 of the Family
Code is immediately final and executory and cannot
be appealed, the remedy of the aggrieved party is a
special civil action for certiorari under R65. (Republic
v. Cantor, 10 December 2013).

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that certiorari
is not a substitute to a lapsed remedy of appeal?

A.
1) When public policy and the advancement of the
public welfare so dictate.
2) When the broader interests of justice so require.
3) When the writs issued are null.
4) When the questioned order amounts to an
oppressive exercise of judicial authority. (Leyte IV
Electric Cooperative v. LEYECO IV Employees
Union, G.R. No. 157775, 19 October 2007).
913

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
5) When appeal is not a plain, speedy, and adequate
remedy.
Q.

P files a collection case for P500,000 against D.
D was declared in default on the ground that his
answer was filed beyond the reglementary period.
D filed a motion for reconsideration in which he
submitted proof that his answer was filed on the
15th day from service of summons. The trial court
denied the motion on the ground that it was not
accompanied by an affidavit of merits. Default
judgment rendered against D who received a copy
of the judgment on March 1. D filed a motion for
reconsideration which was denied in an order
received by D on April 1. On May 3, D filed a
special civil action for certiorari with the CA to set
aside the default judgment. P argued that the
petition should be dismissed since the proper remedy
was appeal. Should the petition for certiorari
be dismissed?

A.

No. The trial court acted with grave abuse of discretion
when it declared the defendant in default despite the
fact that there was proof that he had timely filed his
answer. Furthermore a motion for reconsideration
need not be accompanied by an affidavit of merits.
Appeal is not an adequate remedy since D was not
able to present any evidence before the court a quo
and the appeal would hence be decided on the basis
solely of the plaintiffs evidence. (Balangcad v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 83888, 12 February 1998).

Q.

P filed a collection case against D before the RTC.
P won the case and D filed a notice of appeal. P
then filed with the RTC a motion for execution
pending appeal on the ground that he was posting
a bond to indemnify D for any damages that may

914

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
be caused him by the execution and on the ground
that D's appeal was flimsy and dilatory. After due
notice and hearing, the RTC granted the motion.
a) Was the grant of the motion for execution
pending appeal proper?
b) What would be the remedy of D against the
execution?
A.
a) The mere posting of a bond is not a good ground
for the issuance of discretionary execution.
Otherwise, execution pending appeal would issue
as a matter of course. Likewise the ground that
the appeal is dilatory is not a good ground.
Otherewise the trial court would be virtually preempting the appellate court's decision on the
appeal. (Ong v. Court of Appeals, 203 SCRA 38).
b) D may file a special civil action for certiorari to set
aside the order granting execution pending
appeal. The order was issued with grave abuse of
discretion amounting to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction. Appeal although available to D is not an
adequate remedy as the writ of execution was
already issued. (Presbitetio v. Rodas, 73 Phil. 300).
Q.

C filed a complaint for illegal dismissal against X
Company before the Labor Arbiter. The Labor
Arbiter ruled in favor of C and ordered his
reinstatement and the payment of back wages. X
Company appealed to the National Labor Relations
Commission which set aside the Labor Arbiter's
decision and found that the dismissal of C was
valid. C's motion for reconsideration was denied. What
is the remedy of C from the NLRC's adverse ruling?

915

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

C's remedy is to file a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals on the ground that the
decision of the NLRC was rendered with grave abuse
of discretion amounting to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction. The petition for certiorari should be initially
filed with the Court of Appeals in strict observance of
the doctrine on the hierarchy of courts. (St. Martin
Funeral Home v. NLRC, 295 SCRA 494 [19981).

Q.

JEWM Corporation bought two parcels of registered
land covered by TCT Nos. 325675 and 325676 on
which notices of lis pendens, including that of a
case filed by the spouses Crisologo against
JEWM's predecessor-in-interest, were annotated.
JEWM filed with the Regional Trial Court an action
against the register of deeds and "John and Jane
Does" to cancel the notices of lis pendens on the
registered land pursuant to Section 108 of the
Property Registration Decree. The spouses Crisologo
were not impleaded. The spouses Crisologo filed
a motion to be recognized as parties but did not
file a motion for intervention on their belief that
they were included among the John and Jane
Does. The RTC denied the motion and a
subsequent motion for reconsideration. The spouses
Crisologo thus filed a petition under Rule 65 with
the Court of Appeals to set aside the RTC's order.
The CA dismissed the petition on the grounds
that there were adequate reliefs available to the
spouses Crisologo, that is, a motion for intervention
and appeal; and that the spouses Crisologos as
non-parties in the RTC case cannot avail of R65.
Did the CA act correctly in dismissing the petition
for certiorari?

916

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
A.

No. The spouses Crisologo's liens were annotated at
the back of TCT Nos. 325675 and 325676. Thus, as
persons with their liens annotated, they stand to be
benefited or injured by any order relative to the
cancellation of annotations in the pertinent TCTs. In
other words, they are as indispensable as JEWM itself
in the final disposition of the case for cancellation, being
one of the many lien holders. As indispensable
parties, Spouses Crisologo should have been joined
as defendants in the case pursuant to S7 R3.
Although intervention under Rule 19 could have
been availed of, the failure to use this remedy should
not prejudice Spouses Crisologo. It is the duty of RTCBr. 14, following the rule on joinder of indispensable
parties, to simply recognize them, with or without any
motion to intervene. Through a cursory reading of the
titles, the Court would have noticed the adverse rights
of Spouses Crisologo over the cancellation of any
annotations in the subject TCTs.
Neither will appeal prove adequate as a remedy
since only the original parties to an action can appeal.
Here, Spouses Crisologo were never impleaded.
Hence, they could not have utilized appeal as they
never possessed the required legal standing in the
first place. Moreover appeal is not available as
against an interlocutory order.
The same is also true if recourse to annulment of
judgment under Rule 47 is made since this remedy
presupposes a final judgment already rendered by a
trial court.
The fact that the spouses Crisologo were not
parties in the RTC should not preclude resort to R65
because they were indispensable parties and the lack
of legal standing was not their fault. The SC thus
struck down the CA rulings and ordered the remand
917

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
of the case to the RTC for the Spouses Crisologo and
all other lien holders to be impleaded. (Crisologo v.
JEWM Agro-Ind. Corp., 3 March 2014).
Q.

Siguion Reyna Montecillo & Ongsiako Law Offices
(SRMO) acted as counsel for Remedios N. Rodriguez
(Remedios) when she commenced an action for
the intestate settlement of the estate of her deceased
husband Susano J. Rodriguez before the Regional
Trial Court. During the pendency of the intestate
proceedings, Remedios asked for the payment of
widow's allowance. She was subsequently granted a
monthly widow's allowance of P3,000.00. While
the case was pending, Remedios executed a Deed
of Sale of Inheritance wherein she agreed to sell
all her rights, interests and participation in the
estate to Gerardo in consideration of P200,000.00.
Remedios, executed a special power of attorney
authorizing Gerardo to receive all moneys due to
her from the inheritance or estate.
Gerardo later on executed a document titled
as "Substitution of Attorney-in-Fact," where he
designated SRMO as substitute attorney pursuant
to the power of substitution granted to him in the
earlier SPA. Gerardo subsequently executed his
own SPA authorizing SRMO "[t]o appear... and
represent [Gerardo] in any and all proceedings
and incidents in the estate proceedings." SRMO
filed a motion with the RTC for the payment of the
allowance then amounting to a total of P315,000.00.
A few months after, the Estate remitted to SRMO
three (3) checks totaling this amount
Subsequently the RTC motu proprio directed
SRMO to reimburse the Estate the amount of
P315,000 representing the widow's allowance it
received. The court stated that Remedios was no
longer entitled to the allowance after selling her
918

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
hereditary share. SRMO moved to be excused
from reimbursing the Estate. According to SRMO,
when it sought the payment of the widow's allowance,
it was merely seeking the enforcement of a
judgment credit in favor of its client, Remedios,
who had, in turn, sold her interests to Gerardo,
also represented by SRMO. The RTC denied
SRMO's motion. Aggrieved by the RTC's orders,
SRMO elevated the case to the CA through a
petition for certiorari. SRMO argued that it merely
acted as representative of Gerardo, Remedios'
successor-in-interest, when it received the sum
corresponding to the widow's allowance. Without
going into the merits of the case, however, the CA
denied SRMO's petition on the ground that the
latter was not a party in the case before the lower
court and therefore had no standing to question
the assailed order. Was the denial of the petition
on such ground correct?
A.

No. The general rule is that a person not a party to
the proceedings in the trial court cannot maintain an
action for certiorari in the CA or the Supreme Court to
have the order or decision of the trial court reviewed.
The peculiar facts of this case, however, call for a less
stringent application of the rule. The facts show that
SRMO became involved in its own capacity only when
the RTC ordered it to return the money that it received
on behalf of its client. The order of reimbursement
was directed to SRMO in its personal capacity-not in
its capacity as counsel for either Remedios or Gerardo.
That SRMO is being required to reimburse from its
own coffers money already transmitted to its client is
sufficient to give SRMO direct interest to challenge
the RTC's order. (Siguion Reyna Montecillo Ongsiako
v. Chionglo-Sia, 3 February 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

919

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

A complaint-affidavit was filed with the Office of
the Ombudsman against Mayor Jejomar Binay Jr.
charging him with plunder and violation of the
Anti-Graft Law in connection with the construction
of the Makati City hall parking building. The OMB
issued an order placing Binay under preventive
suspension without pay for not more than 6
months during the pendency of the investigation.
Binay filed a petition for certiorari with the Court
of Appeals seeking the nullification of the
preventive suspension order and praying for the
issuance of a TRO and/or writ of preliminary
injunction to enjoin its implementation. The OMB
filed a motion to dismiss the petition invoking
Section 14 of R.A. No. 6770 or the Ombudsman
Act which reads as follows:
Section 14. Restrictions. — No writ of injunction
shall be issued by any court to delay an investigation
being conducted by the Ombudsman under this Act,
unless there is a prima fade evidence that the
subject matter of the investigation is outside the
jurisdiction of the Office of the Ombudsman.
No court shall hear any appeal or application
for remedy against the decision or findings of the
Ombudsman, except the Supreme Court, on pure
question of law.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. The first paragraph is irrelevant since it evidently
speaks of a writ of injunction issued as a provisional
remedy. This is shown by the phrase, "to delay an
investigation being conducted by the Ombudsman."
Hence the first paragraph does not deal with subjectmatter jurisdiction.

920

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
The second paragraph on the other hand is
unconstitutional and void. It limits the remedy against
"decision or findings" of the Ombudsman to a Rule 45
appeal and thus attempts to effectively increase the
Supreme Court's appellate jurisdiction without its
advice and concurrence in violation of Section 30, Art.
VI of the Constitution.
Since the preventive suspension order is interlocutory
and thus unappealable, the remedy for an aggrieved
party is a R65 petition with the CA pursuant to the
doctrine of hierarchy of courts. (Carpio Morales v.
Court of Appeals, 10 November 2015, e.b., PerlasBernabe, J.).
Q.

Is the filing of a motion for reconsideration of the
court's or quasi-judicial body's decision, order, or
ruling a requirement for the filing of a special civil
action for certiorari?

A.

Yes, the general rule is that the person filing a special
civil action for certiorari should first have moved for
the reconsideration of the court or quasi-judicial
body's decision. The reason is to afford the court or
body an opportunity at the first instance to correct the
imputed error. (BA. Finance Corp. v. Pineda, L-61628,
29 December 1982).

Q.

Is the foregoing rule subject to exceptions?

A.

Yes. In the following instances, a prior motion for
reconsideration is not necessary:
1)

When the challenged order is a patent nullity.
(Luzon Surety Co. v. Marbella, L-16088, 30
September 1960).

2)

When the case involves matters of extreme
urgency. (Matutina v. Bus/on, L-14637, 24 August
1960).
921

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3)

When the issue raised is one purely of law.
(Amante v. Sison, 60 Phil. 949).

4) Where public interest is involved. (National
Electrification Administration v. Court of Appeals,
126 SCRA 394).
5) When the question raised in the certiorari petition
had been properly raised, argued and submitted
to the respondent court or body and passed upon by
(Femandez v. Caluag, L-16124, 30 December 1961).
Q.

A judgment was rendered by the RTC granting the
petition for declaration of presumptive death of
the spouse filed by the private respondent. Without •
filing a motion for reconsideration, the petitioner
Republic filed a petition for certiorari under R65 to
set aside the RTC's decision. Petitioner's main
contention is that private respondent failed to
establish a "well-founded belief that his missing
wife was already dead.
The CA dismissed the petition because no
motion for reconsideration was filed with the
court a quo. The CA ruled that such defect was
fatal and warranted the immediate dismissal of
the petition. Was the dismissal of the petition on
this ground proper?

A.

No. Parties cannot seek reconsideration, nor appeal
decisions in summary judicial proceedings under the
Family Code because by express mandate of Article
247 of the Family Code, judgments rendered thereunder
are immediately final and executory.
While parties are precluded from filing a motion
reconsideration
or a notice of appeal, in a petition
for
for declaration of presumptive death, they may
challenge the decision of the court a quo through a
922

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
petition for certiorari to •question grave abuse of
discretion amounting to lack of jurisdiction. (Republic
v. Catubag, 18 April 2018, Reyes, J.).
Q.

In a petition for financial rehabilitation filed with
the Special Commercial Court pursuant to the Financial
Rehabilitation and Insolvency Act of 2010, what is
the remedy of an aggrieved party from an order
approving or disapproving a rehabilitation plan?

A.

The remedy of the aggrieved party is to file a petition
for certiorari with the Court of Appeals under R65
within 15 days from notice of the decision or order.
(S2 R6, 2013 Financial Rehabilitation Rules of
Procedure).

Q.

Where should a special civil action for certiorari
seeking to set aside an interlocutory order of the
RTC in a local tax case be filed? With the Court of
Appeals or the Court of Tax Appeals?

A.

The Court of Tax Appeals. The power of the CIA
includes that of determining whether or not there has
been grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or
excess of jurisdiction on the part of the RTC in issuing
an interlocutory order in cases falling within the
exclusive appellate jurisdiction of the tax court. It,
thus, follows that the CIA, by constitutional mandate,
is vested with jurisdiction to issue writs of certiorari in
these cases. Since appellate jurisdiction over private
respondents' complaint for tax refund is vested in the
CIA, it follows that a petition for certiorari seeking
nullification of an interlocutory order issued in the said
case should, likewise, be filed with the same court. To
rule otherwise would lead to an absurd situation
where one court decides an appeal in the main case
while another court rules on an incident in the very
same case. (City of Manila v. Grecia-Cuerdo, 715
SCRA 182 [2014]).
923

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
SEC. 2. Petition for prohibition
Q.

What is the special civil action of prohibition?

A.

An extraordinary remedy by which an aggrieved
person prays for a judgment commanding a tribunal,
corporation, board, officer or person, whether exercising
judicial quasi-judicial or ministerial functions, to desist
from further proceedings in an action or matter on the
ground that such proceedings are without or in excess
of its or his jurisdiction, or with grave abuse of
discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction
(S2 R65).

Q.

Give examples where prohibition may be availed of.

A.

Prohibition is proper to restrain a sheriff from
executing a judgment which was not yet executory
(Blossom & Co. v. Manila Gas Corporation, 47 Phil.
670) or from levying on properties of the judgment
obligor which are exempt from execution.

Q.

Antonio, a resident of Pampanga, filed suit in the
Regional Trial Court of Manila on a promissory
note executed by Andres, a resident of Cavite.
The latter moved to dismiss on the ground "that
the venue is improperly laid." The motion was
denied and Andres wants to question the denial
before a higher Tribunal.
If you were Andres' lawyer, should your petition
be for Certiorari, for Prohibition, or for Mandamus?
Explain. (80 Bar 08 ed)

A.

If I were Andres' lawyer, my petition would be for
Prohibition.
The Supreme Court in Enriquez v. Macadaeg, 84
Phil. 674, has held that the remedy where a motion to
dismiss is improperly denied is prohibition.
924

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Here the motion to dismiss was improperly
denied. Under Rule 4, venue of personal actions is
the place where the plaintiff or the defendant resides,
at the plaintiff's election but here the case was filed in
Manila where neither the plaintiff nor the defendant
resides. Hence a petition for prohibition would be proper.
(Note: It is submitted that certiorari may also be
availed of in order to set aside the order denying the
motion to dismiss).
Q.

Petitioners, members of an urban poor organization,
filed a petition for prohibition and mandamus with
the Supreme Court to stop respondents DILG
Secretary and mayors from evicting them pursuant
to the Urban Development Housing Act (RA No.
7279) and to compel the respondents to afford them
judicial process prior to evictions and demolitions.
Section 28 (a) and (b) of RA 7279 provides that
evictions and demolitions may be allowed without
any court order when: (1) persons or entities
occupy danger areas such as esteros, railroad tacks,
garbage dumps, riverbanks, shorelines, waterways,
and other public places such as sidewalks, roads,
parks, and playgrounds; and (2) persons or entities
occupy areas where government infrastructure
projects with available funding are about to be
implemented. Did the Petitioners properly avail
of prohibition?

A.

No. Prohibition is available against a respondent
exercising judicial, quasi-judicial, or ministerial functions.
In exercising the power to demolish and evict illegal
structures pursuant to RA 7279 the respondents are
clearly not exercising judicial or quasi-judicial powers.
Both judicial and quasi-judicial functions involve the
determination of what the law is, and what the legal

925

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
rights of the contending parties are, with respect to
the matter in controversy and, on the basis thereof
and the facts obtaining, the adjudication of their
respective rights.
Nor is there a ministerial duty on the part of
respondents. Section 28 of RA 7279 in authorizing
evictions and demolitions uses the word "may."
Clearly there is discretion on the part of respondents
to implement demolitions and evictions and thus there
is no ministerial duty. (Kalipunan ng Damayang
Mahihirap V. Robredo, 22 July 2014).
Q.

A petition for injunction seeking to enjoin the
MMDA from implementing the number-coding scheme
was filed with the Supreme Court. The MMDA
argues that the SC has no jurisdiction over an
action for injunction since original and exclusive
jurisdiction thereof is with the RTC. May the SC
take cognizance of the case?

A.

Yes. The petition may be treated as one for prohibition,
rather than injunction, under Court's expanded
jurisdiction power where compelling reasons, or the
nature and importance of the issues raised, warrant
the immediate exercise of its jurisdiction (Pantaleon V.
MMDA, 17 November 2020, e.b., Leonen, J.).

Q.

Why is prohibition an extraordinary remedy?

A.

Because it is only available where there is no appeal,
or any plain, speedy, and adequate remedy in the
ordinary course of law. (Id.).

Q.

Distinguish certiorari from prohibition.

A.

The purpose of certiorari is to annul proceedings had
without jurisdiction or in excess of jurisdiction or with
grave abuse of discretion; hence certiorari is a corrective
remedy and operates on acts already consummated.
926

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
On the other hand, prohibition is a preventive remedy
whose function is to restrain the doing of some act
about to be done. It is not intended to provide a
remedy for acts already accomplished. (Agustin v. De
la Fuente, 84 Phil. 515).
Certiorari is directed only against judicial or
quasi-judicial acts while prohibition may be directed
against judicial, quasi-judicial, or ministerial acts.
(Tuason v. Register of Deeds, 157 SCRA 613).
Q.

Distinguish injunction from prohibition.

A.

Injunction is generally directed against a person not
exercising judicial, quasi-judicial or ministerial functions,
while prohibition is directed against a tribunal, corporation,
board, officer or person exercising judicial, quasijudicial or ministerial functions.
Injunction may be the main action itself, or just a
provisional remedy in the main action, whereas
prohibition is always a main action.
Where an action for prohibition is filed, the petitioner
may seek the provisional remedy of preliminary
injunction against the respondent.

Q.

Distinguish prohibition from mandamus.

A.

The object of mandamus is to compel a tribunal,
corporation, board, officer or person to comply with a
ministerial duty while prohibition has for its object that
of preventing the tribunal, corporation, board, officer
or person from executing an act not within or in
excess of its jurisdiction. Mandamus is an affirmative
remedy for it commands that something be done;
prohibition is purely negative for it commands that
something be left undone.

927

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
SEC. 3. Mandamus
Q.

Define mandamus.

A

A special civil action wherein the petitioner prays that
judgment be rendered commanding a tribunal,
corporation, board, officer or person to perform an act
which the law specifically enjoins as a duty resulting
from an office, trust, or station, the performance of
which the respondent has been unlawfully neglecting.
(S3 R65).
It is also available against a person who
unlawfully excludes another from the lisp and enjoyment
of a right or office to which such other person is
entitled. (Id.).
Like certiorari and prohibition, mandamus is only
available when there is no other plain, speedy and
adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law.

Q.

Mandamus is also available against a person who
unlawfully excludes another from the use and
enjoyment of a right or office to which such other
person is entitled. Distinguish this type of mandamus
from quo warranto.

A.

Where the respondent merely excludes the petitioner
from an office without usurping, intruding into, or
unlawfully holding the office, the proper remedy is
mandamus. If the respondent however claims any•
right to the office and usurps, intrudes into, or unlawfully
holds it against the petitioner, the appropriate remedy
would be quo warranto. (Burguete v. Mayor, 94
Phil. 930).

928

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Q.

Give examples where mandamus would be proper.

A.

Mandamus is available to compel a judge to allow an
appeal, where the same was timely and duly filed and
the proper fees failed. It has been held that a
mandamus suit is proper to compel GSIS to continue
paying a member's monthly pension. (GSIS v. de
Leon, 17 November 2010). Mandamus is proper to
compel the Department of Budget and Management
to pay retirement gratuity differentials of retired Court
of Appeals justices. (Assoc. of Retired CA Justices v.
Abad, 10 July 2018, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Shaik filed a petition for mandamus against the
vice-mayor of her town to compel the payment of
her salaries as ex-officio member of the Sangguniang
Bayan. During the pendency of the mandamus
case, Vice-Mayor Teopengco was not re-elected
as vice-mayor. However, Teopengco's successor as
vice-mayor was not substituted in his place pursuant
to S17 R3. May the petition for mandamus prosper?

A.

No. The judgment in the mandamus case cannot be
enforced against Teopengco for he was no longer the
incumbent vice-mayor nor against his successor who
was not substituted in the case. To enforce the
judgment against the successor would violate his right
to due process. (Del Rosario v. Shaikh, 10 December
2019, Reyes, J.).

Q.

May a transferee of shares of stock initiate an
action for mandamus to compel the corporation to
record the transfer of shares in its stock-and-transfer
book, as well as to issue new stock certificates in
his name?

A.

Yes. It is settled jurisprudence that the registration of
a transfer of share of stock, and the consequent
issuance of a new stock certificate to the transferee,
929

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
is a ministerial duty on the part of the corporation.
(Andaya v. Rural Bank of Cabadbaran, Inc., 3 August
2016, Sereno, C.J.). Note that mandamus does not lie
solely against public officers, but even against private
persons who have a ministerial duty.
Q.

May mandamus issue to compel the performance
of a discretionary duty?

A.

As a rule no. Only ministerial duties may be compelled by
mandamus, and not discretionary ones. (Tavera-Luna
Inc. v. Nable, 67 Phil. 340). Where such discretion
however can be legally exercised in only one way and
it refuses to act in such manner, mandamus will lie to
compel the court to exercise its discretion in accordance
with law. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
th
LAW COMPENDIUM 464 [5 rev. ed. 1988]).

Q.

The respondent requested from the Philippine
Statistics Authority the issuance of her certificate
of live birth (COLB). The PSA stated that it cannot
issue the COLB until the respondent (who was
indicated in the COLB as legitimated) verifies
whether her mothers first marriage was annulled
or nullified at the time of the respondent's birth
and if this is not the case, that the requestor should
file a petition to cancel the affidavit of legitimation.
May the PSA be compelled by mandamus to issue
the COLB?

A.

Yes. The PSA neglected its ministerial duty to issue
the COLB; it cannot impose a condition on requesting
party to file petition to cancel affidavit of legitimation,
even if such affidavit was erroneous. The remedy of
the PSA is "to initiate the appropriate action." The PSA
may thus be compelled by mandamus to issue the
COLB. (PSA v. Ferolino, 14 June 2021, Carandang, J.).

930

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Q.

Does mandamus lie to compel the payment of an
informer's reward?

A.

No. The grant of an informer's reward for the
discovery, conviction, and punishment of tax offenses
is a discretionary quasi-judicial matter that cannot be
the subject of a writ of mandamus. It is not a legally
mandated ministerial duty. This reward cannot be
given to a person who only makes sweeping averments
about undisclosed wealth, rather than specific tax
offenses, and who fails to show that the information
which he or she supplied was the undiscovered
pivotal cause for the revelation of a tax offense, the
conviction and/or punishment of the persons liable,
and an actual recovery made by the State. (Lihaylihay
v. Tan, 23 July 2018, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Does mandamus lie to compel President Duterte
to defend the West Philippine Sea (WPS) against
Chinese incursion?

A.

No. The matter on how to counter or respond to
Chinese or foreign intrusion into the WPS is a matter
of discretion on the part of the President as the
commander-in-chief of the armed forces. (Esmero v.
Duterte, 29 June 2021, e.b., Zalameda, J.).

Q.

An order of a Regional Trial Court setting the case
for pre-trial was duly sent to and received by the
plaintiff and defendant and their respective lawyers.
On the date of the pre-trial, plaintiff and his
counsel did not appear and defendant moved to
have plaintiffs complaint dismissed. The Court
denied the motion and re-set the pre-trial. Can
defendant successfully sue for mandamus before
a higher tribunal? (80 Bar 04 ed)

A.

No, the defendant cannot successfully sue for mandamus
before a higher tribunal.
931

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME i
In American Insurance Company v. Republic, L25478, 23 October 1967, the Supreme Court held that
the trial court has the discretion but not the duty to
declare a party non-suited. Under Rule 65 of the Rules
of Court, mandamus only lies to compel the performance
of ministerial acts but not those involving discretion.
Q.

A files a Complaint against B for recovery of title
and possession of land situated in Makati with the
RTC of Pasig. B files a Motion to Dismiss for
improper venue. The RTC Pasig Judge denies B's
Motion to Dismiss, which obviously was incorrect.
Alleging that the RTC Judge "unlawfully neglected
the performance of an act which the law
specifically enjoins as a duty resulting from an
office," B files a Petition for Mandamus against
the judge. Will Mandamus lie? Reasons. (12 Bar
Essay Q10b)

A.

No, mandamus will not lie. The Supreme Court has
held that mandamus may not be directed against
discretionary acts. Prohibition, not mandamus, is the
proper remedy when a motion to dismiss is improperly
denied. (Enriquez v. Macadaeg, 84 Phil. 674).159

Q.

May mandamus lie to challenge a trial judge's
order of voluntary inhibition?

A.

Yes. While, ordinarily, mandamus will not prosper to
compel a discretionary act, the writ shall issue in
instances of gross abuse of discretion, manifest
injustice or palpable excess of authority, equivalent to
denial of a settled right to which petitioner is
entitled; and when there is no other plain, speedy and
adequate remedy. A judge's decision to refuse to act
on account of some disqualification is not conclusive,

159It is submitted that mandamus will He, since the discretion can be legally
exercised in only one way, that is, to dismiss the case on the ground of improper venue.

932

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
and his competency may be determined on an
application for mandamus to compel him to act.
Where the motion for inhibition merely imputed bias or
prejudice without any ground to support it, the judge's
order of inhibition was not grounded on a just and
valid cause. (Pagoda PhiIs. Inc. v. Philippine Canning
Inc., G.R. No. 160966, 11 October 2005).
Q.

Alleging that his father passed away in 1992 and
left a holographic will, which is now in the custody of
his mother, Nixon filed with the RTC a petition for
mandamus with damages to compel his mother to
produce the will so that probate proceedings for
the allowance of the will could be instituted. Was
the filing of the petition for mandamus proper?

A.

No. This is because there is a plain, speedy, and
adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law, that
is, the filing of a petition for probate under 81 R76 and
then moving for the production of the will under S2-5
R75. Under Si R76, an interested person may petition
the court having jurisdiction to have the will allowed,
whether the same be in his possession or not, or
is lost or destroyed. (Uy v. Lee, 15 January 2010). It
also appears that Nixon had a photocopy of the will.
This would have been sufficient to prove the
holographic will.

Q.

May mandamus lie to compel the performance of
contractual duties?

A.

No. Contractual duties are not specifically enjoined by
law but by the agreement between the parties. The
proper remedy then of the aggrieved party is to file an
ordinary civil action for specific performance. (Quioge v.
Del Rosario, 46 Phil. 337).

933

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May a mayor be compelled by mandamus to issue
a business permit?

A.

No. A mayor cannot be compelled by mandamus to
issue a business permit since the exercise of the
same is a delegated police power and hence discretionary
in nature. (Lacap v. Sandiganbayan, 21 June 2017;
Roble Arrastre v. Villafor, 22 August 2006; Rimando
v. Naguilian Emission Testing Center, G.R. No. 198860,
23 July 2012).

Q.

May an examinee avail of mandamus to compel
the Professional Regulatory Commission (PRC) to
disclose or deliver documents regarding the CPA
board examination?

A.

No. Examination documents are confidential. Disclosure
thereof would result in undue pressure or influence on
the PRC and detract from its function as gatekeeper
to the professions. (Antolin-Rosero v. PRC, 30 June
2021, Inting, J.).

Q.

Once the decision of a court in an application for
original registration of land ordering the LRA to
issue the decree of registration has become final,
will mandamus lie to compel the LRA to issue the
decree of registration?

A.

Yes. However mandamus does not lie to compel LRA
to issue the decree of registration where it appears
that there is an existing title over the same land.
(Rodriguez v. CA, 13 June 2013). The reason is that it
would violate the principle that a certificate of title is
not subject to a collateral attack pursuant to the
Property Registration Decree.

934

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Q.

For the benefit of public school teachers, the
Department of Education (DepEd) devised and
implemented a payroll deduction scheme for the
loans they secured from DepEd's duly accredited
private lenders. Rizal Teachers Kilusang Bayan for
Credit, Inc (RTKBCI) was among DepEd's accredited
private lenders which availed of the latter's payroll
deduction scheme. Due to complaints from teachers
regarding RTKBCI's alleged predatory lending,
DepEd suspended the payroll deduction scheme.
May the Department of Education (DepEd) be
compelled by writ of mandamus to collect, by
salary deductions, the loan payments of public
school teachers and remit them to the RTKBCI?

A.

No. RTKBCI has no clear legal right to demand that
DepEd act as its collecting and remitting agent. This
is not one of DepEd's power, duties, and functions.
Rather, it is an accommodation that DepEd does - - not for the benefit of any private lending agency but to
protect and promote the teachers' welfare. Hence, the
only feasible characterization of this activity its being a
mere privilege. To otherwise characterize this activity is
to demean and degrade the stature of DepEd as the
sovereign regulator and supervisor of basic education
and to reduce it to being a mere collection and
remittance agency for private lending institutions.
(Department of Education v. Rizal Teachers Kilusang
Bayan for Credit, 3 July 2019, Lazaro-Javier, J.).

Q.

In an action for declaratory relief, may the RTC
be compelled to rule upon the constitutionality
of a statute?

A.

No. The grant of declaratory relief is discretionary on
the courts. Courts may refuse to declare rights or to
construe instruments if it will not terminate the
controversy or if it is unnecessary and improper under
935

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the circumstances. A discretionary act cannot be the
subject of a petition for mandamus. (Zomer Dev't Co.
v. CA, 7 Jan 2020, e.b., Leonen, J.).
Q.

Does mandamus lie against the Secretary of
Health regarding the conduct of mandatory trial
and procurement of vaccines for COVID-19?

A.

No. The manner of performing a duty is discretionary.
The necessary discretion is given to our health
officials on the procurement of vaccines and on the
necessity of conducting mandatory trials of vaccines.
Exigent circumstances may dispense with the need
for trials. (Nepomuceno v. Duterte, 11 May 2021,
Lopez, J., J.).

Q.

In a petition for mandamus, may the petitioner
recover damages from the respondent?

A.

Yes. Aside from praying for a judgment compelling
the respondent to perform the ministerial duty, the
petitioner may also pray that the court order the
respondent "to pay damages sustained by the petitioner
by reason of the wrongful acts of the respondent." (33
R65). Note that this provision allowing the recovery of
damages is not found in certiorari and prohibition.

Sec. 4. When petition filed
Q.

When may a petition for certiorari, prohibition, or
mandamus be filed?

A.

The petition may be filed not later than 60 days from
notice of the judgment, order or resolution. In case a
motion for reconsideration or new trial is timely filed,
whether such motion is required or not, the 60-day
period shall be counted from notice of the denial of
said motion. (34 R65).

936

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
The 60-day period would not apply in case there
is no judgment, order or resolution to be assailed, as
for instance in a mandamus petition where what is
being assailed is the continuing refusal to perform a
ministerial duty.
Take note however that a petition for certiorari
seeking to restrain or set aside actions taken by the
Monetary Board of the BSP in respect of conservatorship,
receivership, and liquidation proceedings should be
filed within 10 days from receipt by the board of
directors of the institution of the order directing
conservatorship, receivership, or liquidation. (Sec. 30,
New Central Bank Act).
Also a petition for mandamus based on unlawful
exclusion from public office must be filed within one
year from such exclusion. (Galano v. Roxas, 67 SCRA
8, 16 [1975]).
Q.

May a motion for extension of time to file the
petition under R65 be filed?

A.

Yes. While the provision in S4 R65, which states that
"[n]o extension of time to file the petition shall be
granted except for the most compelling reason and in
no case exceeding 15 days," was deleted by A.M. No.
07-12-SC (effective 27 December 2007), this does not
mean that the filing of a motion for extension was
absolutely prohibited. If such were the intention, the
deleted portion could just have been simply reworded
to state that "no extension of time to file the petition
shall be granted." Absent such a prohibition, motions
for extension of time to file a petition under Rule 65
are allowed, subject to the Court's sound discretion
(Domdom vs. Sandiganbayan, G.R. Nos. 182382-83,
24 February 2010, en banc) but only under exceptional
and meritorious cases. (Mid-Islands Power Generation
937

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME!
Corporation v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 189191, 29
February 2012; Republic v. St Vincent de Paul Colleges,
G.R. 192908, 22 August 2012). In Mid-Islands the
petition for certiorari filed with the Court of Appeals
involved the operations of the Calapan Diesel Power
Plant and an imminent brown-out in the entire
province of Oriental Mindoro, while in St Vincent de
Paul Colleges, the Supreme Court took into account
the fact that the CA had earlier granted the motion for
extension of time and the public interest involved, i.e.,
the expropriation of private property for public use.
Note: Views were expressed that courts other
than the Supreme Court cannot grant an extension as
they are bound by the amendment of S4 R65 by A.M.
No. 07-12-SC invoking Laguna Metts Corporation v.
Caa/am, G.R. No. 185220, 27 July 2009. In Laguna
Metts the Supreme Court held that the Court of
Appeals cannot grant an extension of time to file a
petition under R65 since the Court of Appeals would
in effect be disregarding or modifying A.M. No. 07-12SC. Said views said that the ruling in Domdom was
justified by the Supreme Court's equity jurisdiction,
i.e., the power to suspend the operation of the Rules
of Court or to exempt a particular case from its
coverage, a power which can be exercised only by
the Supreme Court.
It should be noted however that in Mid-Islands
the Supreme Court gave its imprimatur to the Court of
Appeals' grant of an extension, stating that the matter
was an exceptional and meritorious case. The practical
effect of the rulings in Domdon, Mid-Islands, and St.
Vincent de Paul Colleges is the reinstatement of the
provision in S4 R65 that "[n]o extension of time to file
the petition shall be granted except for the most

938

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
compelling reason and in no case exceeding 15
days." Hence not only the Supreme Court but other
courts as well may grant the extension, provided the
matter involved is an exceptional and meritorious case.
Q.

Where should the petition under R65 be filed?

A.

If the petition relates to the act or omission of a MTC
or of a corporation, a board, an officer or a person, it
shall be filed with the RTC exercising jurisdiction over
the territorial area as defined by the SC. It may also
be filed with the CA or with the Sandiganbayan,
whether or not in the same is in aid of the court's
appellate jurisdiction.
If the petition involves an act or an omission of a
quasi-judicial agency, unless otherwise provided by
law or these rules, the petition shall be filed with and
be cognizable only by the CA.
In election cases involving an act or an omission
of a MTC or RTC, the petition shall be filed exclusively
with the COMELEC, in aid of its appellate jurisdiction.
(S4 R65).

Q.

A.L. Ang Network filed with the National Water
Resources Board (NWRB) an application for a
certificate of public convenience to operate and
maintain a water service system in Alijis, Bacolod
City. Bacolod City Water District opposed the
application. The NWRB granted the application
and BACIWA moved for reconsideration of the
order and to allow it to present evidence in
support of its opposition. The NWRB granted the
motion and allowed BACIWA to present evidence.
A.L.Ang Network's motion for reconsideration of
the NWRB's order was denied. A.L. Ang Network
filed a petition for certiorari under R65 with the

939

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
RTC which dismissed the petition stating that it
should have been filed with the Court of Appeals.
Was the RTC's dismissal order proper?
A.

Yes. 54 R65 provides that if the petition involves an
act or omission of a quasi-judicial agency, like the
NWRB, the petition under R65 shall be filed with and
cognizable only by the Court of Appeals. The fact that
the NWRB is not mentioned in Si R43 does not mean
that it it not a quasi-judicial agency since the list is S1
R43 is not meant to be exclusive as shown by the use
of the word "among." (National Water Resources Board
v. A.L. Ang Network, Inc., 8 April 2010).

Q.

The Department of Health issued a cease-anddesist order (CDO) against the GCC Approved
Medical Centers Association (GAMCA) enjoining it
from implementing the deck-referral system in
which OFW applicants to the Gulf countries should
have their medical examination only in Gulf
Cooperative Countries (GCC) approved clinics.
GAMCA filed with the RTC of Pasay City a petition
for certiorari under R65 seeking to enjoin the DOH
from implementing the CDO.
a) Was the DOH acting in a quasi-judicial capacity
when it issued the CDO?
b) Was the petition properly filed with the RTC?

A.

a) Yes. The DOH CDO letter directed GAMCA to
cease and desist from engaging in the referral decking
system practice within three days from receipt of the
letter. By issuing this CDO letter implementing Section
16 of RA No. 10022, the DOH (1) made the finding of
fact that GAMCA implements the referral decking
system, and (2) applied Section 16 of RA No. 10022,
to conclude that GAMCA's practice is prohibited by
law and should be stopped.
940

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
From this perspective, the DOH acted in a quasijudicial capacity: its CDO letter determined a question
of fact, and applied the legislative policy prohibiting
the referral decking system practice.
Notably, CDOs have been described and treated
as quasi-judicial acts in past cases, and had even
been described as similar to the remedy of injunction
granted by the courts.
b) No. Acts or omissions by quasi-judicial agencies,
regardless of whether the remedy involves a R43
appeal or a R65 petition for certiorari, is cognizable
by the Court of Appeals. The provision in S4 R65
requiring that certiorari petitions challenging
quasi-judicial acts to be filed with the CA is in full
accord with Section 9(1) and (3) of Batas Pambansa
Blg. 129. Thus, by law and by Supreme Court
Rules, the CA is the court with the exclusive
original jurisdiction to entertain petitions for certiorari
and prohibition against quasi-judicial agencies.
(Association of Medical Clinics v. GCC Medical
Centers, 6 December 2016, e.b., Brion, J.).
Q.

Private respondent filed an election protest case
against the Petitioner before the RTC. The RTC
issued an order finding the service of summons
against the Petitioner valid and declaring the
Petitioner's answer as filed out of time and thus
authorizing the reception of evidence ex parte.
Petitioner filed a petition for certiorari with the
Supreme Court. Private Respondent contends that
the petition for certiorari should have been filed
with the COMELEC pursuant to 54 R65. The
Petitioner on the other hand contends that a
certiorari proceeding to set aside an interlocutory
order is not in aid of appellate jurisdiction. Was
the R65 petition properly filed with the SC?
941

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. If a case may be appealed to a particular court or
judicial tribunal or body, then said court or judicial
tribunal or body has jurisdiction to issue the
extraordinary writ of certiorari, in aid of its appellate
jurisdiction. Since it is the COMELEC which has
jurisdiction to take cognizance of an appeal from the
decision of the regional trial court in election contests
involving elective municipal officials, then it is also the
COMELEC which has jurisdiction to issue a writ of
certiorari in aid of its appellate jurisdiction. (Galang v.
Geronimo, 22 February 2011, e.b., Peralta, J.).

SEC. 5. Respondents and costs in certain cases
Q.

Who should be joined as respondents in a R65
petition?

A.

When the petition filed relates to the acts or omissions
of a judge, court, quasi-judicial agency, tribunal,
corporation, board, officer or person, the petitioner
shall join, as private respondent or respondents with
such public respondent or respondents, the person or
persons interested in sustaining the proceedings.

Q.

In a R65 petition for certiorari filed with the RTC,
wherein the accused Petitioner questions the
denial by the MTC of his application for probation,
the Petitioner failed to implead the offended party
as the private respondent. Hence the RTC dismissed
the petition for failure to comply with S5 R65.
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

In a petition for certiorari under R65, the failure to
implead the private complainant pursuant to S5 R65
will not warrant the dismissal of the petition. S11 R3
states that neither misjoinder nor non-joinder of
parties is a ground for the dismissal of an action.

942

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
Thus, the trial court should have ordered petitioner to
add private complainant as a respondent to the case.
(Cuyo v. People, 12 October 2011, Sereno, J. ).160
Q.

Whose duty is it to appear in behalf of the
respondents?

A.

It shall be the duty of the private respondent to appear
and defend, both in his own behalf and in behalf of
the public respondent. Unless otherwise specifically
directed by the court where the petition is pending,
the public respondents shall not appear in or file an
answer or comment to the petition or any pleading
therein. If the case is elevated to a higher court by
either party, the public respondents shall be included
therein as nominal parties. However unless otherwise
specifically directed by the court, they shall not appear
or participate in the proceedings. (S5 R65).

Q.

Will the filing of the petition under R65 interrupt
the course of the principal case?

A.

No, unless a temporary restraining order or a writ of
preliminary injunction has been issued against the
public respondent from further proceeding in the case.
The public respondent shall proceed with the
principal case within161 ten days from the filing of a
petition for certiorari162 with a higher court or tribunal,
absent a TRO or writ of preliminary injunction, or upon

160See also Abdulraman v. Office of the Ombudsman, 19 August 2013,
wherein the SC held that the CA should not have dismissed the petition for
certiorari for failure to implead the private respondent.
16IAlthough the phrase "within ten days from . " is used, clearly what 57
R65 means is "after the lapse of ten days from ...."
162The use of the phrase "petition for certiorari" instead of "petition" in the
second paragraph of 57 R65 appears to be a drafting oversight. There appears
to be no good reason why the rule requiring the public respondent to proceed
within ten days from the filing of the petition for certiorari should not apply also to
a petition for prohibition and mandamus.

943

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
its expiration. Failure of the public respondent to
proceed with the principal case may be a ground for
an administrative charge. (S7 R65).
However where a person has been adjudged in
direct contempt and he avails himself of the remedies
of certiorari or prohibition, the execution of the judgment
shall be suspended pending resolution of the petition,
provided such person files a bond. (S2 R71).
Q.

P filed a petition for mandamus with the RTC
against the Register of Deeds and the Land
Registration Authority to compel the latter to
issue to him a transfer certificate of title. The
respondents filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that P should have elevated the matter by
way of consulta. The RTC denied the motion to
dismiss as well as the succeeding motion for
reconsideration by the respondents. The respondents
then filed a special civil action for certiorari with
the Court of Appeals with a prayer for the
issuance of a temporary restraining order and writ
of preliminary injunction. After 20 days from the
filing of the petiton for certiorari, the CA required
P to file a comment but did not issue a TRO or writ
of preliminary injunction. The RTC then issued an
order suspending the proceedings before it during
the pendency of the certiorari case before the CA
P moved for the continuation of the proceedings
but the RTC denied P's motion.
a) Is the action of the RTC proper?
b) May the RTC judge be administratively charged?

944

Rule 65
Certiorari, Prohibition And Mandamus
A.

a) No, the action of the RTC is not proper. Under S7
R65, the public respondent shall proceed with the
principal case within 10 days from the filing of the
petition for certiorari with a higher court or tribunal,
absent a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
injunction, or upon its expiration. (S7 R65, as amended
by A.M. No. 07-7-12-SC, 12 December 2007).
b) Yes. Failure of the public respondent to proceed
with the principal case may be a ground for an
administrative charge. (Id.).

945

RULE 66. QUO WARRANTO
Q.

What is quo warranto?

A.

In Latin, quo warranto means "by what right or authority."
It is a special civil action brought in the name of
the Republic against the usurpation of public office,
position or franchise, and commenced by the filing of
a verified petition.
It may also be brought by an individual in his own
name, who claims to be entitled to a public office
or position usurped or unlawfully held or exercised
by another.

Q.

Which courts have jurisdiction over petitions for
quo warranto?

A.

The Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, and the
Regional Trial Courts have original and concurrent
jurisdiction. The Sandiganbayan has original jurisdiction
in quo warranto arising in cases filed under Executive
Order Nos. 1, 2, 14, 14-A, in aid of its appellate
jurisdiction. (Sec. 4, P.D. No. 1606).

Q.

What is the venue in a quo warranto proceeding?

A

If brought before the RTC, it should be filed with the
RTC exercising jurisdiction over the territorial area
where the respondent or any of the respondents resides.
If the action is commenced by the Solicitor General, it
may be brought in a RTC in Manila, in the Court of
Appeals, or in the Supreme Court. (S7 R66).

Q.

Mandamus is also available against a person who
unlawfully excludes another from the use and
enjoyment of a right or office to which such other
person is entitled. Distinguish this type of mandamus
from quo warranto.
946

Rule 66
Quo Warranto
A.

Where the respondent merely excludes the petitioner
from an office without usurping, intruding into, or
unlawfully holding the office, the proper remedy is
mandamus. If the respondent however claims any
right to the office and usurps, intrudes into, or
unlawfully holds it against the petitioner, the proper
remedy would be quo warranto. (Burguete v. Mayor,
94 Phil. 930).

Q.

Petitioner Fabian was appointed Election Registrar
of Municipality of Sevilla supposedly to replace
the respondent Election Registrar Pablo who was
transferred to another municipality without his
consent and who refused to accept his aforesaid
transfer, much less to vacate his position in Bogo
town163 as election registrar, as in fact he
continued to occupy his aforesaid position and
exercise his functions thereto. Petitioner Fabian
then filed a petition for mandamus against Pablo
but the trial court dismissed Fabian's petition
contending that quo warranto is the proper
remedy. Is the court correct in its ruling? Why?
(01 Bar Q3).

A.

Yes the court is correct in its ruling.
Where the respondent merely excludes the
petitioner from an office without usurping, intruding
into, or unlawfully holding the office, the proper
remedy is mandamus. If the respondent however
claims any right to the office and usurps, intrudes into,
or unlawfully holds it against the petitioner, the proper
remedy would be quo warranto. (Burguete v. Mayor,
94 Phil. 930).

153It appears that this should be written as "Sevilla."

947

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Here Pablo refused to vacate his position and
continued to hold it against Fabian. Hence quo warranto
not mandamus is the proper remedy.
Q.

Against whom may a quo warranto case be brought?

A.

Against:
1) A person who usurps, intrudes into, or unlawfully
holds or exercises a public office, position or
franchise.
2) A public officer who does or suffers an act which,
by the provision of law, constitutes a ground for
the forfeiture of his office; or
3) An association which acts as a corporation within
the Philippines without being legally incorporated
or without lawful authority so to act. (Si R65).
Note however that a quo warranto proceeding in
the third case is within the original and exclusive
jurisdiction of the regional trial court pursuant to Sec.
5.2 of the Securities Regulation Code, in relation to
Section 5(b) of P.D. No. 902-A which speaks of a
controversy "between [a] corporation ... and the state
insofar as it concerns [the corporation's] franchise or
right to exist." (See also A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC
effective 1 July 2003).

Q.

A group of businessmen formed an association in
Cebu City calling itself Cars Co. to distribute/sell
cars in said city. It did not incorporate itself under
the law nor did it have any government permit or
license to conduct its business as such. The
Solicitor General filed before a Regional Trial
Court in Manila a verified petition for quo warranto
questioning and seeking to stop the operations of
Cars Co. The latter filed a motion to dismiss the
948

Rule 66
Quo Warranto
petition on the ground of improper venue claiming
that its main office and operations are in Cebu
City and not in Manila. Is the contention of Cars
Co. correct? Why? (01 Bar Q11).
A.

No. Under S7 R66, when the Solicitor General commences
the action for quo warranto, it may be brought in the
Regional Trial Court of Manila.
(Note: With the passage of A.M. No. 03-03-03SC [effective 1 July 2003], original and exclusive
jurisdiction over the action for quo warranto under
S1(c) R66, has been vested in the regional trial court
designated by the Supreme Court. Hence the action
should now be filed in the regional trial court having
jurisdiction over Cebu City).

Q.

Classify quo warranto.

A.

Quo warranto may be:
1) Compulsory or discretionary.
2) Brought in the name of the Republic (Si R66) or
in the name of a private individual. (S5 R66).

Q.

When is quo warranto compulsory?

A.

The Solicitor General or a public prosecutor, when
directed by the President of the Philippines, or when
upon complaint or otherwise he has good reason to
believe that any case specified in S1 R66 can be
established by proof must commence the action.

Q.

When is quo warranto discretionary?

A.

The Solicitor General or a public prosecutor may, with
the permission of the court in which the action is to be
commenced, bring such an action at the request and
upon the relation of another person; but in such case
the officer bringing it may first require an indemnity for
949

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the expenses and costs of the action in an amount
approved by and to be deposited in the court by the
person at whose request and upon whose relation the
same is brought.
Q.

Who may commence a quo warranto action?

A.
1) The Solicitor General.
2) A public prosecutor.
3) A person claiming to be entitled to a public office or
position usurped or unlawfully held or exercised
by another may bring an action therefor in his
own name. (55 R66).
Q.

Distinguish a quo warranto action commenced by
a private individual from a quo warranto action
commenced by the Solicitor General or public
prosecutor.

A.

In the action commenced by the private individual, it is
necessary for the petitioner to prove his right to the
office in dispute. If he fails to prove this, it is
unnecessary for the court to pass upon the right of the
respondent to the office.
In an action commenced by the Solicitor General
or a public prosecutor, it is not necessary that there
be a person claiming to be entitled to the office
alleged to have been usurped. The duty of the court
is to pass upon the right of the respondent only.

950

Rule 66
Quo Warranto
Q.

R.A. 10660 created six new vacancies in the
Sandiganbayan. The JBC submitted six groups or
"clusters" corresponding to each vacancy to
President Aquino for his consideration. Petitioners
are members of one of the clusters. However not
one from their cluster was appointed by President
Aquino. They filed a petition for quo warranto
challenging the appointment of the SB justices by
Aquino. They alleged that the President violated
the Constitution when he disregarded the JBC's
clustering by not appointing any one of their
cluster to the Sandiganbayan. Will the action for
quo warranto prosper?

A.

No. It is axiomatic that in a petition for quo warranto
filed by an individual claiming entitlement to office,
such individual must show that he has a clear right to
the office allegedly held by another. Petitioner judges
who merely have an expectant not a clear right to
Sandiganbayan positions are not proper parties to file
petition for quo warranto under S5 R66. Petitioners'
rights depended on an expectancy: that they would be
the ones appointed by the President. (Aguinaldo v.
Aquino, 29 Nov 2016, e.b., Leonardo-De Castro, J.)

Q.

In the quo warranto case filed by the Republic
against Maria Lourdes Sereno, seeking her ouster
from the position of Chief Justice of the Philippines,
certain private individuals filed motions for leave
to intervene as citizens and as taxpayers. They
claim that as citizens and as taxpayers, they have
a legal interest in the matter of Sereno's ouster or
removal. May these individuals be allowed to
intervene?

A.

No. The movants do not possess the required legal
interest to intervene in a quo warranto suit since they
neither claim to be entitled to the questioned position
951

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
nor are they the ones charged with the usurpation
thereof. (Republic v. Sereno, 11 May 2018, e.b., Tijam, J.).
Q.

In an action for usurpation, can the court award
damages sustained as a result of the usurpation
to the person adjudged entitled to the office?

A.

No. Such damages must be sought in an action to be
filed within one year after the entty of the judgment
establishing the petitioner's right to the office in
question. (See S9 R66 in relation to S11 R66).

Q.

In an action for usurpation, what judgment shall
the court render if usurpation is found?

A.

The court shall render judgment that such respondent
be ousted and altogether excluded therefrom, and
that the petitioner or relator, as the case may be,
recover his costs. Such further judgment may be
rendered determining the respective rights in and to
the public office, position or franchise of all the parties
to the action as justice requires. (S9 R66).

Q.

What is the prescriptive period for bringing a quo
warranto action affecting title to public office?

A.

The action must be brought within one year after the
cause of such ouster, or the right of the petitioner to
hold such office or position arose (S11 R66).

Q.

In the quo warranto case filed by the Republic
against Maria Lourdes Sereno, seeking her ouster
from the position of Chief Justice of the
Philippines, the respondent moved to dismiss the
petition on the ground of prescription, invoking
Sli R66 which provides that "[nothing contained
in this Rule shall be construed to authorize an
action against a public officer or employee for his
ouster from office unless the same be commenced
within one year after the cause of such ouster, or
952

Rule 66
Quo Warranto
the right of the petitioner to hold such office or
position, arose." May the petition for quo warranto
be dismissed on the ground of prescription?
A.

No. The one-year limitation is not applicable when the
quo warranto action is filed by the State at its own
instance through the Solicitor General. Here the
petitioner is not a mere private individual pursuing a
private interest, but the government itself seeking
relief for a public wrong and suing for public interest.
(Republic v. Serene, 11 May 2018, e.b., Tijam, J.).164
However, the one-year prescriptive period shall
apply to a quo warranto action even if filed by the
Solicitor General or public prosecutor but at the
request and upon relation of another person. (Republic
v. Serene, [res.], 19 June 2018, e.b., Tijam, J.).

Q.

What is the prescriptive period for bringing an
action for damages sustained by the person
adjudged entitled to the office as a result of the
usurpation?

A.

Within one year after the entry of the judgment
establishing the petitioner's right to the office in
question. (S11 R66).

Q.

If the principal of a public high school is illegally
replaced by another, is it a requirement that
before he can go to court on quo warranto, he
should first exhaust administrative remedies? (80
Bar Q10)

A.

No, it is not a requirement that he should first exhaust
administrative remedies.

1641-lowever, the one-year prescriptive period shall apply to a quo warranto
action even if filed by the Solicitor General or public prosecutor but at the request
and upon relation of another person. (Republic v. Sereno, [res.], 19 June 2018,
e.b., Tijam, J.).

953

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The Supreme Court has held that in quo
warranto proceedings, no one is compelled to exhaust
administrative remedies since public interest requires
that the right to public office should be determined as
expeditiously as possible. Furthermore, the action for
quo warranto must be brought within one year from
the date of ouster. (Galano v. Roxas, 67 SCRA 8,
[1975]).
Q.

A quo warranto judgment directing the reinstatement
of respondent as regional director of the National
Commission on Indigenous Peoples became final
and executory. However, it was later discovered
that the respondent had falsified his bachelor's
degree and thus had become ineligible for the
position of regional director. May the judgment
still be executed?

A.

No. The general rule is that the execution of a court's
judgment becomes a matter of right upon the
expiration of the period to appeal and no appeal was
duly perfected. Generally, therefore, courts may no
longer review or modify a final and executory judgment.
This is otherwise referred to as the principle of
immutability of judgments, which dictates that once a
decision becomes final, the enforcement or execution
of the judgment becomes a purely ministerial act. An
exception to the rule is whenever circumstances
transpire after the finality of the judgments rendering
execution unjust and inequitable.
Here there was a supervening circumstance, that
discovery that the respondent had falsified his
the
is,
bachelor's degree and thus had become ineligible for
the contested position. To still order the execution of
the judgment would be clearly unjust and inequitable.
(Arroyo v. CA, 10 April 2019, Reyes, J.).

954

RULE 67. EXPROPRIATION
Q.

Define eminent domain and expropriation.

A.

Eminent domain is the right of the state or the
sovereign to take private property for public use upon
payment of just compensation. Expropriation is the
special civil action by which the state or the sovereign
exercises its right of eminent domain. In other words,
eminent domain is the right while expropriation is the
judicial proceeding for enforcing said right.

Q.

What entities may exercise the power of eminent
domain?

A.
1) The State.
2) Local governments. (Sec. 19, Local Government
Code). There must be an ordinance passed by the
LGU, a mere resolution will not suffice. (Beluso v.
Man. of Panay, Capiz, G.R. No. 153974, 7
August 2006).
3) Public utilities when authorized by their franchise.
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
expropriation?

A.

Jurisdiction over eminent domain cases lies with the
regional trial court. An expropriation case is one
whose subject matter is incapable of pecuniary
estimation. The subject of an expropriation case is the
determination of the government's right to take private
property for public use. (Brgy. San Roque v. Pastor,
G.R. 138896, 20 June 2000)

955

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the stages of an expropriation suit?

A.

The first stage is the determination of the plaintiff's
authority to expropriate, including the inquiry into the
propriety of the expropriation, its necessity, and the
public purpose of the expropriation. The court will
issue an order of expropriation declaring that the
plaintiff has the right to expropriate, for the public use
or purpose described in the complaint, and upon the
payment of just compensation. (S4 R67).
The second stage is the ascertainment by the
court of just compensation, taking into account the
report of the commissioners. The court shall render
judgment in accordance with the action it has taken
upon the report.

Q.

How is the right of eminent domain exercised?

A.

The right of eminent domain shall be exercised by the
filing of a verified complaint which shall:
1)

State with certainty the right and purpose of
expropriation;

2) Describe the real or personal property sought to
be expropriated; and
3) Join as defendants all persons owning or claiming
to own, or occupying, any part thereof or interest
therein, showing, so far as practicable, the
separate interest of each defendant. (Si R67).
Q.

If the title to the property is in the name of the
Republic, may an action for expropriation lie?

A.

Yes. If the title to any property sought to be
expropriated appears to be in the Republic of the
Philippines, although occupied by private individuals,

956

Rule 67
Expropriation
or if the title is otherwise obscure or doubtful so that
the plaintiff cannot with accuracy or certainty specify
who are the real owners, averment to that effect shall
be made in the complaint. (32 R67).
Q.

When shall the plaintiff have the right to enter or
to take possession of the property subject of the
expropriation?

A.

In case of real property
Upon the filing of the complaint or at any time
thereafter and after due notice to the defendant, the
plaintiff shall have the right to take or enter upon the
possession of the real property involved if he deposits
with the authorized government depositary an amount
equivalent to the assessed value of the property.
Such deposit shall be held by such bank subject to
the orders of the court and shall be in money, unless
in lieu thereof the court authorizes the deposit of a
certificate of time deposit of a government bank of the
Republic payable on demand to the authorized
government depositary. (32 R67).

In case of expropriation of right-of-way site or location
for national government infrastructure projects
Upon the filing of the complaint or at any time
thereafter, and after due notice to the defendant, the
implementing agency shall immediately deposit to the
court in favor of the owner the amount equivalent to
the sum of:
(1) One hundred percent (100%) of the value of the
land based on the current relevant zonal
valuation of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR)
issued not more than three (3) years prior to the

957

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
filing of the expropriation complaint subject to
subparagraph (c) of this section;165
(2) The replacement cost at current market value of
the improvements and structures as determined by:
(i) The implementing agency;
(ii) A government financial institution with adequate
experience in property appraisal; and
(iii) An independent property appraiser accredited
by the BSP.
(3) The current market value of crops and trees
located within the property as determined by a
government financial institution or an independent
property appraiser to be selected as indicated in
Sec. 5(a) of R.A. No. 10752.
guidelines
with
the
compliance
Upon
abovementioned, the court shall immediately issue to
the implementing agency an order to take possession
of the property and start the implementation of the
project. (Sec. 6[a], R.A. No. 10752).
In case of expropriation by a local government unit
The local government unit may immediately take
possession of the property upon the filing of the
expropriation proceedings and upon making a deposit
165 In provinces, cities, municipalities, and other areas where there is no
land classification, the city or municipal assessor is hereby mandated, within the
period of 60 days from the date of filing of the expropriation case, to come up
with the required land classification and the corresponding declaration of real
property and improvement for the area. In provinces, cities, municipalities, and
other areas where there is no zonal valuation, or where the current zonal
valuation has been in force for more than 3 years, the BIR is mandated, within
the period of 60 days from the date of filing of the expropriation case, to conduct
a zonal valuation of the area, based on the land classification done by the city or
municipal assessor. (Sec. 6[c], R.A. No. 10752).

958

Rule 67
Expropriation
with the proper court of at least 15% of the fair market
value of the property based on the current tax
declaration of the property to be expropriated.
In case ofpersonal property
If personal property is involved, its value shall be
provisionally ascertained and the amount to be
deposited shall be promptly fixed by the court.
After the deposit is made the court shall order
the sheriff or other proper officer to forthwith place the
plaintiff in possession of the real or personal property
involved and promptly submit a report thereof to the
court with service of copies to the parties. (32 R67).
The court shall issue a writ of possession for
this purpose.
Otherwise, the plaintiff shall have a right to enter
upon the property only upon payment to the defendant
of the compensation fixed by the iudqment, with legal
interest thereon from the taking of the possession of
the property, or after tender to the defendant of the
amount so fixed and payment of the costs. (S10 R67).
Q.

Is a prior hearing required before the plaintiff may
enter into or take possession of the property
involved?

A.

No. What is required under 32 R67 is due notice to
the defendant but not a hearing.

Q.

What is the responsive paper or pleading which
the defendant may file in an expropriation suit?

A.

1) NOTICE OF APPEARANCE AND MANIFESTATION.
If a defendant has no objection or defense to the
action or the taking of his property, he may file and
serve a notice of appearance and a manifestation to
that effect, specifically designating or identifying the
959

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
property in which he claims to be interested, within
the time stated in the summons. Thereafter, he
shall be entitled to notice of all proceedings affecting
the same.
2) ANSWER. If a defendant has any objection to the
filing of or the allegations in the complaint, or any
objection or defense to the taking of his property,
he shall serve his answer within the time stated in
the summons. The answer shall specifically
designate or identify the property in which he
claims to have an interest, state the nature and
extent of the interest claimed, and adduce all his
objections and defenses to the taking of his
property. (S3 R67).
Q.

May a counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party
complaint be alleged in the answer?

A.

No. No counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party
complaint shall be alleged or allowed in the answer or
any subsequent pleading. (S3 R67).

Q.

What is the result if a defense or objection is not
alleged in the answer?

A.

A defendant waives all defenses and objections not
alleged in the answer. The court however may in the
interest of justice permit amendments to the answer
to be made but not later than 10 days from the filing of
the answer.
Note however at the trial of the issue of just
compensation, whether or not a defendant has
previously appeared or answered, he may present
evidence as to the amount of the compensation to be
paid for his property, and he may share in the
distribution of the award. (S3 R67).

960

Rule 67
Expropriation
Q.

Can the defendant in an expropriation suit file a
motion to dismiss?

A.

No. While under the 1964 Rules the defendant in an
expropriation case may file a motion to dismiss, under
the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure the defendant may
no longer file a motion to dismiss. Any objections
or defenses the defendant may have to the taking
of his property must be set forth in an answer.
(S3 R67; Masikip v. City of Pasig, G.R. No. 136349,
23 January 2006).

Q.

The Republic of the Philippines, through the
Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
filed with the RTC a complaint for the expropriation
of the parcel of land owned by Jovito. The land is
to be used as an extension of the national highway.
Attached to the complaint is a bank certificate
showing that there is, on deposit with the Land
Bank of the Philippines, an amount equivalent to
the assessed value of the property. Then DPWH
filed a motion for the issuance of a writ of
possession. Jovito filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint on the ground that there are other
properties which would better serve the purpose.
a) Will Jovito's motion to dismiss prosper?
Explain.
b) As judge, will you grant the writ of possession
prayed for by DPWH? Explain. (09 Bar 014).

A.

a) Jovito's motion to dismiss will not prosper.
The Supreme Court has held that the defendant
in an expropriation case cannot file a motion to
dismiss but should raise his objections in the answer.
(Masikip v. City of Pasig, 23 January 2006).

961

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b) As judge, I will not grant the writ of possession
prayed for.
In case of expropriation for national government
infrastructure projects, the law requires that the
government, in order that it will have the right to enter
or take possession, should immediately pay the owner
of the property 100% of the market value of the property.
Here what was done was only to make a deposit of an
amount equivalent to the assessed value. (R.A. No.
8974, Republic v. Gingoyon, 19 Dec 2005).166
Q.

When shall the order of expropriation issue?

A.

If the objections to and the defenses against the right
of the plaintiff to expropriate the property are
overruled, or when no party appears to defend, the
court may issue an order of expropriation declaring
that the plaintiff has a lawful right to take the property
sought to be expropriated, for the public use or
purpose described in the complaint and upon the
payment of just compensation. (S4 R67).

Q.

Is a hearing required before the order of expropriation
may issue?

A.

It depends. If the defendant has no objection or
defense to the action or the taking of his property or if
no party appears to defend, the court may issue the
order of expropriation without a hearing. Otherwise a
hearing shall be conducted.

16sR.A. No. 8974 was subsequently repealed by R.A. No. 10752, approved
on 7 March 2016. See Sec. 6(a) of R.A. No. 10752 for the relevant procedure for
the implementing agency to enter and take possession of the property.

962

Rule 67
Expropriation
Q.

May the order of expropriation be appealed?

A.

Yes. A final order sustaining the right to expropriate
the property may be appealed by any party aggrieved
thereby. Such appeal, however, shall not prevent the
court from determining the just compensation to be
paid. (54 R67).

Q.

What is the time and manner for appealing an
order of expropriation?

A.

The party taking the appeal shall file a notice of
appeal and a record on appeal within 30 days from
notice of the order of expropriation. (Municipality of
Bifiran v. Garcia, 180 SCRA 576). This is because the
appeal from the order of expropriation is a separate
appeal. (52[a] R41).

Q.

What is just compensation?

A.

Just compensation is the market value of the property
plus consequential damages to the property not taken
less the consequential benefits to be derived by the
owner from the public use or purpose of the property
taken. The consequential benefits assessed shall in
no case exceed the consequential damages assessed.
This is to avoid the property owner being deprived of
the actual value of his property. The following equation
is illustrative:
FMV + (CD-CB) = JC
Where:
FMV is the fair market value
(CD-CB) is consequential damages to the property
not taken less the consequential benefits to be
derived by the owner from the public use or purpose

963

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
of the property taken, the operation of its franchise by
the corporation, or the carrying of the business of the
corporation or person taking the property.
Q.

In an expropriation case, may the court award
capital gains tax and transfer taxes to the landowner
as consequential damages?

A.

No, since such taxes are not damages caused to the
land because of the expropriation. (Republic v. Bunsay,
10 December 2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

What is meant by consequential benefits?

A.

Consequential benefits refers to the actual benefits
derived by the owner on the remaining portion of his
or her land which are the direct and proximate results
of the improvements consequent to the expropriation
and not the general benefits which he receives in common
with the community. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
th
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 746 [7 rev. ed.]).

Q.

At what point in time is the just compensation to
be determined?

A.

The just compensation is determined as of the date of
the taking of the property or the filing of the complaint,
whichever comes first. (54 R67).

Q.

The City of Cebu filed the complaint for
expropriation of the Respondent's property on 17
September 1993 but the property was actually
taken by the city only on 21 September 1994. At
what point in time should the just compensation
be determined?

A.

As of the taking of the property on 21 September
1994. While 34 R67 provides that just compensation
shall be determined at the time of the filing of the
complaint if the filing precedes the taking, such
964

Rule 67
Expropriation
provision cannot prevail over Section 19 of the Local
Government Code, a substantive law, which states
that just compensation should be based on the fair
market value of the property at the time of the taking
of the property. (City of Cebu v. Dedamo, 7 May
2002, Davide, C.J.) Hence in expropriation by a local
government, it is Section 19 of the LGC not S4 R67
which governs.
Q.

What is inverse condemnation?

A.

Inverse condemnation refers to the action for recovery
of just compensation filed by the property owner in the
situation wherein the State, local government unit or
public utility seizes or takes private property for public
use without filing beforehand a complaint for expropriation.
It is called inverse because it is the property owner
rather than the State which initiated the proceedings
for the payment of just compensation. (National
Power Corporation v. Makabangkit, 24 August 2011,
Bersamin, J.).

Q.

The National Irrigation Authority took possession
of the Respondent's land without the benefit of
expropriation proceedings. The Respondent filed
a case for recovery of possession or its value and
damages. The trial court rendered judgment awarding
just compensation but without the appointment
of commissioners. Was it proper for the trial court
to do so?

A.

Yes. S5 R67 on the appointment of commissioners
does not apply to inverse condemnation proceedings.
R67 presupposes that the plaintiff exercised its right of
eminent domain by filing a complaint for expropriation.
When a government agency itself violates procedural
requirements, it waives the usual procedure found in
R67. (National Power Corp. v. Asoque, 14 September
965

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2016, Leonen, J.; Republic v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
106804, 12 August 2004). Nothing of course prevents
the court from appointing commissioners to determine
the just compensation. (Rebadulla v. Republic, 31
January 2018, Tijam, J.).
Q.

A complaint for recovery of possession with
damages or payment of just compensation dated
9 January 2001 was filed by petitioner Felisa
Agricultural Corporation (petitioner) against the
National Power Corporation (NPC) before the
RTC. Petitioner claimed that in 1997, it discovered
that the NPC's transmission towers and transmission
lines were located within a 19,635-square meter
portion of its lands situated in Brgy. Felisa, Bacolod
City. Further verification revealed that the transmission
towers were constructed sometime before 1985
by NPC which entered the subject land without
petitioner's knowledge and consent
In the course of the proceedings, the parties
agreed to narrow down the issue to the payment
of just compensation and agreed to settle the
case at the price of P400.00/sq. m. but the
proposed compromise did not push through in
view of the failure of the OSG to act on the Deed
of Sale entered into by the parties. Subsequently,
petitioner moved that NPC be immediately ordered to
pay the amount of P7,845,000 representing the
100% zonal value of the subject land in accordance
with R.A. No. 8974. NPC opposed the motion,
contending that the said law only applies to
expropriation cases initiated by the government
to acquire property for any national government
infrastructure project. Is the opposition meritorious?

966

Rule 67
Expropriation
A.

No. The provisions of RA 8974,167 including that on
the payment of 100% zonal valuation, are applicable
to inverse condemnation proceedings. To hold
otherwise would be to allow the government to benefit
from its own non-observance of the proper procedure
of fiing an expropriation proceeding before taking over
private property. (Felisa Agricultural Corp. v. National
Transmission Corp., 2 July 2018, Perlas-Bernable, J.).

Q.

The NAPOCOR, a public utility vested with the
power of eminent domain, occupied the land of
the owner without expropriation proceedings and
erected power transmission lines thereon. May
the landowner avail of accion publiciana or action
interdictal to recover the land from NAPOCOR?

A.

No. Reasons of public policy and necessity militate
against such actions. Where such action is filed, the
proper course for the court is to continue with the
case as if it were an expropriation case and determine
the just compensation and consequential damages
pursuant to R67 if it has jurisdiction over the case.
(NPC v. Llorin, 13 Jan 2021, Lazaro-Javier, J.).

Q.

In 1940, the DPWH took Respondents' subject
property without the benefit of expropriation
proceedings for the construction of the MacArthur
Highway. In a letter dated December 15, 1994,
Respondents demanded the payment of the fair
market value of the subject parcel of land.
Celestino R. Contreras, then District Engineer of
the First Bulacan Engineering District of the
DPWH, offered to pay for the subject land at the
rate of P0.70 per square meter, per Resolution of
the Provincial Appraisal Committee of Bulacan.
Unsatisfied with the offer, Respondents demanded
the return of their property, or the payment of
167 Now R.A. No. 10752.

967

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
compensation at the current fair market value.
Hence, the complaint for recovery of possession
with damages filed by Respondents. Respondents
were able to obtain favorable decisions in the RTC
and the CA, with the subject property valued at
P1,500.00 per square meter, with interest at 6%
per annum.
Both the RTC and the CA valued the property
at P1,500.00 per square meter, plus 6% interest
from the time of the filing of the complaint until
full payment. What is the reckoning date for
determining just compensation, the time of the
taking in 1940 (P0.70 per sq. m.) or the time of the
filing of the complaint for recovery of possession?
A.

The time of the taking in 1940, pursuant to 34 R67
which states that the just compensation shall be
determined as of the date of the taking of the property
or the filing of the complaint, whichever came first. In
inverse condemnation, the just compensation should
still be reckoned as of the time of the taking, even if
apparently unjust. The landowner will however be
compensated by the award of interest, exemplary
damages, and attorney's fees. (Sec. of DPWH v
Tecson, 21 April 2015 [e.b.])

Q.

What is fair market value?

A.

Fair market value or market value is the price at which
the property would bring in a market of willing buyers
and willing sellers in the ordinary course of trade and
neither operating under pressures or constraints.
(STEVEN GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 125 [1975]).

968

Rule 67
Expropriation
Q.

What is the procedure for ascertaining just
compensation?

A.

Upon the rendition of the order of expropriation, the
court shall appoint not more than 3 competent and
disinterested persons as commissioners to ascertain
and report to the court the just compensation for the
property sought to be taken. The order of appointment
shall designate the time and place of the first session
of the hearing to be held by the commissioners and
specify the time within which their report shall be
submitted to the court. (85 R67).

Q.

Upon the rendition of the order of expropriation, is
the appointment of commissioners mandatory
upon the court?

A.

Yes. This is shown by the use of the word "shall" in
S5 R67.

Q.

Should the court consult the parties prior to the
appointment of commissioners?

A.

No. Neither Rule 67 of the Rules of Court nor R.A.
No. 8974 requires the RTC to consult the parties in
the expropriation case prior to the appointment of
commissioners. (Republic v. Mupas, 8 September
2015).188

Q.

Describe in brief the proceedings before the
commissioners.

A.
1) The commissioners have the power to receive
evidence and are authorized to administer oaths
on hearings before them.

168R.A. No. 8974 was subsequently repealed by R.A. No. 10752, approved
on 7 March 2016.

969

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
2) The commissioners, after due notice to the parties
to attend, may view and examine the subject
property and its surroundings, and may measure
the same.
3) The commissioners shall assess the consequential
damages to the property not taken and deduct
therefrom the consequential benefits to be derived
by the owner from the public use or purpose of
the property taken. But in no case shall the
consequential benefits assessed exceed the
consequential damages assessed. (S6 R67).
4) The commissioners shall make a full and accurate
report to the court of all their proceedings, and
such proceedings shall not be effectual until the
court shall have accepted their report and
rendered judgment in accordance with their
recommendations.
5) Upon the filing of the commissioners' report, the
clerk of court shall serve copies on all interested
parties, with notice that they are allowed 10 days
within which to file objections to the findings of
the report. (S7 R67).
Q.

What are the actions that the court may take upon
the commissioners' report?

A.

The court may, after hearing:
1) ArrPpt the report and render judgment in accordance
therewith;
2)

Recommit the report to the commissioners for
further report of facts;

3) Set aside the report and appoint new commissioners;
or
4) Accept the report in part and reject it in part.
970

Rule 67
Expropriation
The court may make such order or render such
judgment as shall secure to the plaintiff the property
essential to the exercise of his right of expropriation,
and to the defendant just compensation for the
property so taken. (38 R67).
Q.

Is the plaintiffs right to enter the property suspended
by an appeal from the judgment?

A.

No. The plaintiff's right to enter upon the property of
the defendant and appropriate the same for public
use or purpose shall not be delayed by an appeal
from the judgment. But if the appellate court determines
that the plaintiff has no right of expropriation,
judgment shall be rendered ordering the RTC to
forthwith enforce the restoration to the defendant of
the possession of the property, and to determine the
damages which the defendant sustained and may
recover by reason of the possession taken by the
plaintiff. (311 R67).

Q.

Who pays the costs in an expropriation proceeding?

A.

All costs, including the commissioners' fees, shall be
paid by the plaintiff. However if the property owner takes
an appeal and the judgment is affirmed, the costs of
the appeal shall be paid by the owner. (312 R67).

Q.

The National Power Corporation (NPC) filed a
complaint for expropriation against (a) Petrona
Dilao and her co-owners over 7,281 square meters
of land, and (b) Estefania Enriquez over 7,872
square meters of land. The trial court rendered a
judgment adopting the commissioners' report and
fixing the just compensation of the land of Dilao
and her co-owners at P516.66 per square meter.
NPC filed a notice of appeal from the judgment,
but this was disallowed by the trial court on the

971

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
ground that NPC should have filed both a notice
of appeal and a record on appeal. Was the
disallowance of NPC's appeal proper?
A.

Yes. A record on appeal is required in cases of
multiple or separate appeals. (S2[a] R41). Here the
judgment of just compensation still left something to
be done by the trial court since it still has to determine
the just compensation with respect to Enriquez.
Hence this was a case involving a separate appeal. A
record on appeal is required since the trial court still
had to hold on to the records of the case. (National
Power Corporation v. Paderanga, 28 July 2005,
Carpio Morales, J.).169

Q.

The National Power Corporation (NAPOCOR) filed
a complaint for expropriation against the
Petitioners for the construction of a transmission
line project. The NAPOCOR sought to expropriate
7,875 square meters of the Petitioners' property.
Petitioners filed their answer with counterclaim
wherein they said that the expropriation should
cover not only 7,875 square meters but the entire
property since the construction of the transmission
line would render the entire property valueless
and unfit for whatever purpose. In its December
2001 Decision the trial court fixed the fair market
value of the 7,875 square-meter-portion at P115
per square meter. The trial court also directed its
commissioners to submit a report on the fair
market value of the "dangling" or remaining area
of 58,484 square meters affected by the installation

169It is submitted that the more precise reason why the appeal should be
disallowed is that a separate or several judgment may not be appealed while the
main case is pending, unless the court allows an appeal therefrom (51[f] R41; 55
R36). Where an appeal is allowed, a record on appeal would be required since
there is a separate appeal.

972

Rule 67
Expropriation
March
of NAPOCOR's transmission lines. In its
declared
2002 Supplemental Decision, the trial court
square
7
48.8
48,8
of
isted
the "dangling area" cons
per
P65
at
e
valu
ket
meters and fixed its fair mar
rs
tione
Peti
that
d
square meter. The trial court rule
use
beca
are entitled to consequential damages
of the
the expropriation impaired the value
rs of the
"dangling area" and deprived Petitione
R filed a
ordinary use of their property. NAPOCO
ision.
notice of appeal from the Supplemental Dec
ision
Dec
l
enta
plem
Petitioners argue that the Sup
R
OCO
NAP
e
sinc
y
has become final and executor
on
rd
reco
did not file a record on appeal. Is a
appeal required?
multiple and
A. No. A record on appeal is required in
gnizes the
reco
ence
prud
separate appeals. Juris
proceedings
on
priati
existence of multiple appeals in expro
action for
y
ever
because there are two stages in
in the
expropriation. The reason for multiple appeals
case to
same case is to enable the rest of the
ct issue
proceed in the event that a separate and distin
. In
final
be
to
held
and
t
is resolved by the trial cour
able
pens
indis
is
al
such a case, a record on appe
ght
brou
is
since only a particular incident of the case
the
of
rest
to the appellate court for resolution with the
n of the
proceedings remaining within the jurisdictio
fully and
t
cour
trial
the
since
trial court. In this case
plaint
com
the
in
s
issue
finally resolved all conceivable
R to
OCO
NAP
for
for expropriation, there was no need
rds
reco
nal
origi
file a record on appeal because the
t.
cour
could already be sent to the appellate
R,
OCO
(Marinduque Mining and Ind. Corp. v. NAP
).
2008
ber
G.R. 161219, 6 Octo

973

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In an expropriation proceeding the court rendered
judgment awarding just compensation to the
defendant landowner. The government appealed.
May the landowner move for execution pending
appeal?

A.

No. Execution pending appeal not applicable to
expropriation proceedings. The reason is that public funds
cannot be seized under a writ of execution. (National
Power Corp. v. Rabie, 17 Aug 2016, Carpio, J.).

Q.

In expropriation cases, interest should be awarded
to the landowner. From when is such interest
computed?

A.

Interest should be computed from the date of the
taking of the property. Here legal interest shall run not
from the date of the filing of the complaint but from the
date of the issuance of the writ of possession on 5
May 2008, since it is from this date that the fact of the
deprivation of property can be established. As such, it
is only proper that accrual of legal interest should
begin from this date. Accordingly, the Court deems it
proper to correct the award of legal interest to be
imposed on the unpaid balance of the just compensation
for the subject lot, which shall be computed at the rate
of 12% p.a. from the date of the taking on 5 May 2008
until 30 June 2013. Thereafter, or beginning 1 July
2013, until fully paid, the just compensation due
respondent shall earn legal interest at the rate of 6%
p.a. pursuant to BSP Circular No. 799, Series of
2013. (Republic v. Macabagdal, 10 January 2018,
Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
The plaintiff must pay legal interest on difference
between initial payment (100% of FMV as determined
in zonal valuation) and just compensation awarded.
(Republic v. Heirs of Francisco, 3 February 2021,
Delos Santos, J.).
974

RULE 68. FORECLOSURE OF
REAL ESTATE MORTGAGE
Q.

What is a real estate mortgage?

A.

A real estate mortgage is an accessory contract
constituted by the owner of a real property whereby
he allows a lien to be constituted thereon for the
purpose of securing in favor of the creditor the
fulfillment of a principal obligation.

Q.

Define foreclosure of real estate mortgage.

A.

The proceeding whereby the property subject of the
real estate mortgage is sold at public auction for the
payment of the principal obligation in favor of the
mortgagee. (Article 2087, Civil Code). It is called
foreclosure because the purpose of the action is to
foreclose or divest the rights in the property of the
mortgagor and junior lienholders and to vest their
rights in the purchaser. (S3 R68).

Q.

May foreclosure of real estate mortgage be done
extrajudicially?

A.

Yes. It is required however that there be a special
power of attorney inserted in or annexed to the deed
of mortgage empowering the mortgagee to sell the
land at public auction. (Sec. 1, Act No. 3135).

Q.

The real estate mortgage provides that in the
event of nonpayment of the loan, the mortgagors
expressly agree to the extrajudicial foreclosure of
the mortgaged property. Would this be sufficient
to authorize extrajudicial foreclosure in the event
of the mortgagors's default?

975

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. The mortgagors evidently agreed only to the
holding of the extrajudicial foreclosure should they
default in their obligations. Their agreement was a
mere expression of their amenability to extrajudicial
foreclosure as the means of foreclosing the mortgage,
and did not constitute the special power or authority to
sell the mortgaged property to enable the mortgagees
to recover the unpaid obligations. What was necessary
under Act No. 3135 was the special power or
authority to sell — whether inserted in the mortgage
itself, or annexed thereto — that authorized the
mortgagees to sell in the public auction the mortgaged
property. Hence the extrajudicial foreclosure was
void. (Baysa v. Plantilla, 13 July 2015).

Q.

De Castro is the registered owner of Unit 802 of of
the condominium, covered by Condominium
Certificate of Title (CCT) No. 2826. For failure to
pay assessment dues amounting to P79,905.41 as
of 31 July1986 despite demand, We!bit Construction
Corp., Wack Wack Condominium Corp., and
Spouses Eugenio Juan Gonzalez and Matilde
Gonzalez (petitioners) caused the annotation of a
lien for unpaid assessments and other dues at the
back of De Castro's title on 14 August 1986 pursuant
to Section 4 of the registered Master Deed with
Declaration of Restrictions of Wack Wack
Condominium (Master Deed). As the said dues
remained unsealed, petitioners filed a petition for
the extra-judicial foreclosure of the condominium
unit with the Office of the Ex-Officio Sheriff of
Pasig City on 27 October 1986. The requirements
of publication and posting of the notice were then
complied with and the public auction was set on
10 February 1987. Petitioners emerged as the
highest bidder in the auction sale and a certificate
of sale was issued in their favor.
976

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
De Castro subsequently filed a petition for
annulment of foreclosure proceedings with the
RTC. In the said petition, De Castro argued that
the extrajudicial foreclosure proceedings were
null and void since petitioners have no special
power of attorney or authority to sell the mortgaged
property pursuant to Act No. 3135. Is De Castro's
argument correct?
A.

No. Section 20 of the Condominium Act provides that
unpaid assessments in accordance with a duly
registered declaration of restrictions shall be and
become a lien upon the condominium to be registered
with the Register of Deeds of the city or province
where such condominium project is located and that
such liens may be enforced in the same manner
provided for by law for the judicial or extra-judicial
foreclosure of mortgage or real property. In other
words the authority to sell the mortgaged property
was vested in petitioners pursuant to Section 20 of
the Condominium Act and the duly registered
declaration of restrictions. Hence the extrajudicial
foreclosure proceedings including the auction sale
were valid. (We/bit Const Corp. v. De Castro, 23 July
2018, Tijam, J.).170

Q.

In February 2014, petitioner filed an action for
foreclosure of real estate mortgage against the
respondents spouses before the RTC of Kalibo,
Aklan. The complaint alleged that the respondents
borrowed P250,000 in 2008 from the petitioner and
executed in his favor a REM over the subject land,

170

Compare with First Marbella Condominium Association, Inc. v.
Gatmaytan, 579 Phil. 432 (2008). where the court nullified the extrajudicial
foreclosure proceedings since the only basis of therein petitioners for causing the
extra judicial foreclosure of therein itrivoisient's condominium unit was a mere
notice of assessment anno,
on te letters Ca.

977

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
which has an assessed value of P13,380. The RTC
dismissed the action on the ground of lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction. On appeal, the petitioner
argues that the RTC had jurisdiction since
foreclosure is an action which is incapable of
pecuniary estimation. Was the dismissal proper?
A.

Yes. Foreclosure of real estate mortgage is a real
action, since it involves title to real property. Hence it
is the assessed value of the property which determines
the court's jurisdiction. Considering that the assessed
value of the mortgaged property is only P13,380.00,
the RTC correctly found that the action falls within the
jurisdiction of the first level court- per Section 33(3) of
BP 129 as amended. (Roldan v. Barrios, 23 April
2018, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Is an action for foreclosure of a real estate
mortgage an action incapable of pecuniary estimation?

A.

No. It is a real action which affects the title to or
possession of the mortgaged realty. The trial court's
order confirming the foreclosure sale would divest the
mortgagor or junior lienholder of his rights over the
realty and vest the same in the purchaser. Hence
jurisdiction is not exclusively with the regional trial
court but with the municipal trial court or regional trial
court depending upon the assessed value of the
realty mortgaged.

Q.

What is the venue of a foreclosure suit?

A.

In the proper court which has jurisdiction over the
area wherein the real property involved, or a portion
thereof, is situated. This is because a foreclosure suit
is a real action.

978

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
Q.

What shall be set forth in the complaint for
foreclosure?

A.

The complaint shall set forth:
1) The date and due execution of the mortgage;
2) Its assignments, if any;
3) The names and residences of the mortgagor and
the mortgagee;
4) A description of the mortgaged property;
5)

A statement of the date of the note or other
documentary evidence of the obligation secured
by the mortgage;

6) The amount claimed to be unpaid thereon; and
7) The names and residences of all persons having
or claiming an interest in the property subordinate
in right to the holder of the mortgage, all of whom
shall be made defendants in the action. (Si R68).
Such persons are termed as junior encumbrancers.
Q.

Should the debtor, who is not the mortgagor,
included in the action?

A.

It was stated in a case that such debtor should be
included. (Soriano v. Enriquez, 24 Phil. 584). It is
opined that the debtor should not be impleaded.
Firstly he is not mentioned in S1 R68 as among those
who should be made parties. Secondly the mortgagee
has no cause of action against the debtor since he is
not a party to the mortgage contract.

979

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

X mortgaged his real property to C to secure a
loan obtained by X from C. The mortgage was
registered. Subsequently X also mortgaged the
same property to D for another loan and the
mortgage was also registered. X failed to pay both
loans. C filed a foreclosure complaint against X.
C did not implead D. After due trial, the court
rendered judgment in favor of C and confirmed
the auction sale of the property. D filed an action
to annul the judgment on the ground that he was
an indispensable party who was not impleaded.
Will D's action prosper?

A.

No. In an action to foreclose a real estate mortgage,
the junior encumbrancer is merely a necessary party.
The mortgage may be foreclosed without impleading
him and without prejudicing his rights as there will still
remain with him the unforeclosed right of redemption.

Q.

In the preceding question, what are the rights or
remedies available to D, the second mortgagee?

A.

D still has the unforeclosed right of redemption which
he may exercise within one year from the date of the
registration of the foreclosure sale, as he is a
redemptioner under 527(b) R39 which has suppletory
effect to R68 pursuant to S3(a) RI. (1 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 75051 [7th rev. ed., 3'd printing]).
Since D's real estate mortgage was not
foreclosed, D may still foreclose upon the mortgage in
his favor once the principal obligation secured thereby
becomes due and demandable. D should however
pay off the first mortgagee C or the purchaser at the
first foreclosure suit.

980

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
Q.

What would be the effect if D had been impleaded?

A.

The inclusion of D would serve to foreclose or
extinguish his right of redemption. If there is any
residue after satisfaction of C's claim, then D would
be entitled to the residue.

Q.

May mortgagors file a third-party claim after
extrajudicial foreclosure and ask for exclusion of
their shares? (Akiapat v. Summit Bank, 28 June
2021, lnting, J.).

A.

No. Mortgagors to an REM are not 3 rd parties who can
file a third-party claim after extrajudicial foreclosure.
(Akiapat v. Summit Bank, 28 June 2021, Inting, J.).

Q.

How is a foreclosure suit conducted?

A.

A foreclosure suit is conducted like an ordinary civil
action. Upon the filing of the complaint, summons is
issued and served upon the defendant, who answers
within the reglementary period. After the filing of the
answer, trial is held and thereafter judgment is
rendered. (S3[a] R1; JAIME R. NUEVAS, REMEDIAL
LAW REVIEWER 302-303 [1964]).

Q.

Outline in brief the procedure in a foreclosure case.

A.

The procedure in a foreclosure case may be briefly
outlined as follows:
1) FILING OF THE COMPLAINT. The mortgagee or
his assignee files the foreclosure complaint,
which shall set forth the matters stated in Si R68.
2) JUDGMENT OF FORECLOSURE. If upon trial the
court shall find the facts set forth in the complaint
to be true, it shall determine the amount due to
the plaintiff upon the mortgage debt, including

981

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
interests and other charges as approved by the
court, and costs, and shall render judgment for
the sum so found due.
3) EQUITY OF REDEMPTION. The court shall order
that the sum found due be paid to the court or to
the judgment obligee within a period of not less
than 90 days nor more than 120 days from the
entry of judgment, and that in default of such
payment the property shall be sold at public
auction to satisfy the judgment. (S2 R68).
4) FORECLOSURE SALE. If the defendant fails to
pay within the period specified in the judgment of
foreclosure, the plaintiff shall file a motion for the
foreclosure sale of the property. The sale shall be
conducted by way of a public auction in the
manner and under the provisions of R39 governing
execution sale of real property.
5) ORDER OF CONFIRMATION. After the foreclosure
sale has been conducted, the purchaser shall file
a motion for the confirmation of the sale. The
order of confirmation of the sale shall operate to
divest the rights in the property of all the parties
to the action and to vest their rights in the
purchaser, subject to such rights of redemption
as may be allowed by the law. (S3 R68).
6) WRIT OF POSSESSION. Upon the finality of the
order of confirmation or upon the expiration of the
redemption period when allowed by law, the
purchaser or last redemptioner can file with the
court which ordered the foreclosure sale a motion
for the issuance of a writ of possession over the
property. The purchaser or last redemptioner shall
be entitled to possession of the property unless a
third party is actually holding the same adversely
to the judgment obligor. (S3 R68).
982

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
7) DEFICIENCY JUDGMENT. If the proceeds of the
foreclosure sale are not sufficient to pay the
judgment award, the plaintiff may file a motion for
the court to render a deficiency judgment against
the defendant, upon which execution may issue
immediately. (S6 R68).
Q.

Is the judgment of foreclosure appealable? If so,
within what time and in what manner should the
appeal be taken?

A.

Yes the judgment on foreclosure is appealable since it
is a judgment which disposes of the merits of the
case. Justice Regalado writes that since foreclosure
involves multiple or separate appeals, the appeal
shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal and a
record on appeal within 30 days from notice of the
judgment. (FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 509, 752 [7th rev. ed., 3 rd printing]).

Q.

How may the defendant prevent the auction sale?

A.

By paying the amount of the mortgage debt stated in
the judgment on foreclosure within the period
provided by the court for the exercise of the equity of
redemption (90-120 days). In default of such payment,
the property shall be sold at public auction to satisfy
the judgment. (S2 R68).

Q.

From when is the 90-120 day period computed?

A.

From the entry of the judgment on foreclosure. If no
appeal is made, the judgment on foreclosure becomes
final and executory and will be entered in the book of
entries of judgment. The date of finality of the
judgment shall be deemed to be the date of its entry.
(S2 R36).

983

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the equity of redemption?

A.

The right of the defendant to defeat the foreclosure
sale and recover or gain the property by paying the
judgment award within the period stated in the
judgment of foreclosure which shall be not less
than 90 days nor more than 120 days from the entry
ofjudgment.
(Note: Under 32 R68 of the 1964 Rules of Court,
the defendant had "a period of not less than ninety
days from date of service of [the judgment of
foreclosure]" to pay the mortgage debt. Supreme
Court decisions had ruled that the mortgagor or junior
encumbrancer may recover or gain the property by
paying the mortgage debt prior to the finality of the
order of confirmation. (Anderson v. Reyes, 54 Phil.
944; Castillo v. Samonte, 106 Phil. 1023; GSIS v. CFI,
175 SCRA 19). It is submitted that the foregoing
rulings are no longer good case law since S2 R68 of
the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure clearly provides
that the judgment award should be paid within the
period stated in the judgment of foreclosure which
should not be more than 120 days from the entry of
the judgment).

Q.

If the defendant fails to pay within the period
stated in the judgment of foreclosure, what should
the plaintiff do?

A.

The plaintiff should file a motion for the foreclosure
sale of the property.

Q.

Is notice and hearing required for the motion for
foreclosure sale?

A.

While notice is required, the motion will no longer be
set for hearing and shall be resolved by the court
within 5 days from receipt thereof 33 R68 provides
that the court "upon motion, shall order the property to
984

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
be sold in the manner and under the provisions of
Rule 39," and under S4(iv) R15, a motion for the
issuance of a writ of execution is a non-litigious
motion which shall not be set for hearing.
Q.

Should notice of the foreclosure sale be given to
the defendant?

A.

Yes pursuant to S15(d) R39 in relation to S3 R68
which provides that the property mortgaged should be
sold in the manner and under the provisions of
Rule 39 and other regulations governing sale of real
estate under execution. (JOSE Y. FERIA & MARIA
CONCEPCION NOCHE, PROVISIONAL REMEDIES:
A REVIEWER-PRIMER 252 [2007 ed.]).

Q.

Is there a right of redemption in extrajudicial
foreclosure? If so what is the period of redemption?

A.

Yes there is a right of redemption in extrajudicial
foreclosure. The period of redemption is one year
from the registration of the foreclosure sale. (Act
3135; Reyes v. Tolentino, G.R. L-29142, 29 November
1971). However in case of extrajudicial foreclosure by
a bank and the mortgagor is a juridical person, the
period of redemption is until the registration of the
foreclosure sale or 3 months after the foreclosure
sale, whichever is earlier. (Section 47, General
Banking Law).

Q.

Is there a right of redemption in judicial foreclosure?

A.

As a rule there is no right of redemption in judicial
foreclosure. After the finality of the order confirming
the foreclosure sale, the mortgagor has no more right
over the property.

985

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the exception to the rule that there is no
right of redemption in judicial foreclosure?

A.

Under Section 47 of the General Banking Law, in
case of foreclosure by a bank, whether judicial or
extrajudicial, the mortgagor has one year from the
registration of the foreclosure sale within which to
redeem the property.
Also a junior mortgagee or junior lienholder who
was not impleaded in the foreclosure suit has a right
of redemption within one year from the registration of the
foreclosure sale. (S27(b) R39 in relation to S3(a) R1).

Q.

After the foreclosure sale, what should the
purchaser do?

A.

The purchaser should move for the confirmation of
the sale.

Q.

Is notice and hearing required for a motion for
confirmation of sale?

A.

Yes. Notice to the defendants should be given and a
hearing should be conducted. This is to afford the
defendants a chance to contest the confirmation on
the ground, for instance, of nullity of or irregularities in
the sale or of gross inadequacy. (Tiglao v. Botones,
90 Phil. 275). It is submitted however that the
defendants should no longer be given the chance to
pay the mortgage debt after the lapse of the period
stated in the judgment on foreclosure.

Q.

What is the order of confirmation?

A.

The order by which the court confirms the foreclosure
sale and thereby divests the rights in the property of
all the parties to the action and to vest their rights in
the purchaser, subject to such rights of redemption as
may be allowed by law.
986

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
Q.

May the order of confirmation be appealed? If so,
when and how should the appeal be made?

A.

Yes the order of confirmation is a final order which
may be appealed. (Dimalanta v. Ocampo, 20 SCRA
1136; De la Cruz v. Sta. Maria, L-17928, 30 April
1963). Since foreclosure involves multiple or separate
appeals, the appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of
appeal and a record on appeal within 30 days from
notice of the order. (FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 509, 752 [7th rev.
ed., 3 rd printing]).

Q.

Upon the finality of the order of confirmation or
(where redemption is allowed by law) upon the
expiration of the redemption period, may the
purchaser forthwith take possession of the property?

A.

No. The purchaser should file a motion for the
issuance of a writ of possession. Upon the finality of
the order of confirmation or upon the expiration of the
redemption period when allowed by law, the purchaser
or last redemptioner can file with the court which
ordered the foreclosure sale a motion for the issuance
of a writ of possession over the property. The
purchaser or last redemptioner shall be entitled to
possession of the property unless a third party is
actually holding the same adversely to the judgment
obligor. (S3 R68).

Q.

May the motion be filed ex parte?

A.

In extrajudicial foreclosure, the purchaser may file an
ex parte motion for the issuance of a writ of possession.
(Section 7, Act No. 3135).
In judicial foreclosure, the motion for the
issuance of a writ of possession is a non-litigious
motion which shall not be set for hearing and shall be
987

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
resolved by the court within five days from receipt
thereof. (S4 R15, 2020 Rules). Nevertheless the
motion must be served upon the other party. (35 R15,
2020 Rules).
Q.

May a transferee of the purchaser or winning
bidder file a motion for the issuance of a writ of
possession?

A.

Yes since the transferee would be entitled to all the
rights of the transferor. (Gallent v. Velasquez, 6 April
2016, Reyes, J.).

Q.

The bank extrajudicially foreclosed upon the real
property of the petitioners and bought it at the
foreclosure sale. After the expiration of the oneyear redemption period, the bank consolidated its
title. The bank later sold the real property to A
corporation which then sold it to the spouses
Chung. Upon failure of the petitioners to vacate
the property, the spouses Chung filed an ex-parte
petition for the issuance of a writ of possession.
Was it proper for the spouses Chung to avail of
such remedy?

A.

No. Undoubtedly, the spouses Chung can apply for
the issuance of a writ of possession even though they
were not the purchasers at the foreclosure proceedings.
However, unlike the original purchaser, the Chungs'
right to apply for the issuance of a writ of possession
is circumscribed and cannot be made ex parte; the
issuance of a writ of possession in favor of a
subsequent purchaser must be made only "after
hearing and after determining that the subject property
is still in the possession of the mortgagor." In other
words, while the spouses Chung may file a petition for
the issuance of a writ of possession, it should not be

988

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
ex parte. (Reyes v. Chung, 13 September 2017,
Velasco, J.; Okabe v. Saturn/no, 26 August 2014,
e.b., Peralta, J.).
Q.

What is a deficiency judgment?

A.

A judgment rendered by the court in favor of the
plaintiff for the balance if the proceeds of the
foreclosure sale are not sufficient to pay the judgment
award. The plaintiff shall file a motion with the court
praying that it render a deficiency judgment. The
judgment may be appealed but is immediately executory.

Q.

May the deficiency judgment be appealed? If so,
within what period may an appeal be taken?

A.

Since foreclosure involves multiple or separate
appeals, the appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of
appeal and a record on appeal within 30 days from
notice of the order. (FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 509, 752 [7th rev.
ed., 3rd printing]).

Q.

D borrowed P700,000 from C. X executed a real
estate mortgage in favor of C in order to secure
D's debt The debt was not paid and C filed an
action for foreclosure against X. The real property
was sold at the foreclosure sale but the sale only
realized proceeds of P400,000. May C file a motion
for deficiency judgment against X?

A.

No. In the absence of a contrary stipulation, a thirdparty mortgagor is liable only to the extent of the real
property mortgaged. (PhiL Trust Co. v. Echaus, 52
Phil. 852).

989

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

D a non-resident borrowed P1,000,000 from C and
to secure payment thereof, D executed a real
estate mortgage over his property in Tagaytay
City in favor of C. D failed to pay the loan so C
filed a complaint for foreclosure against D with
the RTC of Tagaytay City. C's application for leave
to effect extraterritorial service of summons by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation
was granted by the RTC. In due course, the court
rendered a judgment on foreclosure.
a) Is the judgment on foreclosure valid?
b) Assume that the foreclosure sale did not yield
sufficient proceeds to satisfy the judgment
award in favor of C. C then moved for a
deficiency judgment against D which the court
granted. Is the deficiency judgment valid?

A.

a) Yes, the judgment on foreclosure is valid. An action
for foreclosure of a real estate mortgage is an action
quasi in rem. Hence, extraterritorial service of summons
under 815 R14 may be had.
b)

No the deficiency judgment is not valid. The
deficiency judgment is in personam because it is
directed only against the mortgagor-debtor.
Under 815 R14 extraterritorial service of summons
upon a non-resident can be made only in actions
or proceedings in rem or quasi in rem. Hence the
court cannot acquire jurisdiction over the person
of D and the deficiency judgment rendered
against him would be void.

990

Rule 68
Foreclosure Of Real Estate Mortgage
Q.

The Asean Banking Corporatoin retained the
services of Atty. Victor Mamon in connection with
its contemplated suit against Dap Textile Mills,
Inc. (DAPO) for the collection of the latter's loan in
the amount of P650 million. Payment of the loan
was secured by a real estate mortgage on the
textile plant and the land it occupied, both owned
by DAPO.
At the time that the services of Atty. Mamon
were retained, the appraised value of the
mortgaged property was P256 million as compared
to the loan of P650 million. DAPO defaulted on its
loan after the union of its employees had declared
a strike which prevented everyone from entering
the factory premises. As a consequence, DAPO
ceased operations and its textile plant had since
then been exposed to the elements and risk of fire
due to the presence of highly combustible materials
consisting of synthetic fibers.
The Asean Banking Corporation requested
Atty. Mamon to pursue a cause of action that
would realize two principal objectives: (a) obtain
a judgment for the payment of any deficiency
arising from the foreclosure of the mortgage lien;
(b) procure the possession and operation of a
textile plant either by Asean Banking Corporation
or by a third party during the pendency of the
foreclosure proceedings and until the expiration
of the redemption period after the foreclosure
sale, so that that income derived therefrom could
be applied in partial payment of the loan.
What are the judicial remedies that Atty.
Mamon should pursue to accomplish the two
principal objectives of the Mean Banking Corporation?
(83 Bar Q15).
991

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Atty. Mamon in behalf of Asean Banking Corporation
should file a judicial action for foreclosure of real
estate mortgage and then after the sale, file a motion
for deficiency judgment. (S6 R68).
Upon filing of the foreclosure suit, Atty. Mamon
should in behalf of his client file a verified application
for the appointment of a receiver since the textile
plant is in danger of being wasted or dissipated or
materially injured and its value is insufficient to
discharge the mortgage debt. The receiver would be a
third person except if there is a written stipulation in
the mortgage agreement that Asean Banking Corporation
may be appointed as a receiver. (S1[0] R59). The
receiver would have the power to take and keep
possession of the property in controversy and to
• collect debts due to the corporaton of which he is the
receiver and can thus apply any income from the
textile plant to the payment of the loan. (S6 R59).

992

RULE 69. PARTITION
Q.

Define partition of real estate.

A.

Partition is the process whereby the co-ownership
over real property is terminated by vesting in each of
the co-owners a specific property or allotment of the
proceeds or value of the property.

Q.

May partition be done extrajudicially?

A.

Yes partition may be done extrajudicially by voluntary
agreement among the parties or judicially by the filing
of a complaint for partition by any one of the coowners or their assigns.

Q.

When may the action for partition be filed?

A.

At any time. The action for partition does not
prescribe. Under Article 494 of the Civil Code, each
one of the co-owners may demand at any time the
partition of the thing owned in common.
Take note however that if a co-owner repudiates
the co-ownership and claims title over the property or
part thereof, the remedial action is not one for
partition but for reconveyance of property, in which
case prescription may set in.

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over an action for
partition?

A.

If the subject matter of the action is real property,
jurisdiction would depend upon its assessed value. If
the assessed value exceeds P20,000, or P50,000
within Metro Manila, then it would be the Regional
Trial Court which would have jurisdiction. Otherwise,
it would be the Municipal Trial Court.

993

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
If the subject matter is personal property,
jurisdiction would depend upon the value of the
personal property. If the value exceeds P300,000, or
P400,000 within Metro Manila, then jurisdiction would
lie with the Regional Trial Court. Otherwise, it would
be the Municipal Trial Court which would have
jurisdiction. (FERIA & NOCHE, THE 1997 RULES OF
CIVIL PROCEDURE: PROVISIONAL REMEDIES
AND SPECIAL CIVIL ACTIONS 266-67 [2007 ed.]).
If the main purpose of the action however is the
annulment of a deed of adjudication and the
declaration of the plaintiffs as heirs, with the partition
of the property merely being incidental to the main
action, the action is one which is incapable of pecuniary
estimation and hence within the jurisdiction of the
RTC. (Russel v. Vest!!, 364 Phil. 392 [1999]).
Q.

Is an action for partition of real property a real
action? What is the venue of an action for
partition of real property?

A.

Yes an action for partition of real property is a real
action since it affects title to or possession of real
property or interest therein. JOSE Y. FERIA, RULES
OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 17 (1997). Venue would thus
lie with the proper court which has jurisdiction over
the area where the real property or a portion thereof is
situated. (Si R4).

Q.

A files an action in the Municipal Trial Court
against B, the natural son of A's father, for the
partition of a parcel of land located in Taytay,
Rizal, with an assessed value of P20,000. B moves
to dismiss the action on the ground that the case
should have been brought in the Regional Trial
Court because the action is one that is not capable
of pecuniary estimation as it involves primarily a
994

Rule 69
Partition
determination of hereditary rights and not merely
the bare right to real property. Resolve the motion.
(00 Bar Q18b).
A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied. The MTC
has jurisdiction over real actions over land with an
assessed value not exceeding P20,000. An action for
partition is a real action; hence the MTC has jurisdiction
since the assessed value does not exceed P20,000.
(See Huguete v. Embudo, G.R. No. 149554, 1 July 2003).

Q.

A co-heir filed in 2003 with the RTC of Bacolod
City a complaint for partition of inherited property.
The complaint however did not allege the
assessed value of the property subject of the
complaint May the complaint be dismissed for
lack of jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. For actions on partition, the subject matter is
two-phased. Partition is at once an action (1) for
declaration of co-ownership and (2) for segregation
and conveyance of a determinate portion of the
properties involved. Thus, in a complaint for partition,
the plaintiff seeks, first, a declaration that he/she is a
co-owner of the subject properties, and second, the
conveyance of his/her lawful share. An action for
partition of real estate is at once an action for the
determination of the co-owners of the subject property
and an action for the eventual conveyance of specific
portions thereof to the co-owners. While this subject
matter is incapable of pecuniary estimation, the
proper court which would have jurisdiction over the
action would still depend on the subject property's
assessed values in accordance with Secs. 19(2) and
33 (3) of B.P. Blg. 129. (Agarrado v. Librando-Agarrado,
6 June 2018, Reyes, J.).171

171The court's statement that while action for partition is incapable of
pecuniary estimation, jurisdiction would be based on the assessed value of the

995

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

May an action for partition be employed to settle a
decedent's estate?

A.

Yes. Co-heirs are co-owners hence they may settle
the estate extrajudicially or judicially. The decedent
should however have died intestate, since if he died
with a will, the heirs cannot partition the estate without
first probating the will. (Guevara v. Guevara, 74 Phil.
479 [1943]; Si R75).

Q.

Kuya and Diko filed a complaint for partition of
their deceased father's estate against their sisters,
Ate and Ditse. The brothers alleged that the four
of them are the only heirs of their deceased
father; that they could not agree as to how their
fathers estate should be divided; that their father
left no will and that he left no debts whatsoever.
Ate and Ditse filed a motion to dismiss
insisting that the proper action should be a
petition for the issuance of letters of administration
and not an action for partition. Is the motion
meritorious? Explain. (86 Bar Q14ed).

A.

No, the motion to dismiss is not meritorious. Under
the Law on Partition, the estate of a deceased person
may properly be divided since a co-ownership has
arisen among the deceased's heirs provided that the
deceased died intestate and left no debts. A petition
for issuance of letters of administration is only an
option to settle the estate and is not mandatory. In
fact the heirs in such a case are encouraged to have
the estate partitioned, whether judicially or extrajudicially,
as this is less expensive than a probate proceeding.
(Butiong v. Plazo, 5 August 2015, Peralta, J.).

land is self-contradictory. It is more in accord with the ruling to hold that an
action for partition is a real action.

996

Rule 69
Partition
Q.

Outline in brief the proceedings in judicial partition.

A.

The proceedings in judicial partition may be briefly
outlined as follows:
1)

COMPLAINT. A person having the right to compel
the partition of real estate may file a complaint for
partition, setting forth the nature and extent of his
title and an adequate description of the real
estate of which partition is demanded and joining
as defendants all other persons interested in
the property.

2) ORDER FOR PARTITION. If after the trial the court
finds that the plaintiff has the right thereto, it shall
order the partition of the real estate among all the
parties in interest. (S2 R69).
3) PARTITION BY AGREEMENT. The parties may,
if they are able to agree, make the partition among
themselves by proper instruments of conveyance,
and the court shall confirm the partition agreement.
(S2 R69).
4)

PARTITION BY COMMISSIONERS. If the parties
cannot agree on the partition, the court shall
appoint not more than 3 competent and disinterested
persons as commissioners to make the partition.
(S3 R69).

5) PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COMMISSIONERS.
The commissioners shall: (a) partition the
property, b) if the real estate cannot be divided
without prejudice to the interests of the parties,
the court may assign it to one of the parties
willing to take it, provided he pays to the other
parties such amounts as the commissioners
deem equitable, unless one of the interested

997

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
parties asks that the property be sold instead of
being assigned, in which case the court shall (c)
order the commissioners to sell the property at
public sale.
6) REPORT OF COMMISSIONERS. The commissioners
shall make a full and accurate report to the court
of all their proceedings as to the partition, or the
assignment of the real estate to one of the
parties, or the sale of the real estate. Upon the
filing of the report the clerk of court shall serve
copies on all interested parties with notice that
they have 10 days within which to file objections
to the findings of the report.
7) ACTION OF COURT UPON REPORT, JUDGMENT
OF PARTITION. Upon the expiration of the 10day period, the court may upon hearing: (a) accept
the report and render judgment in accordance
therewith; (b) recommit the report to the commissioners
for further report of facts; or (c) set aside the
report and appoint new commissioners; or (d)
accept the report in part and reject it in part; and
make such order and render judgment as shall
effectuate a fair and just partition of the real
estate or its value (where the realty is assigned or
sold) between the several owners thereof.
Q.

May the order for partition be appealed? If so, how?

A.

Yes the order for partition is appealable pursuant to
S2 R69 which states that "a final order decreeing
partition and accounting may be appealed by any
party aggrieved thereby." The aggrieved party shall
file a notice of appeal and a record on appeal within
30 days from notice of the order. A record on appeal
is required since there may be a subsequent appeal

998

Rule 69
Partition
from the judgment of partition and/or accounting for
rent and profits under S7 & 8 R69. (Miranda v. Court
of Appeals, 71 SCRA 295; see also Municipality of
Bitian v. Garcia, 180 SCRA 576).
Q.

If the parties cannot agree among themselves to a
voluntary partition, is reference to commissioners
mandatory?

A.

Yes. This is shown by the use of the word "shall" in
53 R69.

Q.

May the judgment for partition be appealed?
If so, how?

A.

Yes. It is submitted that the appeal is taken by filing a
notice of appeal within 15 days from notice of the
judgment. There is nothing more left for the trial court
to do after the rendition of the judgment for partition
and no reason for it to retain the records if an appeal
is interposed. Hence the considerations in Miranda v.
Court of Appeals, supra, are not apropos.

Q.

B, C, and D filed an action for partition of a land
alleging that they are co-heirs and co-owners of
the land. After due proceedings, the trial court
rendered a judgment of partition dividing the land
among B, C, and D. The judgment became final
and executory. Y then filed an action to recover
the land against B, C, and D, claiming that X (the
deceased father of B, C, and D) had sold the land
to him 5 years earlier. B, C, and D countered that
X's rights over the land had been cut-off by the
judgment of partition. Are B, C, and D correct?

999

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No, B, C, and D are not correct.
Under S12 R69, nothing in R69 shall be
construed so as to prejudice, defeat, or destroy the
right or title of any person claiming real estate involved
by title under any other person, or by title paramount
to the title of the parties among whom the partition
may have been made. The partition of a thing owned
in common shall not prejudice third persons, who
shall retain the rights of mortgage, servitude, or any
other real rights belonging to them before the division
was made. (Article 499, Civil Code).
Here Y's title over the land is paramount to that
of B, C, and D since X had no more right over the
land at the time of his demise.

Q.

Petitioners and Respondents are siblings.
Respondents filed an action for partition against
Petitioners. The action was dismissed for failure
to prosecute per S3 R17. The dismissal became
final and unappealable. Subsequently the Petitioners
filed an action for quieting of title against the
Respondents over the same lot subject of the
partition suit The court denied the action for
quieting of title but granted the Respondents'
counterclaim for partition. The Petitioners contend
that the trial court should not have granted the
counterclaim for partition as the same was barred
by res judicata. Is the counterclaim for partition
barred by res judicata?

1000

Rule 69
Partition
A.

No. Dismissal with prejudice under 53 R17 cannot
defeat the right of a co-owner to ask for partition at
any time, provided that there is no actual adjudication
of ownership of shares yet. Between dismissal with
prejudice under S3 R17 and the right granted to coowners under Art. 494 of the Civil Code, the latter
must prevail. To construe otherwise would diminish
the substantive right of a co-owner through the
promulgation of procedural rules. Such a construction
is not sanctioned by the principle that a substantive
law cannot be amended by a procedural rule. This
finds further support from Art. 496 of the Civil Code
which provides that "[Nartition shall be governed by
the Rules of Court insofar as they are consistent with
this Code." (Quintos v. Nicolas, 16 June 2014).

1001

RULE 70. FORCIBLE ENTRY AND
UNLAWFUL DETAINER (EJECTMENT)
Q.

What are the 3 kinds of actions available in order
to recover possession of real property?

A.

The three kinds of actions in order to recover possession
of real property are:
1) Accion interdictal,
2) Accion publiciana, and
3) Accion reivindicatoria.

Q.

Define the three actions.

A.

Accion interdictal is the action to recover physical
possession or possession de facto.172 It refers to the
action for ejectment.
Accion publiciana is the plenary action to recover
the real right of possession.
Accion reivindicatoria is the action to recover not
just possession but ownership of real property.

Q.

Which courts have jurisdiction over the foregoing
actions?

A.

Accion interdictal falls within the jurisdiction of the
municipal trial courts.
Accion publiciana and accion reivindicatoria being
real actions, the jurisdiction would depend on the
assessed value of the real property involved. Where
the assessed value does not exceed P20,000 (or

mit is submitted that the more precise term is "possession de facto" not
"physical possession." The latter term can be erroneously interpreted to refer
only to actual possession when the law protects not only actual but constructive
possession as well. (See Articles 531, 538 and 539 of the Civil Code).

1002

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
P50,000 in Metro Manila) it would be the municipal
trial court which would have jurisdiction. It the
assessed value exceeds such amounts then it would
be the regional trial court which would have jurisdiction.
Q.

May an ejectment suit be resorted to in order to
resolve a boundary dispute?

A.

No. Opposing possessory rights over certain areas of
adjacent lots, arising from claims of ownership
thereof, cannot be resolved in a summary action such
as an ejectment suit. The issues involved in such a
controversy should be fully threshed out in an accion
publiciana or an accion reivindicatoria, and not before
the municipal trial court in a summary proceeding of
unlawful detainer or forcible entry. (Javier v. De
Guzman, 2 September 2015, Peralta, J.).
Boundary dispute arising from metes and bounds
of Torrens title may be threshed out not in a forcible
entry case but only through an accion reivindicatoria.
(Martinez v. Heirs of Lim, 11 September 2019,
Bersamin, C.J.).

Q.

In an action for unlawful detainer in the Municipal
Trial Court (MTC) of Manila, defendant X raised in
his answer the defense that plaintiff A is not the
real owner of the house subject of the suit. X filed
a counterclaim against A for the collection of a
debt of P380,000 plus accrued interest of P15,000
and attorney's fees of P20,000.
a) Is X's defense tenable? (98 Bar Q2ed)
)ax

A.

a) No, X's defense is not tenable.

1003

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The Supreme Court has held that in an unlawful
detainer suit, the issue is not ownership but the
physical or material possession of the subject premises.
X's defense is merely that A is not the real owner
but he did not allege that the right of possession was
based on the right of ownership. Hence X's defense
is untenable.
Q.

Is an action for ejectment an action quasi in rem
or an action in personam?

A.

An ejectment case is an action in personam since it
merely seeks to enforce personal liability against the
Defendant. This can be gleaned from Sections 1, 15,
and 17 of Rule 70. (Domagas v. Jensen, G.R. No.
155847, 17 January 2005). Hence the rule is that the
judgment in an ejectment case is binding only on one
who has been properly impleaded and given an
opportunity to be heard. (Sunflower Neighborhood
Association v. Court of Appeals, C.R. No. 136274, 3
September 2003).

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that the
judgment in an ejectment case is binding only
upon the persons impleaded in the suit?

A.
1) A trespasser, squatter or agent of the defendant
fraudulently occupying the property to frustrate
the judgment.
2)

A guest or occupant of the premises with the
permission of the defendant.

3) A transferee pendente lite.
4) A sublessee.
5) A co-lessee.
1004

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
6) A member of the family, relative or privy of the
defendant. (Sunflower Neighborhood Association
v. Court of Appeals, supra).
Q.

What are the two kinds of ejectment suits?

A.

The two kinds of ejectment suits are suits for forcible
entry and those for unlawful detainer.

Q.

Distinguish forcible entry from unlawful detainer.

A.
1) AS TO NATURE OF DEFENDANTS POSSESSION.
In forcible entry, the defendant's possession is
unlawful from the start, while in unlawful detainer,
the defendant's possession was lawful at the start
but later on became illegal.
2) AS TO NEED FOR DEMAND. In forcible entry
there is no need for prior demand to file it, while
prior demand is needed in unlawful detainer
where the defendant failed to pay or comply with
the conditions of the lease contract.
3) AS TO PRESCRIPTIVE PERIOD. The one-year
period in forcible entry is counted from the
unlawful deprivation, while in unlawful detainer
the one-year period is counted from the last
demand to pay/comply and vacate or from the
withholding of possession.
4) AS TO REQUIREMENT OF PRIOR PHYSICAL
POSSESSION. In forcible entry it is required that
the plaintiff had prior physical possession, while
such possession is not required in unlawful
detainer.

1005

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Forcible entry
Q.

Define an action for forcible entry.

A.

The action for forcible entry is a summary proceeding
for the recovery of possession by a person who has
been deprived of possession of any land or building
by force, intimidation, threat, strategy, or stealth. (FISTS)

Q.

What is the prescriptive period for bringing an
action for forcible entry?

A.

Within 1 year after such unlawful deprivation. (Art.
1147[1], Civil Code; Si R70). Where the unlawful
deprivation is by stealth, the one-year period is
counted from the time the plaintiff came to know of
the unlawful deprivation. (City of Manila v. Garcia, L26053, 21 February 1967).

Q.

Is prior demand necessary in an action for
forcible entry?

A.

No. A perusal of Sections 1 and 2 of Rule 70 reveal
that prior demand is unnecessary in an action for
forcible entry.

Q.

What are the essential allegations of a complaint
for forcible entry?

A.

The essential allegations of a complaint for forcible
entry are the following: (PUF)
1) Prior physical possession of the land or building by
the plaintiff; and
2) Unlawful deprivation of such possession by the
defendant through force, intimidation, stealth,
threats, and strategy. (FISTS)

1006

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

Is it necessary that the foregoing allegations be
expressly stated in the complaint for forcible entry?

A.

No. The allegations need not be express. It is
sufficient if these matters may be inferred from other
allegations in the complaint. Thus an allegation that
"Defendant unlawfully turned Plaintiff out of possession
of the property though force" would suffice to allege
prior physical possession since a person who was
turned out of possession has to be in prior physical
possession. (Madammu v. Municipal Court of Manila,
74 Phil. 230).

Q.

On 25 March 1996, Tirona sued Nunez before the
Metropolitan Trial Court of Valenzuela for forcible
entry. Tirona claimed to be owner of various
fishpond lots located at Valenzuela, Metro Manila.
He alleged that on 20 January 20 1996, Nunez, "by
means of force, stealth, or strategy, unlawfully
entered the said fishpond lots and occupied the
same against his will, thereby depriving him of
possession of said fishponds."
Nunez filed his answer, in which he raised the
defense that the MTC has no subject-matter
jurisdiction over the complaint since Tirona failed
to allege that he was in prior physical possession,
which allegation is jurisdictional in a complaint for
forcible entry. Tirona countered that the allegation
that he was deprived of possession was in effect
an allegation that he was in prior physical possession.
a) Should the MTC dismiss the case for lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction?
b) Assume that Tirona filed a motion for leave to
amend complaint so as to allege prior physical
possession on his part. May the court grant
him leave to do so?
1007

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

a) Yes the MTC should dismiss the case for lack of
subject-matter jurisdiction. In an action for forcible
entry, an allegation that the plaintiff was in prior
physical possession is mandatory for the court to
acquire jurisdiction.
While the complaint alleged that Tirona was
deprived of possession of the fishponds, it cannot be
inferred from such phrase that the possession that
Tirona was supposedly deprived of was a prior
physical possession.
b) No. An amendment is not allowed where the court
has no jurisdiction over the original complaint and
the purpose of the amendment is to confer
jurisdiction upon the court. (Tirona v. Alejo, 10
October 2001).

Q.

Discuss the meaning of prior physical possession
in forcible entry.

A.

Prior physical possession should not be interpreted
literally to refer solely to the situation where Plaintiff is
physically occupying the land or building. Possession
can be acquired not only by material occupation or
the exercise of a right but also by the fact that a thing
is subject to the action of one's will or by the proper
acts and legal formalities established for acquiring
such right. (Art. 531, Civil Code).
Possession can be acquired by juridical acts
such as donation, succession, and execution of public
instruments. Possession in the eyes of the law does
not mean that a man has to have his feet on every
square meter of ground. It is enough that he is able to
subject the property to the action of his will. (Mangaser
v. Ugay, 3 December 2014).

1008

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

Primus bought a parcel of unregistered land through
a deed of absolute sale which was acknowledged
before a notary public. He never took physical
possession of the land. Subsequently, Fortius
occupied the land without the knowledge of Primus.
Six months after, Primus filed a complaint for
forcible entry against Fortius. Fortius raised the
defense that Primus was not in prior possession
of the land. Is Fortius' defense meritorious?

A.

No, Fortius' defense is not meritorious.
Under the Law on Property, possession may be
acquired constructively or by the proper legal acts and
formalities, such as the execution of a public
instrument.
Here, the deed of sale in favor of Primus was
acknowledged before a notary public and therefore
executed in a public instrument. Thus, Primus had
acquired possession of the land prior to Fortius'
occupation.
Hence, Fortius' defense is not meritorious and
Primus could file a complaint for forcible entry against
him. (Wong v. Carpio, 21 October 1991; Madayag v.
Madayag, 20 January 2020).

Q.

A parcel of land was registered in the Plaintiffs
name and a TCT issued in his favor. Subsequently
the Defendant entered into possession of the lot
without the Plaintiffs knowledge and consent
The Plaintiff filed a forcible entry case against the
Defendant. MTC rendered judgment dismissing
the complaint because the Plaintiff did not allege
much less prove that he was in prior physical
possession. Was the MTC's judgment correct?

1009

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Possession can be acquired not only by material
or actual occupation, but also by the fact that a thing
is subject to the action of one's will or by the proper
acts and legal formalities established for acquiring
such right.
The Plaintiff was in prior possession of the
subject property by juridical act, specifically, through
the sale of the subject property in his favor, and the
registration thereof in the Torrens system in his name.
If we are to disregard such juridical acts and
unreasonably constrict the concept of prior possession
to "physical occupation" in its rigid literal sense, then it
will open floodgates of absurdity wherein land
intruders will be favored under the law than Torrens
title holders. (Madayag v. Madayag, 20 January 2020,
Reyes, J.).

Q.

The complaint for forcible entry alleges that the
plaintiff has been deprived of the land in question
without stating how such deprivation took place.
Is the complaint sufficient?

A.

No the complaint is not sufficient There was no
showing from the complaint that the unlawful deprivation
took place through FISTS. (Gum/ran v. Gumiran, 21
Phil. 174).

Q.

The complaint for forcible entry alleges that
"before plaintiff could take possession of and
occupy said house, defendant surreptitiously and
maliciously occupied same without the knowledge
and consent of plaintiff." Is the complaint sufficient?

A.

No, the complaint is not sufficient. It is clear from the
allegation that the plaintiff was not able to take prior
physical possession of the property. (Madammu v.
Municipal Court of Manila, 74 Phil. 230).

1010

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Unlawful detainer
Q.

Define unlawful detainer.

A.

Unlawful detainer is the summary proceeding for the
recovery of possession filed by a lessor, vendor,
vendee, or other person against whom the possession of
any land or building is unlawfully withheld by the
defendant after the termination or expiration of the
defendant's right to hold possession by virtue of an
implied or express contract.
In unlawful detainer, the defendant's right to
possess was initially lawful since he had a right to do
so by virtue of an implied or express contract, but
later on became unlawful after the termination or
expiration of such right.

Q.

Against whom is the unlawful detainer action
brought?

A.

Against the person who is unlawfully withholding
possession from the plaintiff or against any person
claiming under him.

Q.

May a person who had not been in possession of
the premises bring an action for unlawful detainer
of these premises?

A.

Yes. A perusal of S1R70 shows that prior possession
de facto is not required in unlawful detainer, unlike in
forcible entry where the plaintiff should have been
"deprived of the possession." What is important in
unlawful detainer is that the plaintiff is a person who
has a right to possession and "against whom the
possession of any land or building is unlawfully withheld."

1011

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
For instance an action for unlawful detainer may
be brought by a vendee against whom the possession
is unlawfully withheld by the vendor. (See Maninang
V. Court of Appeals, 314 SCRA 525). Si R70 states
that a vendee against whom the possession of any
land or building is unlawfully withheld after the
expiration or the termination of the right to hold
possession by virtue of any contract, express or implied,
may bring an action for unlawful detainer.
Q.

Ben sold a land to Del with right to repurchase
within one year. Ben remained in possession of
the property. When Ben failed to repurchase the
same, title was consolidated in favor of Del.
Despite demand, Ben refused to vacate the land,
constraining Del to file a complaint for unlawful
detainer. In his defense, Ben contended that the
case should be dismissed because Del had never
been in possession of the property. Is Ben correct?
(08 Bar Q17).

A.

No Ben is not correct. Under Si R70, prior physical
possession is not required of the plaintiff in unlawful
detainer.

Q.

D stayed in P's land by the latter's tolerance. P
then asked D to vacate the land as he was going
to reside therein. D refused. Should P file an
action for forcible entry or unlawful detainer?

A.

Unlawful detainer. D's possession was initially lawful
albeit only through P's tolerance. It became unlawful
after D refused to vacate after being asked to do so
by P. Where a person is allowed to stay in another's
land or building by tolerance, there is an implied
contract that the occupant will leave once the owner
desires to make use of the premises.

1012

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

In a complaint for unlawful detainer, is a simple
allegation that the "defendant is unlawfully withholding
possession from the plaintiff' sufficient?

A.

Yes such an allegation is sufficient for the words
"unlawfully withholding" imply possession on the
defendant's part, which was lawful at the start,
expired later as a right, and which is being withheld by
the defendant. (Co Tiamco v. Diaz, 75 Phil. 672).

Q.

a) Can the mortgagee-buyer of a foreclosed
property file an action for unlawful detainer against
the mortgagor after the lapse of the redemption
period?
b) Would the pendency of a suit for the annulment
of the mortgage bar the ejectment suit?

A.

a) Yes. This is because the mortgagee-buyer is
entitled to the possession after the expiration of the
redemption period. In such a case the mortgagor's
right to stay in the premises by virtue of the real
estate mortgage has terminated.
The mortgagee-buyer may ask for a writ of
possession or file an action for ejectment.
b) Pendency of a suit for annulment of the mortgage
is not a bar to the ejectment suit since the issue
in the latter is merely physical possession not
ownership. (Jayelosa v. Court of Appeals, 10
December 1996).

Q.

Union Bank acquired the Maunlad Shopping Mall
after the foreclosure sale. Union Bank then entered
into a contract to sell over the mall in favor of
Maunlad Homes Inc. The price was payable in
installments and upon full payment Union Bank
would execute a deed of absolute sale in favor of
Maunlad Homes. Under the contract, in event of
1013

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
rescission due to failure to pay or to violation of
the contract, Maunlad Homes would be immediately
required to vacate the property and turn over
possession to Union Bank.
Maunlad Homes failed to pay succeeding
installments and so Union Bank served a notice of
rescission and then a notice to pay and vacate
which Maunlad Homes did not heed. Union Bank
filed an action for unlawful detainer with the MeTC
against Maunland Homes. Maunlad Homes raised
the defense that it still had the right to possess as
it was still was the owner of the mall because of
Union Bank's failure to reserve ownership in the
contract. The MeTC dismissed the action for lack
of jurisdiction. It found that Union Bank's cause
of action was based on a breach of contract and
that both parties are claiming a better right to
possess the property based on their respective
claims of ownership of the property. The MeTC
ruled that the appropriate action to resolve these
conflicting claims was an accion reivindicatoria,
over which it had no jurisdiction.
The RTC and the CA affirmed the MeTC's
decision. The CA additionally held that Union Bank's
claim of possession is based on its claim of ownership
which in turn is based on its interpretation of the
terms and conditions of the contract, particularly,
the provision on the consequences of Maunlad
Homes' breach of contract. The CA determined
that Union Bank's cause of action is premised on
the interpretation and enforcement of the contract
and the determination of the validity of the rescission,
both of which are matters beyond the jurisdictionof
the MeTC. Therefore, it ruled that the dismissal of
the ejectment suit was proper. Did the MeTC have
jurisdiction over the case?
1014

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
A.

Yes. Despite Maunlad Homes' claim of ownership of
the property, the MeTC retained its jurisdiction over
the action; a defendant may not divest the MeTC of its
jurisdiction by merely claiming ownership of the
property. Under S16 R70, "[w]hen the defendant
raises the defense of ownership in his pleadings and
the question of possession cannot be resolved
without deciding the issue of ownership, the issue of
ownership shall be resolved only to determine the
issue of possession." In ejectment cases, the MTC
has the jurisdiction to preliminarily determine the
issue of ownership in order to determine the issue
of possession.
The authority granted to the MeTC to
preliminarily resolve the issue of ownership to
determine the issue of possession ultimately
allows it to interpret and enforce the contract or
agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant
To deny the MeTC jurisdiction over a complaint
merely because the issue of possession requires the
interpretation of a contract will effectively rule out
unlawful detainer as a remedy. As stated, in an action
for unlawful detainer, the defendant's right to possess
the property may be by virtue of a contract, express or
implied; corollarily, the termination of the defendant's
right to possess would be governed by the terms of
the same contract. Interpretation of the contract
between the plaintiff and the defendant is inevitable
because it is the contract that initially granted the
defendant the right to possess the property; it is this
same contract that the plaintiff subsequently claims
was violated or extinguished, terminating the defendant's
right to possess. (Union Bank v. Maunlad Homes,
Inc., G.R. 190071, 15 August 2012). The doctrine in
Union Bank overturns that laid down in Vda. de Murga
v. Chan, 25 SCRA 441 (1968).
1015

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Is prior demand required in an unlawful detainer
case?

A.

No, as a rule prior demand is not required in an
unlawful detainer case. The exception is where the
unlawful detainer suit is brought by the lessor against
the lessee on the ground of the latter's failure to
pay or to comply with the conditions of the lease.
(S2 R70).
Also where the unlawful detainer is based on
defendant's possession through tolerance, a demand
for the defendant to vacate is necessary.

Q.

X leased his land to B under a one-year lease
contract from 1 January 2014 to 31 December
2014 with monthly rental of P30,000. Despite the
expiration of the lease, B continued to possess
the land without any notice to vacate from X. On
14 January 2015, X filed with the MTC an action
for unlawful detainer against B, alleging that B
was withholding possession despite the expiration
of the lease contract B filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction, contending
that X had not made a prior demand to vacate
against him. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?

A.

No. Prior demand is not required in an unlawful
detainer case if the ground of the suit is the termination or
expiration of the defendant's right to possess.
Here the defendant B's right to possess had
terminated upon the expiration of the lease contract.

1016

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

Same facts as the preceding question except that
the unlawful detainer suit was filed on 16 January
2015. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. Under Article 1670, if at the end of the lease, the
lessee should continue enjoying the thing leased for
15 days with the acquiescence of the lessor, and
unless a notice to the contrary by either party has
been given, it is understood that there is an implied
new lease for the time established in Article 1687.
Here since the lease was paid monthly, a month-tomonth lease was impliedly established for the month
of January 2015. The monthly lease had not yet
expired when X brought the suit on 16 January 2015.
What X should do is to serve a notice of nonrenewal or prior notice to B that he is terminating the
lease for the succeeding month of February 2015. X
may then bring an action for unlawful detainer against
B if the latter refuses to leave after 31 January 2015.
A lease on a month-to-month basis terminates at the
end of each month, but is renewed the next month by
tacit agreement, and so successively until one of the
parties refuses to continue the tacit renewals.
(Villanueva v. Can/as, 77 Phil. 381, 384 [1946], cited
in 2 DEAN MARIA CONCEPCION NOCHE, CIVIL
PROCEDURE EXPLAINED 776 [2021]).

Q.

On 10 January 1990, X leased the warehouse of A
under a lease contract with a period of five years.
On 8 June 1996, A filed an unlawful detainer case
against X without a prior demand for X to vacate
the premises. Can X contest his ejectment on the
ground that there was no prior demand for him to
vacate the premises? (97 Bar Q5a)

1017

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes, X can contest his ejectment on the ground that
there was no prior demand for him to vacate the
premises.
Under Article 1670 of the Civil Code, an implied
new lease arises if the lessee shall continue enjoying
the premises for fifteen days after the expiration of the
lease with the acquiescence of the lessor and without
any notice to the contrary being given.
Here, X had continued enjoying the premises
after the expiration of the lease on 11 January 1995
and up to June 1996 with the acquiescence of A who
had not made any prior demand for X to vacate.
Hence, an implied new lease had arisen and thus A
cannot file an unlawful detainer case without a prior
demand to vacate on X.

Q.

What is the prescriptive period for bringing an
action for unlawful detainer?

A.

Within 1 year after the unlawful withholding of
possession. (Art. 1147[1], Civil Code; Si R70).
Upon the expiration of the lease, the lessee is
already considered to be unlawfully withholding the
property; hence the right of action for unlawful detainer
immediately arises. (Panganiban v. Pilipinas Shell
Petroleum Corp., 395 SCRA 624).
In case of failure to pay or to comply with the
conditions of the lease, the action should be brought
within one year from the expiration of the 15-day or 5day period from demand (the last demand in case there
are more than one) or from the service or posting of
written notice as provided in S2 R70.

1018

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

In an unlawful detainer complaint, it was alleged
that plaintiffs tolerated defendant's occuputation
of the land, that plaintiffs demanded that defendant
vacate the property but to no avail; hence the
plaintiffs served upon defendant a formal demand
to vacate dated 1 September 2003 which was not
heeded. The complaint was filed on 6 October
2003. The MTC ruled in favor of plaintiffs. On
appeal, the Court of Appeals set aside the decision
on the ground that the MTC did not acquire
jurisdiction. The CA held that in ejectment cases,
is it a requirement that the complaint should aver,
as jurisdictional facts, when and how entry into
the property was made. Did the CA rule correctly?

A.

No. The requirement that the complaint should aver,
as jurisdictional facts, when and how entry into the
property was made by the defendants applies only
when the issue is the timeliness of the filing of the
complaint before the MTC. This is because, in forcible
entry cases, the prescriptive period is counted from
the date of defendants' actual entry into the property;
whereas, in unlawful detainer cases, it is counted
from date of the last demand to vacate. Hence, to
determine whether the case was filed on time, there is
a necessity to ascertain whether the complaint is one
for forcible entry or for unlawful detainer; and since
the main distinction between the two actions is when
and how defendant entered the property, the determinative
facts should be alleged in the complaint.
Here the Complaint was filed on October 6, 2003
or within one year from the time the formal demand to
vacate was made. Hence timeliness of the complaint
was not at issue and thus the Complaint sufficiently

1019

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
established a case for unlawful detainer as to vest the
MTC with jurisdiction. (Dela Cruz V. Capco, 17 March
2014, Del Castillo, J.).173
Q.

A complaint for unlawful detainer was filed with
the MTC by Plaintiff on 24 December 2008 which
contained the following allegations: (1) Plaintiff
was in possession and control of subject property,
however, sometime in May 2007 she discovered
that Defendants have entered the subject property
and occupied the same; (2) Plaintiff demanded
that they leave the premises. The defendants
requested for time to leave and she acceded to
said request The defendants committed to vacate
the subject property by the end of May, 2008; (3)
Despite several repeated demands, defendants
unjustifiably refused to vacate the subject premises
prompting the Plaintiff to seek the assistance of a
lawyer who wrote them a formal and final demand
letter in July 2008 to vacate the premises and to
pay reasonable compensation for their illegal use
and occupancy of the subject property. Does the
MTC have jurisdiction over the complaint?

A.

No. To justify an action for unlawful detainer, it is
essential that the plaintiffs supposed acts of tolerance
must have been present right from the start of the
possession which is later sought to be recovered.

mThe courts reasoning appears to be faulty. If the dispossession was
through FISTS, then the one-year period would have been counted from the
unlawful deprivation through FISTS rather than from the last demand and thus
timeliness would have been an issue. It is submitted that the CA's decision was
the correct one. To justify an action for unlawful detainer based on tolerance, it is
essential that the complaint allege that the plaintiffs tolerance must have been
present right from the start of the possession sought to be recovered. In the
case, the complaint merely alleged that "plaintiff tolerated defendant's occupation
of the lot' but did not state how defendant came to occupy or possess the and.
(See Zacarias v. Anacay, 24 September 2014).

1020

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Otherwise, if the possession was unlawful from the
start, an action for unlawful detainer would be an
improper remedy.
The above complaint failed to allege a cause of
action for unlawful detainer as it does not describe
possession by the Defendants being initially legal or
tolerated by the Plaintiff and which became illegal
upon termination by the Plaintiff of such lawful
possession. Plaintiff's insistence that she actually
tolerated Defendants' continued occupation after her
discovery of their entry into the subject premises is
incorrect. As she had averred, she discovered respondents'
occupation in May 2007. Such possession could not
have been legal from the start as it was without her
knowledge or consent, much less was it based on any
contract, express or implied. The possession of the
defendant in unlawful detainer is originally legal but
became illegal due to the expiration or termination of
the right to possess. Where the complaint did not
satisfy the jurisdictional requirement of a valid cause
for unlawful detainer, the municipal trial court had no
jurisdiction over the case.
MTC clearly had no jurisdiction over the case as
the complaint did not satisfy the jurisdictional
requirement of a valid cause for unlawful detainer.
Since the prescriptive period for filing an action for
forcible entry has lapsed, petitioner could not convert
her action into one for unlawful detainer, reckoning
the one-year period to file her action from the time of
her demand for respondents to vacate the property.
(Zacarias v. Anacay, 24 September 2014).174
1741n Dela Cruz v. Capco the complaint alleged that defendant's possession
was tolerated without indicating that defendant unlawfully deprived plaintiff of
possession through FISTS. Compare with Zacarias where complaint alleged that
she discovered defenant's occupation which was without her knowledge and
consent, and which allegation in effect made it a case of forcible entry.

1021

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are the requirements of the demand or notice
under S2 R70?

A.
1) The demand made on the lessee must be to pay
or to comply with the conditions of the lease and
to vacate. (S2 R70).
2)

If demand cannot be made upon the lessee
himself, by serving written notice of such demand
upon the person found in the premises or by
posting written notice of such demand on the
premises if no person be found thereon.

3)

The lessee failed to comply with the demand
within 15 days in case of land and 5 days in case
of building. The 15/5-day period is counted from
notice if made upon the lessee or the person
found in the premises or from the posting of the
notice of demand on the premises if no person be
found thereon.

Q.

Is the demand under S2 R70 required to be in writing?

A.

The demand made on the lessee himself need not be
in writing. (Jakihaca v. Aquino, 181 SCRA 67).
The demand should be in writing however if the
demand cannot be made on the lessee himself In
such case, the written demand should be served on
the person found in the premises or posted in the
premises if no person be found thereon.

Q.

The lessee failed to pay the rent for 3 months.
The lessor served a written notice upon the lessee
to pay the rent or vacate the premises. The lessee
failed to either pay or vacate within 5 days from
receipt of the notice. May the lessor file a suit for
unlawful detainer against the lessee?
1022

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
A.

No. The jurisdictional demand in unlawful detainer is a
demand to pay and vacate. As worded, plaintiff's
demand gave defendant an alternative of either
paying the rent or vacating. When defendant then
elected to stay after such demand, he became merely
a debtor for the unpaid rental and cannot be ejected
until he defaults in payment and a demand is made
upon him. (Vda. de Marge v. Chan, 25 SCRA 441).

Q.

In the preceding problem, what if the lessor served
a demand to vacate without any demand to pay?

A.

The demand is sufficient for purposes of complying
with the jurisdictional requirement. The reason is that
the defendant is left with no choice to defeat
ejectment, unlike in a demand letter couched as
"pay/comply or vacate."

Q.

Plaintiff lessor filed with the MTC an unlawful
detainer case against the lessee. The demand
letter by the lessor informed the lessee that he
was unilaterally rescinding the lease and demanded
that lessee vacate the premises. The MTC dismissed
the ejectment case for lack of jurisdiction, holding
that action publiciana was the proper remedy.
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

Yes. The lessor's letter to the lessee informing him
that the lease is unilaterally rescinded and demanding
that lessee vacate is not the jurisdictional demand
required under S2 R70. (Quesada v. Bonanza
Restaurants, 14 Nov 2016, Brion, J.).

Q.

D sold her residential land to P but D requested
that she be allowed to live in the house with a
promise to vacate as soon as she was able to find
a new residence. After D had been living in the
house for one year, P demanded that D vacate but

1023

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
D failed or refused to do so. On appeal the RTC
held that there was no valid demand to pay and
vacate since the demand was to vacate only. Was
the RTC correct?
A.

No. Demand to vacate is sufficient where the defendant's
possession was based on the plaintiffs tolerance, and
not on any contract between them. (Maceslang v.
Zamora, G.R. No. 156375, 30 May 2011).

Q.

What is an implied new lease?

A.

It is a new lease which results if at the end of the
lease contract the lessee should continue enjoying
the thing leased for 15 days with the acquiescence of
the lessor, and unless a notice to the contrary by
either party has previously been given. The period of
the lease shall be for the time established in Articles
1682 and 1687 of the Civil Code and the other
terms of the contract shall be revived. (Article 1670,
Civil Code).

Q.

What are the consequences if a complaint for
forcible entry or unlawful detainer is defective,
that is the allegations therein do not make out a
case for forcible entry or unlawful detainer?

A.

The following are the consequences if a complaint for
forcible entry or unlawful detainer is so defective (PJ):
1) The action would be treated as an accion publiciana
or accion reivindicatoria and hence governed by
the regular procedure.
2) The MTC would not have jurisdiction if the assessed
value as alleged in the complaint exceeds the
jurisdictional amount or if there is no allegation
regarding the assessed value.

1024

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

Are ejectment cases governed by the Rule on
Summary Procedure?

A.

Yes, all actions for forcible entry and unlawful
detainer, irrespective of the amount of damages or
unpaid rentals sought to be recovered, shall be
governed by the Rule on Summary Procedure.

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings, motions, and
petitions under the Rule 70?

A.

(6M [dbp red] TM PIRC)
1)

Motion to dismiss or quash except where the
ground is non-referral for conciliation and lack of
subject matter jurisdiction.

2) Motion for bill of particulars.
3) Motion for postponements which are dilatory.
4)

Motion for reconsideration of a judgment, reopening, and new trial.

5) Motion for extension of time to file pleadings or
papers.
6) Motion to declare defendant in default.
7) Third-party complaint.
8) Memoranda.
9) Petition for relief from judgment.
10) Intervention.
11) Reply.
12) Certiorari, prohibition, and mandamus against
interlocutory orders.

1025

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

P filed an action for unlawful detainer against D
alleging that D had not been paying rent for over a
year and that D refused to leave despite P's
demand upon him to pay and vacate. D filed a
verified answer in which he interposed a counterclaim
for collection of a P200,000 loan he had extended
to P for the latter to buy a used car. If you were
the counsel for P what would you do?

A.

I would file a motion to expunge the counterclaim.
Under S4 R70 the only pleadings allowed in an
ejectment case are the complaint, compulsory counterclaim,
cross-claim and the answers thereto. The counterclaim of
D is permissive since it does not arise out of nor is it
connected to the lease between P and D.

Q.

In an action for unlawful detainer in the Municipal
Trial Court (MTC) of Manila, defendant X raised in
his answer the defense that plaintiff A is not the
real owner of the house subject of the suit. X filed
a counterclaim against A for the collection of a
debt of P380,000 plus accrued interest of P15,000
and attorney's fees of P20,000.
a) xxx
b) Does the MTC have jurisdiction over the
counterclaim? (98 Bar Q2 ed)

A.

b) Yes the MTC has subject-matter jurisdiction over
the counterclaim.
Under B.P. Blg. 129, the MTC in Metro Manila
has jurisdiction where the amount of the claim,
excluding interests and attorney's fees, does not
exceed P400,000.
Here the amount of the counterclaim, exclusive
of interests and costs, does not exceed P400,000.
Hence the MTC has jurisdiction.
1026

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
However the MTC does not have jurisdiction to
act on the counterclaim since a permissive counterclaim
is not allowed under the Rule on Summary
Procedure. Hence it is a mere scrap of paper which
should not be considered by the Court. (S4 R70).
Q.

P filed with the MeTC of Las Pinas City an action
for forcible entry against D. The complaint alleges
that the land subject of the action is in Muntinlupa
City. Without even waiting for the answer of D, the
judge dismissed the complaint on the ground of
improper venue. Was the judge's action proper?

A.

Yes the judge's action was proper.
Under S5 R70, the court may, from an
examination of the allegations in the complaint and
such evidence as may be attached thereto, dismiss
the case outright on any of the grounds for the
dismissal of a civil action which are apparent therein.
If no ground for dismissal is found, it shall forthwith
issue summons.

Q.

Within what time should the defendant in an
ejectment case file and serve his answer?

A.

Within 10 days from service of summons. (S6 R70).
The answer to counterclaims or cross-claims shall be
served and filed within 10 days from service of the
answer in which they are pleaded. Note that a motion
for extension of time to file answer is prohibited
(S13 R70).

Q.

What is the result if defenses available to the
defendant are not pleaded in the answer?

A.

Affirmative and negative defenses not pleaded in the
answer are deemed waived, except lack of subjectmatter jurisdiction. (S6 R70).

1027

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect if the defendant fails to answer?

A.

Should the defendant fail to answer the complaint
within 10 days from service of summons, the court,
motu proprio or on plaintiffs motion, shall render
judgment as may be warranted by the facts alleged in
the complaint and limited to what is prayed for therein.
The court may in its discretion reduce the amount of
damages and attomey's fees claimed for being excessive
or otherwise unconscionable, without prejudice to the
applicability of 53(c) R9 if there are two or more
defendants. (S7 R70).

Q.

The complaint for unlawful detainer filed before
the MeTC by Fairland Knitcraft Corporation against
Po contained the following allegations: Fairland
was the owner of Condominium Unit No. 205 in
Cedar Mansion II on Ma. Escriba Street, Pasig City.
The said unit was leased by Fairland to Po by verbal
agreement, with a rental fee of P20,000.00 a
month, to be paid by Po at the beginning of each
month. From March 2011, Po had continuously
failed to pay rent. For said reason, Fairland opted
not to renew the lease agreement anymore. On
January 30, 2012, Fairland sent a formal letter to
Po demanding that he pay the amount of
P220,000.00, representing the rental arrears, and
that he vacate the leased premises within 15 days
from the receipt of the letter. Despite receipt of
the demand letter and the lapse of the said 15-day
period to comply, Po neither tendered payment for
the unpaid rent nor vacated the premises. Thus, on
December 12, 2012, Fairland was constrained to
file the complaint for unlawful detainer before
the MeTC.

1028

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Po failed to file an answer within the
reglementary period. Hence Fairland filed a motion to
render judgment. The MeTC considered the case
submitted for decision. Po filed a Motion for Leave
of Court to file Comment/Opposition to Motion to
Render Judgment. In the attached Comment/
Opposition, Po denied the allegations against him
and commented that there was no supporting
document that would show that Fairland owned
the property; that there was no lease contract
between them; and that there were no documents
attached to the complaint which would show that
previous demands had been made and received
by him.
In its decision, the MeTC dismissed the
complaint for lack of merit due to Fairland's
failure to prove its claim by preponderance of
evidence. The MeTC explained that although the
complaint sufficiently alleged a cause of action,
Fairland failed to prove that it was entitled to the
possession of the subject property. The MeTC
also stated that there was no evidence presented
to support Fairland's claim against Po either.
On appeal, Fairland posits that judgment
should have been rendered in its favor on the
basis of the complaint itself and not on its failure
to adduce proof of ownership over the subject
property. Is Fairland correct?
A.

Yes. S6 of the Rule on Summary Procedure and S7
R70 are clear that in case the defendant fails to file
his answer, the court shall render judgment, either
motu proprio or upon plaintiff's motion, based solely
on the facts alleged in the complaint and limited to
what is prayed for. The failure of the defendant to
timely file his answer and to controvert the claim
against him constitutes his acquiescence to every
1029

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
allegation stated in the complaint. Logically, there is
nothing to be done in this situation except to render
judgment as may be warranted by the facts alleged in
the complaint.
Judgment shall be rendered based only on the
complaint of Fairland without the need to consider the
weight of evidence. The complaint of Fairland had a
valid cause of action for unlawful detainer. Consequently,
there is no more need to present evidence to
establish the allegation of Fairland of its ownership
and superior right of possession over the subject
property. (Fairland Knitcraft Corp. v. Po, 27 January
2016, Mendoza, J.).
Q.

When is the preliminary conference held?

A.

Not later than 30 days after the last answer is filed, a
preliminary conference shall be held. (S8 R70).

Q.

Are the provisions of R18 on pre-trial applicable
to the preliminary conference?

A.

Yes unless the same are inconsistent with the
provisions of R70.

Q.

What is the result of the failure of a party to
appear during the preliminary conference?

A.

The failure of the plaintiff to appear in the preliminary
conference shall be cause for the dismissal of his
complaint. The defendant who appears in the absence
of the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment on his
counterclaim in accordance with S7.
If a sole defendant shall fail to appear, the
plaintiff shall likewise be entitled to judgment in
accordance with S7 R70. This procedure shall not
apply where one of two or more defendants sued

1030

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
under a common cause of action who had pleaded a
common defense shall appear at the preliminary
conference. (58 R70).
Q.

What happens after the preliminary conference
is terminated?

A.

Within 5 days after the termination of the preliminary
conference, the court shall issue an order stating the
matters taken up therein, including but not limited to:
1) Whether the parties have arrived at an amicable
settlement, and if so the terms thereof;
2) The stipulations or admissions entered into by the
parties;
3) Whether, on the basis of the pleadings and the
stipulations and admissions made by the parties,
judgment may be rendered without need of
further proceedings, in which event the judgment
shall be rendered within 30 days from issuance of
the order;
4) A clear specification of material facts which remain
controverted; and
5)

Such other matters intended to expedite the
disposition of the case.

Q.

Is a full-blown trial conducted in ejectment cases?

A.

No. Instead within 10 days from receipt of the
preliminary conference order, the parties shall submit
the affidavits of their witnesses and other evidence
on the factual issues defined in the order, together
with their position papers setting forth, the law and
the facts relied upon by them. (S10 R70).

1031

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When shall the court render judgment?

A.

Within 30 days after receipt of the affidavits and
position papers, or the expiration of the period for
filing the same, the court shall render judgment.

Q.

What may the court do if there is no showing of a
referral in a case requiring referral for conciliation?

A.

The court may sua sponte or upon motion dismiss the
case without prejudice. The case may be revived only
after that requirement shall have been complied with.
(S12 R70).

Q.

In an ejectment case, the court dismissed the
complaint for failure of the plaintiff to appear
during the preliminary conference. The Plaintiff
filed a motion for reconsideration of the dismissal
order. The Defendant contends that the dismissal
had become final and executory since the motion
for reconsideration is a prohibited pleading and
hence does not suspend the reglementary period
to appeal. Is the Defendant's contention correct?

A.

No. The motion for reconsideration of a judgment
prohibited under Sec. 19(c) of the RSP is that which
seeks reconsideration of a judgment rendered by the
court after trial on the merits. The dismissal order is
not a judgment on the merits after trial of the case.
(Lucas v. Fabros, 324 SCRA 1).

Q.

Discuss the availability of preliminary injunction
in ejectment cases.

A.

Preliminary (prohibitive) injunction
The court may grant preliminary injunction, in
accordance with the provisions of R58 to prevent the
defendant from committing further acts of dispossession
against the plaintiff.
1032

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Preliminary mandatory injunction
A possessor deprived of his possession through
forcible entry or unlawful detainer may, within 5 days
from the filing of the complaint, present a motion in
the action for forcible entry or unlawful detainer for the
issuance of a writ of preliminary mandatory injunction
to restore him in his possession. The court shall
decide the motion within 30 days from the filing
thereof (315 R70).
It should be noted that 315 R70 modifies Article
539 of the Civil Code in two ways: First by extending
the remedy of preliminary mandatory injunction to
unlawful detainer. Second, by limiting the period within
which the remedy may be availed of from 10 days to 5
days from the filing of the complaint.
Preliminary mandatory injunction in case of appeal
Upon motion of the plaintiff, within 10 days from
the perfection of the appeal to the RTC, the latter may
issue a writ of preliminary mandatory injunction to
restore the plaintiff in possession if the court is
satisfied that the defendant's appeal is frivolous or
dilatory, or that the plaintiffs appeal is prima facie
meritorious. (320 R70). Take note that this remedy
is available to plaintiff even if he lost before the MTC
provided that the RTC is satisfied that the plaintiff's
appeal is prima facie meritorious.
Q.

In ejectment cases, may the defendant raise the
defense of ownership?

A.

The general rule is that in ejectment cases the
defendant may not raise the defense of ownership in
his pleadings. The reason is that the issue in ejectment
cases is not ownership but merely physical possession.

1033

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
The exception is where the question of
possession cannot be resolved without deciding the
issue of ownership; provided, that the issue of
ownership shall be resolved only to determine the
issue of possession. (316 R70).
Q.

If after trial, the court finds that the allegations of
the complaint are true, what are the reliefs it shall
grant to the plaintiff in the judgment?

A.

(RARAC)
1) Restitution of the premises.
2) The sum justly due as arrears of rent or as
reasonable compensation for the occupation and
use of the premises.
3) Attorney's fees, and
4) Costs. (317 R70).

Q.

Can the trial court award moral and exemplary
damages in favor of the plaintiff?

A.

No. The only damages that may be awarded by the
court are those provided for in S17 R70.

Q.

In ejectment cases, may the court award attorney's
fees exceeding P20,000?

A.

Yes. The limitation in Sec. 1(A)(1) of the Rule on
Summary Procedure was deleted in 57 & 317 R70
of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure. (HONORATO
Y. AQUINO, ASPECTS OF JURISDICTION 113
[1999 ed.]).175

175The pronouncement in Dela Rosa v. Roldan, 5 September 2006, that
the P20,000 ceiling applies to ejectment cases before the MTC, referred to a
MTC judgment rendered in 25 September 1996 or prior to the effectivity of the
1997 Rules of Civil Procedure on 1 July 1997.

1034

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

In an action for unlawful detainer based on the
plaintiff's tolerance of defendant's possession,
when should the back rentals start to run? From
the occupation by tolerance or from the time of
the demand to vacate?

A.

From the time of the demand to vacate. It is
inconsistent to demand payment of rentals during the
period of tolerance. (Pro-Guard Security v. Tormil
Realty, 7 July 2014).

Q.

Lajave Agricultural Management and Development
Corporation (Lajave) entered into a lease agreement
over agricultural land with the lessor Agustin for a
ten-year term from 1988 to 1998. When the lease
contract expired in 1998, Lajave continued to
occupy and use the premises without any renewal
or extension of the lease contract through the
tolerance of Agustin. Lajave paid Agustin the
annual compensation for the use and occupancy
of the said properties, but the latter alleged that
they were never apprised of how the annual rental
was determined and that the payment of lease
rentals was more often delayed.
On 1 March 2010, Agustin sent a demand
letter to Lajave to vacate the premises which the
latter did not heed. Agustin thus filed an unlawful
detainer case in the MTC against Lajave.
Subsequently, Agustin also filed with the RTC a
complaint for sum of money to recover the
deficiency rentals for the use and occupancy of
the premises from January 2003 to February 2010.
Lajave filed a motion to dismiss the RTC case on
the ground of us pendens, arguing that both
cases involve the same cause of action and hence
such rentals in arrears should be recovered in the
unlawful detainer case. Should the motion to
dismiss be granted?
1035

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

No. Both cases involve a different cause of action. In
unlawful detainer, the recoverable damages are
reckoned from the time the possession of the property
becomes unlawful. Here the demand to vacate was
made only on 1 March 2010, thus, it was only after
said demand that Lajave's continued possession of
the leased properties became unlawful. Prior to the
lapse of the 15-day period to vacate the property as
stated in the demand letter, the damages sustained
from January 2003 to February 2010 do not have a
direct relation to Agustin's loss of material possession
since they do not result from Lajave's refusal to vacate
the leased premises. These damages must be claimed
in an ordinary action, as in the complaint for collection
of sum of money. (Lajave Agricultural Mgt & Dev't
Corp. v. Jayeliana, 7 November 2018, Peralta, J.).
Note: The court's ruling may be justified by the
fact that Lajave's possession after the expiration of
the lease contract was through Agustin's tolerance.
Hence, applying the case of Pro-Guard Security v.
Tormil Realty, 7 July 2014, which was also cited in
Lajave, the back rentals should start to run only from
the time of demand to vacate. In other words, the
cause of action of Agustin's unlawful detainer suit was
not the violation of any lease contract, which had
already expired at that point, but on Lajave's failure to
vacate upon demand to do so. The Lajave case
should not be read as limiting the amount of unpaid
rentals a lessor can claim in an unlawful detainer suit
to those falling due after the demand to vacate.

1036

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

D is renting an apartment unit from P under a oneyear lease contract with rent payable monthly at
P10,000. Ten days after the expiration of the lease
contract, P, without making a prior written demand to
pay and vacate, filed an unlawful detainer suit
against D. D filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that P did not comply with the jurisdictional
requirement of prior demand.
a) Is the motion to dismiss a prohibited pleading?
b) How should the judge rule on the motion to
dismiss?
c) Assume that you were consulted by P prior to
the filing of the ejectment case and he asks
your opinion on the fastest way for him to
take possession of the apartment unit. What
would be your advice?
d) Can P include in his complaint a prayer for
moral and exemplary damages in the amount
of P100,000?
e) If D files an answer, could he interpose therein
a counterclaim for moral and exemplary damages
against P in the amount of P100,000 arising
from the filing of the suit against him (D)?

A.
a)

No. A motion to dismiss is allowed when it is
based on the ground of lack of subject-matter
jurisdiction. (S13 R70). Here the motion to
dismiss alleges that there was no jurisdictional
demand which in effect alleges that the MTC has
no jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the suit.

1037

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
b)

The judge should deny the motion to dismiss.
Prior demand is not required where the action for
unlawful detainer is based on termination of the
defendant's right to hold possession. (Si R70).

c) I would tell him to apply, within 5 days from the
filing of the complaint, for a writ of preliminary
mandatory injunction to restore him in his possession.
d) No. The only damages that can be recovered in
an unlawful detainer suit are the fair rental value
or the reasonable compensation for the use and
occupation of the real property, attorney's fees,
and costs. (S17 R70). Other damages must be
claimed in an ordinary action. (Felisilda V. Villanueva,
139 SCRA 431).
e) Yes. The claim for moral and exemplary damages
arising from the filing of the suit is a compulsory
counterclaim which is allowed under 84 R70.
Q.

P filed a case of unlawful detainer against D over
real property with an assessed value of P60,000.
P alleged that D failed to pay the rent for over a
year and that he made a written demand on D pay
or to vacate the leased premises. D filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground that the demand of P on
D was for D to pay or vacate.
a) Is the motion to dismiss filed by D a prohibited
pleading?
Assume that the court grants the motion to
dismiss. P filed a motion for reconsideration of
the order dismissing the case.
b) Is the motion for reconsideration a prohibited
pleading?

1038

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Assume that the court denies the motion
to dismiss.
c) May D file a motion for reconsideration of the
order denying the motion to dismiss?
d) Assume that D filed the motion for reconsideration
and the court denies the same. May 0 file a
special civil action for certiorari and mandamus
with the RTC challenging the court's refusal
to dismiss the case?
The MTC proceeded to try the case on the
merits and then rendered judgment in favor of P.
D appealed to the RTC contending that the MTC
has no jurisdiction over the case.
e) On appeal, should the RTC dismiss or decide
the case?
f)

Assume that the RTC decided to take cognizance
of the appeal. On appeal, may the RTC admit
an amended pleading by D in which he raises
a counterclaim for P200,000 as moral and
exemplary damages for the filing by P of a
baseless and harassment suit?

g) The RTC decided the case in favor of P. What
mode of appeal should D avail of if he wants
to have the decision of the RTC reviewed?

h) Is the judgment of the RTC immediately
executory?
A.

a) The motion to dismiss filed by D is not a prohibited
pleading. A motion to dismiss is not prohibited if it is
based on lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter.
Here D's ground that there was a failure to comply
with the jurisdictional demand to pay and vacate is in
effect a motion to dismiss on the ground that the
1039

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
MTC has no jurisdiction over the subject matter since
the demand to pay and vacate is jurisdictional in
unlawful detainer cases.
b) The motion for reconsideration is not a prohibited
pleading. In Lucas v. Fabro, 324 SCRA 1, it was
held that the motion for reconsideration which is
prohibited is one which seeks reconsideration of
a judgment rendered by the court after trial on the
merits. Here the dismissal was done without a
trial on the merits being conducted.
c) Yes. What is prohibited under 313(3) R70 is only
a motion for reconsideration of a judgment. Hence
a motion for reconsideration of an interlocutory
order is not prohibited.
d) No. Under S13(8) R70, a petition for certiorari or
mandamus against any interlocutory order issued
by the trial court in ejectment cases is a
prohibited pleading. The order denying the motion
to dismiss is an interlocutory order.
e) The RTC should decide the case. Under 38 R40,
if a case was tried on the merits by the lower
court without jurisdiction over the subject matter,
the RTC on appeal shall not dismiss the case if it
has original jurisdiction thereof, but shall decide
the case, without prejudice to the admission of
amended pleadings and additional evidence in
the interest of justice.
f)

No. A counterclaim should be within the jurisdiction
of the RTC both as to nature and amount. Here
the amount of P200,000 lies below the jurisdictional
amount for the RTC. The RTC is trying the case
in the exercise of its appellate rather than original
jurisdiction; hence the exceptive clause of 37 R6
finds no application.
1040

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
g) D should avail of the petition for review under R42.
This is because the judgment of the RTC was
rendered in the exercise of its appellate, not
original, jurisdiction.
h) Yes the judgment of the RTC is immediately
executory. Under S21 R70 the RTC's judgment
against the defendant shall be immediately
executory, without prejudice to a further appeal
that may be taken therefrom.
Q.

D sold a parcel of land to P with an assessed
value of P15,000. After the delivery of the title over
the land to P, D despite P's demand refused to
turn over possession to P.
a)

May P file an action for unlawful detainer
against D?

Assume that P filed an unlawful detainer case
against D.
b) May D raise the defense that he is still the
owner since the sale was subject to the
suspensive condition that P should first clear
the premises of squatters?
After trial, the court rendered judgment in
favor of P finding that P is entitled to the possession
of the land as the contract of sale was not subject
to any suspensive condition.
c) May D later on file with the MeTC an action to
recover the ownership of the land as against P?
A.

a) Yes P may file an action for unlawful detainer
against D.
An action for unlawful detainer may be brought
by a vendee against whom the possession hi
unlawfully withheld by the vendor. (See Maninang v.
1041

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Court of Appeals, 314 SCRA 525). Si R70 states
that a vendee against whom the possession of any
land or building is unlawfully withheld after the expiration
or the termination of the right to hold possession by
virtue of any contract, express or implied, may bring
an action for unlawful detainer.
b)

Yes D may raise the defense of ownership since
in this case the issue of possession cannot be
resolved without determining the issue of ownership.
Here the issue of ownership hinges on whether
the sale was subject to a suspensive condition.

c) Yes. When the defendant raises the defense of
ownership in his pleadings and the question of
possession cannot be resolved without deciding
the issue of ownership, the issue of ownership
shall be resolved only to determine the issue of
possession. (S16 R70). Likewise S18 R70
provides that the judgment in an ejectment case
shall be conclusive with respect to the possession
only and shall in no wise bind the title or affect the
ownership of the land or building.
Q.

To what court is the judgment or final order in an
ejectment case appealable?

A.

The judgment or final order shall be appealable to the
appropriate Regional Trial Court.

Q.

How shall the Regional Trial Court decide the
appeal?

A.

The Regional Trial Court shall decide the appeal on
the basis of the entire record of the proceedings had
in the court of origin and such memoranda and/or
briefs as may be submitted by the parties or required
by the Regional Trial Court. (S18 R70). As such, the
RTC, in exercising appellate jurisdiction, is not limited
1042

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
to the errors assigned in the appeal memorandum but
could decide on the basis of the entire record of the
proceedings had in the trial court and such
memoranda and/or briefs as may be submitted by the
parties or required by the RTC. (Macaslang v. Zamora,
30 May 2011, Bersamin, J.).
Q.

Is the judgment of the MTC in ejectment cases
immediately executory?

A.

The judgment of the MTC against the Plaintiff is not
immediately executory pending appeal.
The judgment of the MTC against the defendant
is immediately executory unless: (SAD)
1) An appeal has been perfected;
2) The defendant to stay execution files a sufficient
supersedeas bond, approved by the MTC and
executed in favor of the plaintiff to pay the rents,
damages, and costs accruing down to the time of
the judgment appealed from; and
3) During the pendency of the appeal, the defendant
deposits with the appellate court the amount of
rent due from time to time under the contract, if
any, as determined by the judgment of the MTC,
or in the absence of a contract, the defendant
deposits with the RTC the reasonable value of
the use and occupation of the premises for the
preceding month or period at the rate determined
by the judgment of the lower court on or before
the 10th day of each succeeding month or period.
(S19 R70)

1043

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What is the effect of failure of the defendant to
make the periodic deposit?

A.

The appellate court, upon plaintiffs motion and upon
proof of such failure, shall order the execution of the
appealed judgment with respect to the restoration of
possession, but such execution shall not be a bar to
the appeal taking its course until the final disposition
thereof on the merits. (S19 R70).

Q.

The Defendant appealed from the judgment in an
unlawful detainer case. Pending appeal and
because of the Defendant's failure to deposit the
rental corresponding to April, the Plaintiff filed
with the RTC on May 11 a motion for execution
with respect to the restoration of possession. After
the filing of the motion or on May 13, the Defendant
made the deposit of rentals corresponding to April.
The RTC denied the motion for execution on the
ground that the deposit had already been made
on May 13. Was the denial of the motion for
execution correct?

A.

No. 319 R70 regarding the periodic deposit of the
rentals corresponding to the previous month within
the first ten days of the succeeding month is
mandatory. The fact that the actual deposit was made
shortly after the expiration of the first ten days cannot
make any difference. Failure to make the deposit of
rentals within the period fixed by law, however short
the delay, gives the appellee the right to execution of
the judgment, which the court is bound to grant and
enforce. (Carbungco v. Amparo, G.R. No. L-2245, 20
May 1949).

1044

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

Distinguish the supersedeas bond from the
periodic deposit.

A.

The supersedeas bond covers only the rent,
damages, and costs as fixed in the MTC judgment
while the deposit covers the rent/reasonable cost for
the use and occupation of the premises that accrue
after the MTC judgment and until the final judgment
on appeal.
Failure to file the supersedeas bond will render
the MTC judgment immediately executory while the
failure to make the deposit (but with a supersedeas
bond posted) will render the MTC judgment executory
only as to the restoration of plaintiff's possession.
The supersedeas bond is necessary to stay
execution even if the defendant vacates the premises
after the judgment while a periodic deposit is not
necessary if the defendant vacates the premises.
(S19 R70).

Q.

While the ejectment case was pending before the
Municipal Court, Juan Santos religiously deposits
all current rentals. In due time, the judge ordered
Juan Santos to pay all rents until he vacates the
premises as well as attorney's fees in the amount
of P5,000. Maria Cruz moves for immediate
execution on the ground that Juan Santos did not
deposit the attorney's fees of P5,000 and that he
did not post a supersedeas bond for the award.
Should the court grant immediate execution?
Decide with reasons. (90 Bar 03).

A.

No, the court should not grant immediate execution.
A supersedeas bond covers only the rents, damages,
and costs accruing down to the time of the judgment
appealed from. In other words, it does not cover those
that accrue afterthe judgment appealed from.
1045

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Here Juan had been religiously depositing all the
current rentals during the pendency of the ejectment
case. Hence a supersedeas bond was unnecessary
notwithstanding the court's order to pay rentals. The
court can simply order the application of the deposit to
the rentals in arrears.
As to the award of attorney's fees, the same is
not required to be covered by a supersedeas bond.
(Once v. Gonzalez, 76 SCRA 258).
Q.

Judgment was rendered against defendant
Jaypee in an action for unlawful detainer. The
judgment ordered Jaypee to vacate and to pay
attorney's fees in favor of Bart, the plaintiff.
To prevent the immediate execution of the
judgment, would you advise the posting of a
supersedeas bond as counsel for Jaypee? Explain
your answer briefly. (17 Bar Q12A).

A.

As counsel for Jaypee, I would advise him that the
posting of a supersedeas bond to prevent immediate
execution of the judgment is unnecessary.
A supersedeas bond is necessary to prevent
immediate execution only if the judgment awards
rents, damages, and costs in favor of the plaintiff.
Here the judgment against Jaypee did not award
any rents, damages, and costs. The Supreme Court
has held that attorney's fees are not covered by the
supersedeas bond. (Once v. Gonzalez, 76 SCRA
258, 261).

1046

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
Q.

In an ejectment case, the MTC ordered Ellery to
vacate the nipa house standing on a residential
lot, restore possession thereof to Indit and pay
the sum of P340 as back rentals at the rate of P20
per month. Ellery appealed to the RTC and posted
a suersedeas bond of P400. Subsequently, lndit
filed a motion in the RTC for the execution of the
judgment on the ground that Ellery had not
deposited the current rentals of P20 per month.
Ellery opposed the motion pointing out that the
MTC did not fix in its judgment the monthly rental
to be paid during his continued stay in the
premises so that he is not duty bound to pay the
same. Decide the motion for execution filed by
Indit. (89 Bar Q7[2]).

A.

Motion for execution granted insofar as the restoration
of Indit to the possession of the subject premises is
concerned.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that there is no need for the MTC judgment
to specifically fix and order the payment of rentals
during the pendency of the appeal. What the rules
require merely is that "the amount of rent due from time
to time under the contract, if any, [has been] determined
by the judgment of the Municipal Trial Court."
Here the judgment determined that the amount
of rent due from time to time under the contract is P20
per month. The fact that Ellery posted a supersedeas
bond is a commitment on his part to deposit the
current rentals of P20 per month. (Dehesa v.
Maclalag, 81 SCRA 53 [1978]).

1047

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Plaintiff filed an unlawful detainer case against the
Defendant lessee. The MTC rendered a judgment in
favor of the Plaintiff ordering the Defendant to
vacate the premises and to pay rentals and
damages to the Plaintiff. Dissatisfied with the
amount of the rentals awarded, the Plaintiff
appealed to the RTC. Defendant did not appeal
nor did he post a supersedeas bond or make the
periodic deposits. May the Plaintiff move for the
immediate execution of the judgment in his favor?

A.

Yes. The provisions of S19 R70 are applicable even if
the one who appeals is the plaintiff rather than the
defendant. The provision provides that "an appeal has
been perfected" without specifiying who perfected the
appeal. The defendant in order to prevent immediate
execution must post the supersedeas bond and make
the periodic deposit. (See City of Manila v. Court of
Appeals, 149 SCRA 183 [1987]).

Q.

The Air Transportation Office filed a complaint for
unlawful detainer against Miaque. Judgment was
rendered in favor of the ATO ordering Miaque to
vacate the premises and to pay damages to the
ATO. On appeal the RTC affirmed. Miaque filed a
petition for review with the Court of Appeals
under R42 which was given due course by the CA.
The RTC issued a writ of execution to enforce the
judgment but the CA set aside the order on the
sole ground that that the RTC "has no jurisdiction
to order the issuance of [the] writ of execution"
because, when it (CA) gave due course to the
petition for review in CA-G.R. SP No. 79439, the
RTC was already divested of jurisdiction over the
case pursuant to the third paragraph of S8(a),
R42. Was the writ of execution properly set aside
by the CA?

1048

Rule 70
Forcible Entry And Unlawful Detainer (Ejectment)
A.

No. The Court of Appeals is mistaken. It disregards
both (1) the immediately executory nature of the
judgment of the RTC in ejectment cases under 821
R70, and (2) the rule that such judgment of the RTC
is not stayed by an appeal taken therefrom under
88(b) R42. It ignores the nature of the RTC's function
to issue a writ of execution of its judgment in an
ejectment case as ministerial and not discretionary.
(Air Transportation Office v. Court of Appeals, 25
June 2014, Leonardo-De Castro, J.)

Q.

In the hearing on the motion for execution of an
unlawful detainer case decided in favor of the
Plaintiff, the Defendants raised the argument that
the writ of execution may no longer be enforced
because after the judgment was rendered but
before the writ of execution was issued, they had
acquired ownership over the land subject of the
ejectment case. May the writ of execution be
quashed on this ground?

A.

No. Defendant's argument that they subsequently
acquired ownership of the subject property cannot be
considered as a supervening event that will bar the
execution, as unlawful detainer does not deal with the
issue of ownership. The issue of ownership should
be properly litigated in the appropriate action, not in
the hearing of a motion for execution of the ejectment
case. (Holy Trinity Realty v. Abacan, 17 April 2013,
Sereno, C.J.).

1049

RULE 71. CONTEMPT
Q.

Define contempt.

A

Contempt is the disobedience to the court by acting in
opposition to its authority, justice, and dignity.
(Regalado V. Go, G.R. No. 167988, 6 February 2007).

Q.

Briefly discuss the contempt power and the
reason for it.

A.

The power to punish for contempt is inherent in all
courts. Its existence is essential to the preservation of
order in judicial proceedings and to the enforcement
of judgments, orders and mandates of the courts, and
consequently to the due administration of justice. The
reason behind this power to punish for contempt is
that respect of the courts guarantees the stability of
their institution. (JAIME R. NUEVAS, REMEDIAL LAW
REVIEWER 321 [1964] citing Perkins v. Director of
Prisons, 58 Phil. 271 and Cornejo v. Tan, 85 Phil. 772).

Q.

Does Rule 71 apply to contempt committed
against quasi-judicial bodies or entities?

A.

Yes. Rule 71 shall apply to contempt committed
against quasi-judicial bodies or entities, or it shall
have suppletory effect to such rules as they may have
adopted pursuant to authority granted to them by law
to punish for contempt. The RTC of the place wherein
the contempt has been committed shall have jurisdiction
over such charges as may be filed therefor.
(S12 R71).

Q.

May persons, entities, bodies or agencies
exercising quasi-judicial functions have the power
to punish for contempt?

1050

Rule 71
Contempt

A.

Generally no since the contempt power is essentially
of a judicial nature. (Negros Oriental ll Electric Cooperative v. Sangguniang Panlungsod of Dumaguete,
G.R. No. 72492, 5 November 1987). Such person or
entity shall file the contempt charge with the RTC of
the place wherein the contempt has been committed
and it is the RTC which shall have the power to
punish (812 R71). The law however may expressly
authorize the person or entity exercising quasi-judicial
functions to punish for contempt as in Sec. 5(j) of the
Securities Regulation Code which empowers the
Securities and Exchange Commission to "[p]unish for
contempt of the Commission, both direct and indirect,
in accordance with the pertinent provisions of and
penalties prescribed by the Rules of Court."

Q.

How is contempt classified under the Rules of Court?

A.

Contempt is classified as either direct contempt or
indirect contempt.

Q.

What is the main distinction between direct contempt
and indirect contempt?

A.

Direct contempt is misbehavior in the presence of or
so near a court as to obstruct or interrupt the court
proceedings; any other disobedience, disrespect or
misbehavior not in the presence of or so near a court
is indirect contempt.

Q.

Define direct contempt.

A.

As set forth in S1 R71, direct contempt is misbehavior
in the presence of or so near a court as to
obstruct or interrupt the proceedings before the
same, including: (FORD)
1) Disrespect toward the court;
2) Offensive personalities toward others, or
1051

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
3) Refusal to be sworn or to answer as a witness, or
to subscribe an affidavit or deposition when
lawfully required to do so. (Si R71).
4) Willful and deliberate forum shopping. (S5 R7).
Q.

What is the punishment for direct contempt?

A.

Fine not exceeding P2,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 10 days or both, if it be a RTC or court of
equivalent or higher rank.
Fine not exceeding P200 or imprisonment not
exceeding 1 day, or both, if it be a MTC. (S1 R71).

Q.

Is a charge and hearing required before a person
may be punished for direct contempt?

A.

No. A person may be summarily adjudged in contempt
and punished by the court. (Si R71).

Q.

May a person appeal from the order adjudging
him in direct contempt?

A.

No. The person adjudged in direct contempt may not
appeal therefrom, but may avail of the remedies of
certiorari or prohibition. The execution of the judgment
shall be suspended pending resolution of such petition,
provided such person files a bond fixed by the court
which rendered the judgment and conditioned that he
will abide by and perform the judgment should the
petition be decided against him. (S2 R71).

Q.

In filing a motion for reconsideration of a decision
of the Court of Tax Appeals, Attys. H and M stated
therein that "it was gross ignorance of the law for
the Honorable Court to have held that it has no
jurisdiction over this instant petition." Are Attys.
H and M liable for direct contempt?

1052

Rule 71
Contempt
A.

Yes. Rule 11.03 of the Code of Professional
Responsibility enjoins all attorneys to "abstain from
scandalous, offensive or menacing language or
behavior before the Courts." While a lawyer may
criticize a court's decision in properly respectful terms,
he should refrain from offensive language. (Habawel
v. CTA, 7 September 2011, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

What acts constitute indirect contempt?

A.

A person guilty of any of the following acts may be
punished for indirect contempt: (MAIDS FAR)
a)

Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the
performance of his official duties or in his official
transactions;

b)

Disobedience of or resistance to a lawful writ,
process, order, or judgment of a court, including
the act of a person who, after being dispossessed
or ejected from any real property by the judgment
or process of any court of competent jurisdiction,
enters or attempts or induces another to enter
into or upon such real property, for the purpose of
executing acts of ownership or possession, or in
any manner disturbs the possession given to the
person adjudged to be entitled thereto;

c) Any abuse of or any unlawful interference with the
process or proceedings of a court not constituting
direct contempt;
d) Any improper conduct tending, directly or indirectly,
to impede, obstruct, or degrade the administration
of justice;
e) Assuming to be an attorney or an officer of a court,
and acting as such without authority;
f) Failure to obey a subpoena duly served; and
1053

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

g)

The rescue, or attempted rescue, of a person
or property in the custody of an officer by virtue
of an order or process of a court held by him.
(S3 R71).

h) Submission of a false certification against forumshopping or non-compliance with any of the
undertakings therein. (35 R7).
Q.

May a person be summarily adjudged in indirect
contempt?

A.

No. There must be a charge in writing filed, an
opportunity given to the respondent to comment
thereon within such period as may be fixed by the
court and to be heard by himself or counsel. (33 R71)
(CCH)

Q.

Before the respondent has been given the
opportunity to comment and before the hearing,
may the court issue a bench warrant to arrest the
respondent and bring him to court?

A.

Yes. Nothing in S3 R71 shall be so construed as to
prevent the court from issuing process to bring the
respondent into court, or from holding him in custody
pending such proceedings. (S3 R71).

Q.

P filed an action for recovery of possession of
land against D. The RTC decided in favor of P and
after the judgment had become final and executory
the RTC, upon P's motion, issued a writ of
execution directing the sheriff to place P in
possession of the subject land. When the sheriff
tried to evict D from the land, the latter refused to
do so. May the RTC hold D in indirect contempt?

A.

No. The writ was not directed to D but to the sheriff
who was directed to deliver the property to P. As the
writ did not command the judgment debtor to do
1054

Rule 71
Contempt
anything, he cannot be guilty of the acts described in
Rule 71 which is "disobedience of or resistance to a
lawful writ, process, order, judgment, or command of
any court." The proper procedure is for the sheriff to
oust D availing of the assistance of peace officers
pursuant to Section 10(c) of Rule 39. (Lipata v.
Tutaan, L-16643, 29 September 1983).
Q.

A writ of execution was served by a sheriff upon
defendant so that plaintiff may be placed in
possession of the property held by the former.
The defendant refused to vacate and surrender
the premises to plaintiff. Can defendant be held
for indirect contempt for disobedience of, or
resistance to a lawful writ issued by the Fowl?
Explain. (95 Bar Q5[2]).

A.

No. The writ was not directed to the defendant but to
the sheriff who was directed to deliver the property to
the plaintiff. As the writ did not command the judgment
debtor to do anything, he cannot be guilty of the acts
described in Rule 71 which is "disobedience of or
resistance to a lawful writ, process, order, judgment,
or command of any court." The proper procedure is
for the sheriff to oust the defendant availing of the
assistance of peace officers pursuant to Section 10(c)
of Rule 39. (Lipata v. Tutaan, L-16643, 29 September 1983).

Q.

Suppose that by virtue of an execution of the
judgment in an ejectment case, defendant was
successfully ousted from the property in litigation
and the plaintiff was lawfully placed in possession
thereof, but seven years later defendant reentered the property and forcibly took over
possession, can plaintiff move that defendant be
declared in indirect contempt? (95 Bar Q5[31)

1055

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
A.

Yes the plaintiff can move that defendant be declared
in indirect contempt.
Under Section 3(b) of Rule 70, a person who
after being dispossessed or ejected from any real
property by the judgment or process of any court of
competent jurisdiction, enters or attempts or induces
another to enter into or upon such real property, for
the purpose of executing acts of ownership or
possession, or in any manner disturbs the possession
given to the person adjudged to be entitled thereto is
liable for indirect contempt.
Here defendant was ejected by a lawful writ yet
he re-entered the subject real property and executed
acts of possession. Hence he can be declared in
indirect contempt.

Q.

Nancio is a driver of the Chief of the Business
Permit Division of Makati City. One morning finding
that the parking slot for his boss was occupied by
another car, Nancio looked for another parking
space and parked his car in a vacant parking slot
Unbeknownst to Nancio, the parking slot belonged
to Makati RTC Judge Frank. Judge Frank found
his parking slot occupied and because he had to
spend a lot of time looking for a parking space,
his promulgation of decisions was delayed. Judge
Frank issued a show-cause order to Nancio to
explain why he should not be cited for indirect
contempt for "improper conduct tending, directly
or indirectly, to impede, obstruct, or degrade the
administration of justice." Finding Nancio's explanation
unsatisfactory, Judge Frank ordered Nancio to
pay a fine of P1,000 and to be imprisoned.

1056

Rule 71
Contempt
a) Was Judge Frank's order finding Nancio liable
for indirect contempt proper?
b) Would your answer be different if there was a
showing that Nancio knew that the parking
slot belonged to Judge Frank?
A.

Q.

a)

No. The phrase "improper conduct tending, directly
or indirectly, to impede, obstruct, or degrade the
administration of justice," is so broad and general
that it encompasses a wide spectrum of acts that
could constitute indirect contempt. However the
act of Nancio in parking his car in the judge's
parking slot does not fall under this category.
There was no showing that Nancio acted with
malice or bad faith or that he was improperly
motivated to delay the proceedings of the court
by parking in Judge Frank's slot. We cannot also
say that Nancio's act constitutes disrespect to the
dignity of the court. (lnonog v. May, A.M. No.
RTJ-09-2715, 28 July 2009).

b)

No, my answer would not be different. While
Nancio's act was improper, in the absence of a
showing that his motivation in parking in Judge
Frank's slot was to delay the court proceedings,
his act would not constitute indirect contempt.

The NBI Deputy Director for Intelligence Services
issued and served a subpoena duces tecum to
Andrew directing him to attend and produce
documents in an investigation for falsification of
public documents allegedly committed by him.
Andrew refused to attend the investigation.

1057

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
a) Does the NBI Deputy Director have the authority
to issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum?
b) May the NBI hold Andrew in indirect contempt
for his refusal to obey the subpoena?
c) May the NBI successfully file a verified petition
for indirect contempt against Andrew for his
refusal to obey the subpoena?
A.

a) Yes. The NBI has the power to issue subpoena for
the appearance of any person for investigation or
production of documents, through its officers from the
ranks of Regional Director to Director. (Sec. 4[b], R.A.
10867).
b) No. The NBI is neither a court nor has it been
conferred contempt powers by law.
c) No. A person who refuses to obey a subpoena
duly served may be held liable for indirect
contempt if the subpoena was issued by a court
or a person or body exercising quasi-judicial
powers. (S4 & 12 R71). The NBI is neither a court
or a body exercising quasi-judicial powers.

Q.

How are proceedings for indirect contempt
commenced?

A.

SHOW-CAUSE ORDER. Proceedings for indirect
contempt may be initiated motu proprio by the court
against which the contempt was committed by an
order or any other formal charge requiring the respondent
to show cause why he should not be punished for
contempt.
VERIFIED PETITION. In all other cases, charges
for indirect contempt shall be commenced by a
verified petition with supporting particulars and
certified true copies of documents or papers involved
1058

Rule 71
Contempt
therein, and upon full compliance with the requirements
for filing initiatory pleadings for civil actions in the
court concerned.
Q.

If the contempt charges in the verified petition
arose out of or are related to a principal action
pending in court, will the petition be tried separately?

A.

If the contempt charges arose out of or are related to
a principal action pending in the court, the petition for
contempt shall allege that fact but said petition shall
be docketed, heard, and decided separately unless
the court in its discretion orders the consolidation of
the contempt charge and the principal action for joint
hearing and decision. (S4 R71).

Q.

When the indirect contempt proceedings are
commenced by a show-cause order issued motu
proprio by the court, may such proceedings be
docketed and heard separately from the main case?

A.

No. When the court issues motu proprio a showcause order, the duty of the court under 84 R71 (1) to
docket and (2) to hear and decide the case separately
from the main case does not arise, much less to
exercise the discretion (3) to order the consolidation
of the cases. There is no petition from any party to be
docketed, heard and decided separately from the
main case precisely because it is the show-cause
order that initiated the proceedings. (Baculi v. Be/en,
24 September 2012, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Union Bank filed with the RTC of Pasay City a
case against the Spouses Tamondong to collect
on an unpaid motor vehicle loan, with prayer for
the issuance of a writ of replevin. The case was
dismissed for failure to prosecute, reinstated upon
Union Bank's motion for reconsideration, and
dismissed again for failure to prosecute.
1059

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Union Bank filed another case to collect on
the same loan this time before the MTC of Pasay
City. Upon Union Bank's application, the Tamondong's
motor vehicle was seized under a writ of replevin.
The Spouses Tamondong filed motions to dismiss
the case, to set aside the writ of replevin, and to
cite for contempt the counsel of Union Bank for
forum-shopping. The MTC issued an order
dismissing the case, recalling the writ of replevin,
and ordering Union Bank and its counsel to
immediately return the vehicle to the Spouses
Tamondong. Union Bank did not return the
vehicle. The Spouses Tamondong filed an unverified
motion to cite Union Bank and its counsel for
indirect contempt for failing to return the replevied
motor vehicle.
Upon Union Bank's failure to forthwith return
the vehicle, the MTC issued an order for Union
Bank and its counsel to show cause why they
should not be cited for contempt for failing to
return the vehicle. Union Bank submitted a reply
questioning the manner in which the contempt
proceedings were initiated but continued to keep
the vehicle. The MTC thus cited Union Bank's
counsel, Atty. Leonidas, for indirect contempt.
Atty. Leonidas filed an administrative case against
Judge Supnet for not following the proper
procedure in citing him for indirect contempt The
Office of the Court Administrator agreed with Atty.
Leonidas saying that the indirect contempt
proceedings were not initiated by Judge Supnet
motu proprio but upon mere motions of the
Tamondongs. The OCA recommended that Judge
Supnet be sanctioned for improperly citing Union
Bank's counsel in indirect contempt. Was the
OCA's recommendation correct? Explain.
1060

Rule 71
Contempt
A.

No, the OCA's recommendation was not correct.
Under S4 R71, indirect contempt proceedings
may be initiated motu proprio by the court by an order
or any other formal charge requiring the respondent to
show cause why he should not be cited for contempt.
Disobedience to the MTC's order for the return of
the vehicle qualifies as indirect contempt for which the
MTC properly issued a show-cause order to Union
Bank. The show-cause order was a legitimate exercise
of the MTC's judicial discretion to determine whether
Union Bank should be sanctioned for discregarding its
order. Thus independently of the motions filed by the
Tamondong spouses, it was the Pasay MTC which
commenced the contempt proceedings motu proprio.
No verified petition is required if the contempt
proceedings are initiated in this manner. (Leonidas V.
Judge Supnet, AM. No. MTJ-02-1433, 21 February 2003).

Q.

In a certiorari case before the Court of Appeals
seeking the review of the NLRC decision, Atty.
Regalado acted as counsel for the employer.
Subsequently a compromise agreement was entered
into between the employer and the employee Go.
The compromise agreement was entered into
without the knowledge and participation of Go's
counsel. Subsequently Go, through counsel, filed
a manifestation with omnibus motion wherein Go,
inter alia, asked that Atty. Regalado be asked to
explain why no disciplinary action should be
taken against her for negotiating directly with Go
without the presence of his counsel. The Court of
Appeals issued an order asking Atty. Regalado to
show cause why she should not be cited in
contempt for violating Canon 9 of the Canons of
Professional Ethics. Finding Atty. Regalado's

1061

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
explanation unsatisfactory, the Court of Appeals
issued a resolution holding Atty. Regalado guilty
of indirect contempt. May Atty. Regalado's conviction
for indirect contempt be set aside?
A.

Yes for lack of jurisdiction on the part of the CA to
issue the resolution.
Under 34 R71, if the contempt proceedings are
not initiated motu proprio by the court against which
the contempt was committed, the charge for indirect
contempt shall be commenced by a verified petition
upon full compliance with the requirements for filing
initiatory pleadings for civil actions.
Here it was Go who brought to the attention of
the CA the alleged misbehaviour of Atty. Regalado
through the filing of the manifestation with omnibus
motion. Without such positive act on the part of Go,
no indirect contempt charge could have been initiated
at all. Hence the filing of a verified petition was
mandatory and the absence of such meant that the
CA did not acquire jurisdiction over the special civil
action for contempt against Atty. Regalado.
The Supreme Court distinguished the instant
case from Leonidas v. Judge Supnet, supra, where
there was an utter violation of the court's order
requiring Union Bank to return the seized chattel and
where independently of the motions filed by the
Tamondongs, it was the Pasay MTC which commenced
the contempt proceedings motu proprio. (Regalado v.
Go, G.R. No. 167988, 6 February 2007).

1062

Rule 71
Contempt
Q.

Where may the charge for indirect contempt
be filed?

A.
1) If committed against a RTC or a court of equivalent
or higher rank, or against an officer appointed by
it, the charge may be filed with such court.
2) If committed against the MTC, the charge may be
filed with the RTC of the place in which the MTC
is sitting; the charge may also be filed with such
MTC subject to appeal to the RTC of such
place in the same manner as provided in S11
R71. (55R71).
3) If committed against a person or body exercising
quasi-judicial powers, the RTC of the place
wherein the contempt has been committed shall
have jurisdiction over such charges. (312 R71).
Q.

The spouses Nicolas filed a case against the
spouses Rodriguez for the latter's closure of a
subdivision road lot. The HLURB ruled in favor of
the spouses Nicolas. The spouses Rodriguez
sought to set aside the HLURB's decision by way
of a petition for certiorari with the Court of Appeals.
The CA dismissed the petition and the spouses
Rodriguez appealed to the Supreme Court by way
of a petition for review on certiorari under R45. In
the SC, the spouses Nicolas filed a Petition for
Indirect Contempt against the spouses Rodriguez,
alleging that "despite vigorous protestation on the
part of the spouses Nicolas, and after having been
warned of the existence of the Cease and Desist
Order issued by the HLURB, the spouses Rodriguez,
in complete defiance of the injunction issued by
the HLURB continuously, maliciously and feloniously

1063

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
dumped filling materials that would ultimately
block the road lot leading to the inner lots of the
subdivision." May the SC act on the petition for
indirect contempt?
A.

No, the SC may not act on the petition and should
dismiss it. Just because the decision of a quasijudicial body is pending appeal before the SC does
not mean that the SC has jurisdiction over a petition
for indirect contempt committed against the quasijudicial body. S12 R71 states that with respect to
contumacious acts committed against quasi-judicial
bodies such as the HLURB, it is the regional trial court
of the place where the contemptuous acts have been
committed that acquires jurisdiction over the indirect
contempt case. (Rodriguez v. HLURB, 19 June 2019,
Caguioa, J.).

Q.

May the respondent in indirect contempt held in
custody be released on bail?

A.

Yes. If the hearing is not ordered to be had forthwith,
the respondent may be released from custody upon
filing a bond, in an amount fixed by the court, for his
appearance at the hearing of the charge. (S6 R71).

Q.

What is the punishment for indirect contempt?

A.

In indirect contempt against a RTC or a court of
equivalent or higher rank, fine not exceeding P30,000
or imprisonment not exceeding 6 months, or both.
If indirect contempt against a MTC, fine not
exceeding P5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 1
month, or both. (S7 R71).

1064

Rule 71
Contempt
Q.

May a writ of execution issue for the enforcement
of a judgment imposing a fine?

A.

Yes, a writ of execution, as in ordinary civil actions, shall
issue for the enforcement of a judgment imposing a
fine unless the court otherwise provides. (87 R71).

Q.

May the penalty of imprisonment exceed 6 months?

A.

Yes. When the contempt consists in the refusal or
omission to do an act which is yet in the power of
the respondent to perform, he may be imprisoned
by order of the court concerned until he performs it.
(S8 R71).

Q.

May the judgment of a court adjudging the
respondent guilty of indirect contempt be appealed?

A.

Yes, the judgment of a court in a case of indirect
contempt may be appealed to the proper court as in
criminal cases. (S11 R71).

Q.

May the judgment of the court finding that
the respondent is not guilty of indirect contempt
be appealed?

A.

No. The judgment of the court finding that the
respondent is not guilty of indirect contempt may not
be appealed; otherwise double jeopardy would result.
(Santiago v. Anuncianon, 84 SCRA 118).

Q.

Will the appeal suspend the execution of the
judgment or final order?

A.

No, unless a bond is filed by the person adjudged in
contempt, in an amount fixed by the court from which
the appeal is taken, conditioned that if the appeal be
decided against him, he will abide by and perform the
judgment or final order. (S11 R71).

£003
1065

