THE
REVISED PENAL CODE
CRIMINAL LAW
LUIS B. REYES
Formerly, Professor and Bar Reviewer in Criminal Law
(Retired Associate Justice of the Court ofAppeals; Formerly,
Second Assistant City Fiscal of Manila; Judge, Court of First
Instance of Batangas and Lipa City; and Judge,
Court of First Instance of Manila)

Updated by:
RHODA REGINA REYES
Managing Partner, MarksPro Philippines
Law Firm of Reyes Rara & Associates

BOOK ONE
Articles 1-113

/

/

Twentieth Edition

2021

Philippine Copyright, 2021
by

2..o
LUIS B. REYES

PREFACE TO THE TWENTIETH EDITION
This edition contains the amendments to the amount or the value
of property and damage on which a penalty is based and the fines
imposed under the Revised Penal Code brought about by Republic Act
No. 10951. It also includes applicable laws passed after April 2016,
as well as relevant jurisprudence as of December 2019.

ISBN 978-621-04-0470-8
No portion of this book may be copied or
reproduced in books, pamphlets, outlines or notes,
whether printed, mimeographed, typewritten, copied
in different electronic devices or in any other form, for
distribution or sale, without the written permission of
the author except brief passages in books, articles,
reviews, legal papers, and judicial or other official
proceedings with proper citation.

Rhoda Regina Reyes-Rara
February 2020

Any copy of this book without the corresponding
number and the signature of the author on this page
either proceeds from an illegitimate source or is in
possession of one who has no authority to dispose of
the same.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
BY THE AUTHOR

No.

_
ISBN 978-621-04-0470-8

ml

05-CR-00063-0

9'78621
Printed by:

§

REX PRinTinij comrnnq, inc.
Typography & Creative Lithography
84P FereLno St. Sia Mesa Heights, Ouorcn CAN
Tel No 88597.7778

8

PREFACE TO THE NINETEENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE EIGHTEENTH EDITION

The nineteenth edition of this book includes amendments to
Articles 29, 94, 97, 98, and 99 of the R.P.C. under R.A. No. 10592, and
to Article 39 under R.A. No. 10159. It likewise includes amendments
to the Juvenile Justice end Welfare Act of2006 as brought about by
R.A. No. 10630 as well as amendments to the Probation Law of 1976
under R.A. No. 10707.

This edition contains the most relevant Supreme Court decisions
as of March 2011 clarifyi ng the provisions of the R.P.C., including
Valenzuela v. People, G.R. No. 160188, June 21, 2007, which ruled
that there is no crime of frustrated theft. Rulings on special penal
laws which amend or repeal provisions of the R.P.C., such as R.A.
No. 9165 on dangerous drugs and R.A. No. 7610 on child abuse, and
Supreme Court administrative issuances relating to provisions of the
R.P.C., ere likewise included herein.

Aside from the latest relevant rulings of the Supreme Court, this
edition also replaces with Supreme Court decisions several Court of
Appeals decisions which were cited in previous editions due to lack
ofjurisprudence from the Supreme Court at the time.

Rhoda Regina Reyes-Rara
Manila, May 2011

Rhoda Regina Reyes-Rare
Manila, April 2016

iv

V

PREFACE TO THE SEVENTEENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE SIXTEENTH EDITION

The enactment ofR.A. No. 9346 (An Act Prohibiting the Imposition of the Death Penalty in the Philippines) and R.A. No. 9372 (The
Human Security Act of 2007) brought about the need to revise this
book. Supreme Court decisions applying these newly-passed laws
and other special penal laws which have reference to the R.P.C., and
clarifying provisions of the R.P.C. are also included herein.

The ruling of the Supreme Court in the landmark case ofPeople
v. Genosa, G.R. No. 135981, January 15, 2004 and the passage of not
just one but two import pieces of legislation, R.A. No. 9262 otherwise
known as "Anti-Violence Against Women and Their Children Act of
2004" and R.A. No. 9344 or the "Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of
2006" brought about this revised edition of the country's best-selling
book on Criminal Law.

Once again, the invaluable assistance of Atty. Rhoda Regina
Reyes-Rara in updating this book is acknowledged with deepest appreciation.
L.B.R.
Manila, May 2008

Needless to say, this edition also contains the latest relevant
court rulings that will further clarify the law as well as those that
even modify established rules such as the case of People v. Mateo,
G.R. Nos. 147678-87, July 7, 2004 which enunciated that the Court
of Appeals should first review death penalty cases before elevating
the same to the Supreme Court for its final disposition.
Finally, it should be acknowledged that this edition would not
have seen light if not for the invaluable assistance of Atty. Rhoda
Regina Reyes-Rara.

L.B.R.
Manila, May 2006

vi

vii

PREFACE TO THE FIFTEENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE FOURTEENTH EDITION

This edition includes the latest relevant laws and Supreme Court
rulings in criminal cases. Revisions have also been made in this edition to clarify certain portions and to correct errors in the printing of
the previous edition.

The fourteenth edition of this book incorporates the revisions to
the R.P.C. effected by R.A. No. 6968 (An Act Punishing the Crime of
Coup D'Etat), R.A. No. 7610 (Special Protection of Children Against
Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act), R.A. No. 7659 (An Act
to Impose the Death Penalty for Certain Heinous Crimes), R.A. No.
7390 (An Act Amending Article 286, Section 3, Chapter 2, Title 9 of
the R.P.C.) and R.A. No. 8353 (Anti-Rape Law of1997) as well as the
latest Supreme Court rulings in criminal cases.

The invaluable assistance of Atty. Rhoda Regina Reyes-Rara,
Partner, Ponce Enrile Reyes & Manalastas Law Offices, in updating
this book is acknowledged.
L.B.R.
Manila, April 2001

Once again, the invaluable assistance of Atty. Rhoda Regina
Reyes-Rara, Partner, Ponce Enrile Reyes & Manalastas Law Offices,
in updating this book is acknowledged with deepest appreciation.

L.B.R.
Manila, June 1998

viii

ix

PREFACE TO THE THIRTEENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE TWELFTH EDITION

The thirteenth edition ofthis book is made necessaryby the new
Supreme Court rulings in criminal cases and by the recent amendments ofcertain provisions of the R.P.C.

Thisnew edition includes the amendments ofcertain provisions
of the Revised Penal Code by Presidential Decrees and by Batas
Pambansa, published in the recent issues ofthe Official Gazette up to
Vol. 77, No. 20, p. 2706, May 18, 1981, and the new rulings in criminal
cases found in the Supreme Court Reports Annotated (SCRA) up to
Vol. 98 and in the Official Gazette up to Vol. 77, No. 20, p. 2706, May
18, 1981.

The invaluable assistance ofAtty. Rhoda Regina M. Reyes-Rara
in the updating of this book is hereby acknowledged with deepest
appreciation.
L.B.R.
Manila, June 1993

x

L.B.R.
Manila, August 25, 1981

xi

PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE TENTH EDITION

This Book is not a reprint of the Tenth Edition. It is updated
with new annotations and commentaries. The latest amendments
to certain provisions of the R.P.C. and other pertinent Presidential
Decrees, for ready reference, are reproduced in this Book.

This tenth edition of this Book is in response to the persistent
demand for the reprinting of the ninth edition which has long been
out of print. Some changes are made in this edition to make clearer
certain portions of the commentaries in, and to correct errors in the
printing of, the previous edition.

L.B.R.
Manila, August, 1977

xii

L.B.R.
Manila, June 22, 1974

xiii

PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION

In this ninth edition ofthis Book, included are the latest amendments to the R.P.C. and the latest decisions of the Supreme Court
and the Court ofAppeals involving Criminal Law.

This eighth edition ofthis Book contains the latest decisions of
the Supreme Court and the Court ofAppeals involving criminal law,
and the latest amendments to the R.P.C., with new annotations and
commentaries.

L.B.R.
Manila, June 30, 1971

L.B.R.
Manila, August 25, 1969

r

xiv

Iv

PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION

PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION

Since the publication of the sixth edition of this book in May,
1965, new cases involving criminal law have been decided by the
Supreme Court and the Court ofAppeals. In order to make this book
up-to-date, new annotations and new commentaries are made and the
new cases on which they are based are reproduced in this edition.

The publication ofthis edition is brought about by the increasing
demand for copies of this book which, although intended primarily
for the law students and bar candidates, has been well received by
the members of the Bench and the Bar. Lawyers have found this
book handy in the study and preparation oftheir criminal cases. The
Supreme Courtand the Court ofAppeals have cited this book in some
of their decisions.

L.B.R.
Manila, August 25, 1967

L.B.R.
Manila, May 25, 1965

xvi

PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION
In the preparation of this edition, new annotations and commentaries are added to make this book up-to-date.
Certain annotations and commentaries are made more detailed
because it has been observed that the law students who do not have
the time to read the cases cited have found it difficult to illustrate
the application of the principle involved.
It is the hope of the author that the improvements made in this
book will greatly facilitate the study of Criminal Law.

L.B.R.
Manila, May 1, 1963

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION
The fourth edition of this book is published upon request of the
numerous law students and bar candidates from different law schools.
It is the pride and satisfaction of the author that the previous editions of this book proved very helpful to the law students and the bar
candidates.
In preparing this fourth edition, the author endeavored to improve the arrangement of, and to make up-to-date, the annotations
and commentaries under each article of the R.P.C. The bar questions,
which were reproduced and included in the first three editions, are
eliminated in this edition, because the bar questions and the answers
thereto will be included in the second edition of the Criminal Law
Reviewer by the same author.

L.B.R.
Manila, May 15, 1961

xviii

xix

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

Encouraged by the favorable comments from the candidates for,
and members of the Bar, the author prepared the third edition of this
book. Certain improvements are introduced to make the discussion
of the provisions and principles of criminal Jaw more comprehensive
and exhaustive.

In the preparation of this book, the author has endeavored to fill
the needs of the Jaw students and bar candidates who have always
desired a brief but comprehensive textbook for the study of Criminal
Law.

This third edition is intended to meet the difficult questions
asked in the Bar Examin ations nowadays.
Leading cases involving criminal law, decided by the Supreme
Court and the Court of Appeals, are reproduced with pertinent facts
and some cases are compared and commented upon to explain the
difference of some of the rulings of the appellate courts on certain
provisions of the R.P.C.

L.B.R.

Manila, May 1958

When all the copies of the first edition of this book had been sold
out, many students from different law schools came to the author
and requested him to publish more copies for their use. Hence, the
publication of this second edition.
As the first edition was hurriedly prepared, several errors were
committed through the oversight of the author and the printer. In
this second edition, those errors are corrected and the arrangement
of the topics and of the discussions under each topic are improved to
make clear the points emphasized.
This book is aimed at the mastery of the coda! provisions which
is essential. The cases decided by the Supreme Court and the Court
of Appeals are discussed in relation to the meaning and purpose of
the coda! provisions are explained in the light of the decisions of the
appellate courts.
The author is confident that this book will be of great help to
the Jaw students and bar candidates.
L.B.R.

Manila, June 1956

xxi
xx

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
This book is intended primarily for the law students and bar
candidates. Emphasis is placed on the elements ofthe legal provisions,
because knowledge of such elements will enable one to know easily
the meaning of a legal provision and the extent ofits application. No
one can hope to have a good knowledge of criminal law without first
mastering the coda! provisions. For the proper understanding and
easy recollection of the coda! provisions, the author has endeavored
to break the provisions of every article into elements, stating them
in outline form. In this book, the rulings in important and leading
cases are stated in the discussion of each and every element of the
legal provisions, indicating thereby the connection of the ruling of a
given case with the particular provision of the Code.
Definitions of terms and other important words and phrases
used in the different articles are incorporated in the commentaries
to enable the readers to have a full grasp of the meaning of the law.
Distinctions ofone article from another, whenever necessary to
avoid confusion, are stated as part of the commentaries.
The opinions of the late Justice Mariano A. Albert and Judge
Guillermo B. Guevarra are quoted in connection with certain articles
of the Code, because in the discussion of those articles their views
are very enlightening.
As a textbook for law students, this book should be amplified
by assigning to the students and reading of the original cases cited
therein.

Bar questions from 1913 to 1953 are reproduced and included
herein as one of the appendices to acquaint the bar candidates with
the nature and extent of the questions asked in the past. Most of the
questions do not call for controversial answers. The answers given
with respect to those questions can be adopted.
As regards the questions calling for controversial answers, notes
are placed after the answers and the two sides of the answers are
presented.
This book is published in the hope that this humble work will
be of great help to the law students and bar candidates.
L.B.R.
Manila, April 1952

CONTENTS
CRIMINAL LAW

.
Book ONE

PRELIMINARY TITLE DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS
AND APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS
OF THIS CODE
Article 1. Time when Act takes effect
..
Article 2. Application of its provisions
.

TITLE ONE- FELONIES AND CIRCUMSTANCES
WHICH AFFECT CRIMINAL LIABILITY
Chapter One Felonies
41
Article 3. Definition
.
68
Article 4. Criminal liability
.
Article 5. Duty of the court in connection with acts
which should be repressed but which are
not covered by the law, and in cases of
94
excessive penalties
.
Article 6. Consummated, frustrated, and
attempted felonies
. 101
Article 7. When light felonies are punishable
. 131
Article 8. Conspiracy and proposal to commit
felony
. 133
Article 9. Grave felonies, less grave felonies, and
light felonies
. 142
Article 10. Offenses not subject to the provisions
of this Code
.. 145
Chapter Two- Justifying Circumstances and
Circumstances Which Exempt from
Criminal Liability
Article 11. Justifying circumstances
. 157
xxiii

xii

31
32

Article 12. Circumstances which exempt from
criminal liability........................................
Chapter Three - Circumstances Which Mitigate
Criminal Liability
Article 13. Mitigating circumstances..........................
Chapter Four Circumstances Which Aggravate
Criminal Liability
Article 14. Aggravating circumstances......................
Chapter Five Alternative Circumstances
Article 15. Their concept...............................................
TITLE TWO- PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE
FOR FELONIES
Article 16. Who are criminally liable..........................
Article 17. Principals...................................................
Article 18. Accomplices................................................
Article 19. Accessories.................................................
Article 20. Accessories who are exempt from
criminal liability........................................
TITLE THREE- PENALTIES
Chapter One Penalties in General
Article 21. Penalties that may be imposed.................
Article 22. Retroactive effect of penal laws................
Article 23. Effect of pardon by the offended party.....
Article 24. Measures of prevention or safety
which are not considered penalties
Chapter Two Classification of Penalties
Article 25. Penalties which may be imposed..............
Article 26. Fine - When afflictive, correctional,
or light penalty
Chapter Three Duration and Effect of Penalties
Section One Duration of penalties
Article 27. Reclusion perpetua
Article 28. Computation of penalties..........................
Article 29. Period of preventive imprisonment
deducted from term of imprisonment.......
xiv

227

267

350
490

506
510
557
578
592

599
601
612
614
617
621

624
626

Section Two Effects of the penalties according
to their respective nature
Article 30. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or
temporary absolute disqualification .........
Article 31. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or
temporary special disqualification............
Article 32. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or
temporary special disqualification for the
exercise of the right of suffrage.................
Article 33. Effects of the penalties of suspension
from any public office, profession or
calling, or the right of suffrage .................
Article 34. Civil interdiction........................................
Article 35. Effects of bond to keep the peace ..............
Article 36. Pardon; its effects ......................................
Article 37. Costs - What are included.......................
Article 38. Pecuniary liabilities - Order
of payment..................................................
Article 39. Subsidiary Penalty ....................................
Section Three Penalties in which other
accessory penalties are inherent
Article 40. Death - Its accessory penalties...............
Article 41. Reclusion perpetua and reclusion
temporal Their accessory penalties......
Article 42. Prision mayor Its accessory penalties..
Article 43. Prision correccional- Its accessory
penalties.....................................................
Article 44. Arresto - Its accessory penalties.............
Article 45. Confiscation and forfeiture of the
proceeds or instruments of the crime
Chapter Four-Application of Penalties
Section One Rules for the application of
penalties to the persons criminally liable
and for the graduation of the same
Article 46. Penalty to be imposed upon principals
in general

628
xxV

634
634

635

635
635
636
639
642
643
645

656
656
656
657
657
659

664

Article 47. In what cases the death penalty shall not
be imposed; Automatic review of death
penalty cases
Article 48. Penalty for complex crimes
Article 49. Penalty to be imposed upon the principals
when the crime committed is different
from that intended.....................................
Article 50. Penalty to be imposed upon principals
of a frustrated crime..................................
Article 51. Penalty to be imposed upon principals
of attempted crime.....................................
Article 52. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices
in a consummated crime
Article 53. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories
to the commission of a consummated
felony..........................................................
Article 54. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices
in a frustrated crime..................................
Article 55. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories
of a frustrated crime..................................
Article 56. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices
in an attempted crime...............................
Article 57. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories
of an attempted crime
Article 58. Additional penalty to be imposed upon
certain accessories.....................................
Article 59. Penalty to be imposed in case of failure
to commit the crime because the means
employed or the aims sought are
impossible...................................................
Article 60. Exceptions to the rules established
in Articles 50 to 57
Article 61. Rules for graduating penalties
Section Two - Rules for the application of
penalties with regard to the mitigating
and aggravating circumstances, and
habitual delinquency

665
672

702
707
707
707

707
707
707
708
708
711

711
713
714

Article 62. Effects of the attendance of mitigating
or aggravating circumstances and of
habitual delinquency .................................
Article 63. Rules for the application of indivisible
penalties .....................................................
Article 64. Rules for the application of penalties
which contain three periods ......................
Article 65. Rules in cases in which the penalty
is not composed of three periods ...............
Article 66. Imposition of fines .....................................
Article 67. Penalty to be imposed when not all the
requisites of exemption of the fourth
circumstance ofArticle 12 are present.....
Article 68. Penalty to be imposed upon a person
under eighteen years of age ......................
Article 69. Penalty to be imposed when the crime
committed is not wholly excusable ...........
Article 70. Successive service of sentences .................
Article 71. Graduated scales .......................................
Article 72. Preference in the payment of the civil
liabilities ....................................................
Section Three Provision common to the last
two preceding sections
Article 73. Presumption in regard to the imposition
of accessory penalties
Article 74. Penalty higher than reclusion perpetua
in certain cases
Article 75. Increasing or reducing the penalty of
fine by one or more degrees.......................
Article 76. Legal period of duration of divisible
penalties.....................................................
Article 77. When the penalty is a complex one
composed of three distinct penalties.........

740
743
751
754

756
757
760
762
772
777

777
778
779
782
787

Indeterminate Sentence Law.............................................. 789
Presidential Decree No. 968, as amended by Presidential
Decree No. 1257, and as further amended by
xxvii

xvi

721

Batas Pambansa Blg. 76, Presidential Decree
No. 1990, and Republic Act No. 17070.......................... 814
Chapter Five Execution and Service of Penalties
Section One General provisions
Article 78. When and how a penalty is to be
executed......................................................
Article 79. Suspension of the execution and service
of the penalties in case of insanity...........
Article 80. Suspension of sentence of minor
delinquents.................................................
Section Two Execution of principal penalties
Article 81. When and how the death penalty is
to be executed .............................................
Article 82. Notification and execution of the
sentence and assistance to the culprit......
Article 83. Suspension of the execution of the
death sentence ...........................................
Article 84. Place of execution and persons who
may witness the same.........····.·······......
Article 85. Provisions relative to the corpse of
the person executed and its burial ...........
Article 86. Reclusion perpetua, reclusion temporal,
prision mayor, prision correccional
and arresto mayor .....................................
Article 87. Destierro .....................................................
Article 88. Arresto menor

834
835
836

846
848
849
851
852

853
853
854

TITLE FOUR- EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY
Chapter One -Total Extinction of Criminal Liability
Article 89. How criminal liability is totally
extinguished...............................................
Article 90. Prescription of crimes................................
Article 91. Computation of prescription ofoffenses ...
Article 92. When and how penalties prescribe...........
Article 93. Computation of the prescription
of penalties.................................................

856
866
873
886
888

Chapter Two Partial Extinction of Criminal
Liability
Article 94. Partial extinction of criminal liability ......
Article 95. Obligation incurred by a person
granted conditional pardon .......................
Article 96. Effect of commutation of sentence ............
Article 97. Allowance for good conduct.. .....................
Article 98. Special time allowance for loyalty ............
Article 99. Who grants time allowance .......................

898
899
900
903
904

TITLE FIVE- CIVIL LIABILITY
Chapter One Persons Civilly Liable for Felonies
Article 100. Civil liability of a person guilty
of felony....................................................
Article 101. Rules regarding civil liability in
certain cases.............................................
Article 102. Subsidiary civil liability of innkeepers,
tavernkeepers, and proprietors
of establishments.....................................
Article 103. Subsidiary civil liability of other
persons

906
927

931
932

Chapter Two- What Civil Liability Includes
Article 104. What is included in civil liability............ 941
Article 105. Restitution - How made........................ 943
Article 106. Reparation - How made........................ 949
Article 107. Indemnification - What is included...... 950
Article 108. Obligation to make restoration, reparation
for damages, or indemnification for
consequential damages and action
to demand the same - Upon whom
it devolves................................................ 972
Article 109. Share of each person civilly liable.......... 974
Article 110. Several and subsidiary liability
of principals, accomplices, and accessories
of felony - Preference in payment........ 975
Article 111. Obligation to make restitution
in a certain case....................................... 976
xxix

xxviii

894

Chapter Three Extinction and Survival
of Civil Liability
Article 112. Extinction of civil liability.......................
Article 113. Obligation to satisfy civil liability..........

978
980

CRIMINAL LAW
Criminal Law, defined.
Criminal law is that branch or division of law which defines
crimes, treats of their nature, and provides for their punishment. (12
Cye. 129)
Crime, defined.
Crime is an act committed or omitted in violation of a public law
forbidding or commanding it. (I Bouvier's Law Dictionary, Rawle's
Third Revision, 729)
Sources of Philippine Criminal Law.
1.

The Revised Penal Code {Act No. 3815) and its amendments.

2.

Special Penal Laws passed by the Philippine Commission,
Philippine Assembly, Philippine Legislature, National
Assembly, the Batasang Pambansa, and the Congress of
the Philippines.

3.

Penal Presidential Decrees issued during Martial Law.

No common law crimes in the Philippines.
The so-called common law crimes, known in the United States
and England as the body of principles, usages and rules of action,
which do not rest for their authority upon any express and positive
declaration of the will of the legislature, are not recognized in this
country. Unless there be a particular provision in the penal code
or special penal law that defines and punishes the act, even if it
be socially or morally wrong, no criminal liability is incurred by its
commission. (See U.S. v. Taylor, 28 Phil. 599, 604)
Court decisions are not sources of criminal law, because they
merely explain the meaning of, and apply, the law as enacted by the
legislative branch of the government.
xxO

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

Criminal Law

Power to define and punish crimes.
The State has the authority, under its police power, to define and
punish crimes and to lay down the rules of criminal procedure. States,
as a part of their police power, have a large measure of discretion in
creating and defining criminal offenses. (People v. Santiago, 43 Phil.
120, 124)
The right of prosecution and punishment for a crime is one of
the attributes that by a natural law belongs to the sovereign power
instinctively charged by the common will of the members of society
to look after, guard and defend the interests of the community, the
individual and social rights and the liberties of every citizen and the
guaranty of the exercise of his rights. (U.S. u. Pablo, 35 Phil. 94, 100)
Limitations on the power of Congress to enact penal legislation.
The 1987 Constitution imposes the following limitations on the
power of Congress to enact penal legislation:
1.

Due Process and Equal Protection
No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property
without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied
the equal protection of the laws. (Art. III, Sec. 1)

2.

Non-imposition of excessive fines or cruel and unusual
punishment.
Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel,
degrading or inhuman punishment inflicted. Neither
shall the death penalty be imposed, unless, for compelling
reasons involving heinous crimes, the Congress hereafter
provides for it. Any death penalty already imposed shall
be reduced to reclusion perpetua. (Art. III, Sec. 19.1)

3.

Ex Post Facto Law or Bill of Attainder
No ex post facto law or bill of attainder shall be
enacted. (Art. III, Sec. 2)

procedural due process which consists of the two basic rights of
notice and hearing, as well as the guarantee of being heard by an
impartial and competent tribunal. (Cruz, Constitutional Law, 1993
Ed., pp. 102-106)
Due process of law requires that the accused must be heard in
court of competent jurisdiction, proceeded against under the orderly
process of law, and only punished after inquiry and investigation,
upon notice to him, with an opportunity to be heard, and a judgment
awarded within the authority of a constitutional law. (Hildawa v.
Minister of Defense, G.R. No. L-67766 [1985), citing Ong Chang Wing
u. U.S., 40 Phil. 1049)
Equal protection.
Equal protection requires that all persons or things similarly
situated should be treated alike, both as to rights conferred and
responsibilities imposed. Similar subjects, in other words, should not
be treated differently, so as to give undue favor to some and unjustly
discriminate against others. The guarantee means that no person or
class of persons shall be denied the same protection of laws which is
enjoyed by other persons or other classes in like circumstances. (City
of Manila u. Hon. Laguio, Jr., 495 Phil. 326)
Excessive fines.
The Constitutional prohibition on the imposition of unusual
fines applies only to criminal prosecutions. (Republic u. De La Merced
& Sons, G.R. No. 201501 [2018}, citing Serrano u. NLRC, 387 Phil.
345)
For a penalty to be considered obnoxious to the Constitution, it
needs to be more than merely being harsh, excessive, out of proportion,
or severe. To come under the prohibition, the penalty must be
flagrantly and plainly oppressive or so disproportionate to the offense
committed as to shock the moral sense of all reasonable persons as
to what is right and proper under the circumstances. (Republic v. De
La Merced && Sons, supra, citing People v. Dionisio, 131 Phil. 408,
411 and People u. De la Cruz, 92 Phil. 906, 908)

Due process.
Due process is comprised of two components
substantive due
process which requires the intrinsic validity of the law in interfering
with the rights of the person to his life, liberty, or property; and

Cruel and unusual punishment.
The Constitutional proscription against cruel and unusual
punishment under the Bill of Rights extends only to situations

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
of extreme corporeal or psychological punishment that strips the
individual of his humanity. (See Maturan v. Commission on Elections,
G.R. No. 227155, March 28, 2017) The proscription is aimed more at
the form or character of the punishment rather than at its severity,
as the Court has elucidated in Lim v. People, 390 SCRA 194, 198199, to wit:
Settled is the rule that a punishment authorized by statute
is not cruel, degrading or disproportionate to the nature of the
offense unless it is flagrantly and plainly oppressive and wholly
disproportionate to the nature ofthe offense as to shock the moral
sense of the community. It takes more than merely being harsh,
excessive, out ofproportion or severe for a penalty to be obnoxious
to the Constitution. Based on this principle, the Court has consistently overruled contentions of the defense that the penalty of
fine or imprisonment authorized by the statute involved is cruel
and degrading.
1n People v. Tongko, G.R. No. 123567, June 5, 1998, this
Court held that the prohibition against cruel and unusual
punishment is generally aimed at the form or character of the
punishment rather than its severity in respect of its duration
or amount, and applies to punishments which never existed in
America or which public sentiment regards as cruel or obsolete.
This refers, for instance, to those inflicted at the whipping post
or in the pillory, to burning at the stake, breaking on the wheel,
disemboweling and the like. The fact that the penalty is severe
provides insufficient basis to declare a law unconstitutional and
does not, by that circumstance alone, make it cruel and inhuman.

Ex post facto law.
Congress is prohibited from passing retroactive penal laws
that are prejudicial to the accused. Penal laws are those acts of the
legislature which prohibit certain acts and establish penalties for
their violations; or those that define crimes, treat of their nature,
and provide for their punishment. (Lacson v. The Executive Secretary,
301 SCRA 298)
An ex post facto law is one which:
(1)

makes criminal an act done before the passage of the law
and which was innocent when done, and punishes such an
act;

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

(2)

aggravates a crime, or makes it greater than it was, when
committed;

(3)

changes the punishment and inflicts a greater punishment
than the law annexed to the crime when committed;

(4)

alters the legal rules of evidence, and authorizes conviction
upon less or different testimony than the law required at
the time of the commission of the offense;

(5)

assumes to regulate civil rights and remedies only, in effect
imposes penalty or deprivation of a right for something
which when done was lawful; and

(6) deprives a person accused ofa crime some lawful protection
to which he has become entitled, such as the protection
of a former conviction or acquittal, or a proclamation of
amnesty. (In re: Kay Villegas Kami, Inc., 35 SCRA 429,
431)
To give a law retroactive application to the prejudice of the accused
Is to make It an ex post facto law.

Batas Pambansa Big. 195 which was approved on March 16,
1982, amending Section 11 of R.A. No. 3019 by increasing from 10 to
15 years the period for the prescription ofa violation of the Anti-Graft
and Corrupt Practices Act, may not be given retroactive application
to the "crime" which was committed in January 1976, for it would
be prejudicial to the accused. To apply B.P. Blg. 195 to the accused
would make it an ex post facto law for it would after his situation to
his disadvantage by making him criminally liable for a crime that
had already been extinguished under the law existing when it was
committed. (People v. Sandiganbayan, et al., 211 SCRA 241)
The penalty of prision mayor medium, or eight years and one
day to 10 years, imposed by P.D. No. 818, applies only to swindling
by means of issuing bouncing checks committed on or after October
22, 1985. That increased penalty does not apply to estafa committed
on October 16, 1974 because it would make the decree an ex post facto
law. Its retroactive application is prohibited by Articles 21 and 22
of the R.P.C. and Section 12, Article IV (now Sec. 22, Art. III, of the
1987 Constitution). (People v. Villaraza, 81 SCRA 95, 97)
5

4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

BIil of attainder.
A bill of attainder is a legislative act which inflicts punishment
on individuals without judicial trial. Its essence is the substitution of
a legislative act for a judicial determination of guilt. (People v. Ferrer,
48 SCRA 382, 395)

provided that he has been duly notified and his failure to
appear is unjustifiable. (Sec. 14[2])
5.

Any person under investigation for the commission of
an offense shall have the right to be informed of his right
to remain silent and to have competent and independent
counsel preferably of his own choice.

Examples: Congress passes a law which authorizes the arrest
and imprisonment of communists without the benefit of a judicial trial.

A law which makes it a crime for a member of the Communist
Party to serve as an officer or employee of a labor union is a bill of
attainder. (United States v. Brown, 381 U.S. 437)

If the person cannot afford the services of counsel, he
must be provided with one.
These rights cannot be waived except in writing and
in the presence of counsel. (Sec. 12(1])

Constitutional rights of the accused.
Article III, Bill of Rights, of the 1987 Constitution provides for
the following rights:
1.

All persons shall have the right to a speedy disposition
of their cases before all judicial, quasi-judicial, or
administrative bodies. (Sec. 16)

2.

No person shall be held to answer for a criminal offense
without due process of law. (Sec. 14[1])

3.

All persons, except those charged with offenses punishable
by reclusion perpetua when evidence ofguilt is strong, shall,
before conviction, be bailable by sufficient sureties, or be
released on recognizance as may be provided by law.

No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any
other means which vitiate the free will shall be used against
him. Secret detention places, solitary, incommunicado, or
other similar forms of detention are prohibited. (Sec. 12[2])
Any confession or admission obtained in violation of
this or Section 17 hereof shall be inadmissible in evidence
against him. (Sec. 12[3])
6.

Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, degrading
or inhuman punishment inflicted. (Sec. 19[1])

7.

No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment
for the same offense. If an act is punished by a law and
an ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either shall
constitute a bar to another prosecution for the same act.
(Sec. 21)

8.

Free access to the courts and quasi-judicial bodies and
adequate legal assistance shall not be denied to any person
by reason of poverty. (Sec. 11)

The right to bail shall not be impaired even when the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus is suspended.
Excessive bail shall not be required. (Sec. 13)
4.

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be presumed
innocent until the contrary is proved, and shall enjoy the
right to be heard by himself and counsel, to be informed
of the nature and cause of the accusation against him,
to have speedy, impartial, and public trial, to meet the
witnesses face to face, and to have compulsory process to
secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of
evidence in his behalf. However, after arraignment, trial
may proceed notwithstanding the absence of the accused
6

No person shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself. (Sec. 17)

Statutory rights of an accused.
Section 1, Rule 115, of the Revised Rules on Criminal Procedure
provides that in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be
entitled:
1.

To be presumed innocent until the contrary is proved
beyond reasonable doubt.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
2.

To be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation
against him.

3.

To be present and defend in person and by counsel at every
stage of the proceedings, from arraignment to promulgation
of the judgment. x x x

4.

To testify as a witness in his own behalf but subject to crossexamination on matters covered by direct examination. His
silence shall not in any manner prejudice him.

5.

To be exempt from being compelled to be a witness against
himself.

6.

To confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him
at the trial. x xx

7.

To have compulsory process issued to secure the attendance
of witnesses and production of other evidence in his behalf.

8.

To have a speedy, impartial, and public trial.

9.

To appeal in all cases allowed and in the manner prescribed
bylaw.

Rights of the accused which may be waived and rights which may
not be waived.
A right which may be waived is the right of the accused to
confrontation and cross-examination. A right which may not be waived
is the right of the accused to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation against him.
The reason or principle underlying the difference between rights
which may be waived and rights which may not be waived is that those
rights which may be waived are personal, while those rights which
may not be waived involve public interest which may be affected. (2
Moran, Rules of Court, 1952 Ed., 748)
Characteristics of criminal law.
Criminal law has three main characteristics: (1) general, (2)

territorial, and (3) prospective.
I.

GENERAL. Criminal law is binding on all persons who live
or sojourn in Philippine territory. (Art. 14, new Civil Code)

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

In a case where the accused contended that being an American
citizen, he cannot be prosecuted for, much less convicted for, the crime
of illegal possession of firearms, because it is a constitutional right of
the citizens of the United States of America "to keep and bear arms"
without any need of applying and securing a government license
therefor, the Court of Appeals held:
"The Philippines is a sovereign state with the obligation and
the right of every government to uphold its laws and maintain
order within its domain, and with the general jurisdiction to
punish persons for offenses committed within its territory,
regardless of the nationality of the offender. (Salonga and Yap,
Public International Law, p. 169) No foreigner enjoys in this
country extra-territorial right to be exempted from its laws and
jurisdiction, with the exception of heads of states and diplomatic
representatives who, by virtue of the customary law of nations,
are not subject to the Philippine territorial jurisdiction." (People
v. Galacgac, CA., 54 O.G. 1027)
As a general rule, jurisdiction of civil courts is not affected by the
military character of the accused.
U.S. v. Sweet
(1 Phil. 18)

Facts: Sweet was an employee of the U.S. Army in the Philippines.
He assaulted a prisoner of war for which he was charged with the crime
of physical injuries. Sweet interposed the defense that the fact that he
was an employee of the U.S. military authorities deprived the court of the
jurisdiction to try and punish him.
Held: The case is open to the application of the general principle that
the jurisdiction of the civil tribunals is unaffected by the military or other
special character ofthe person brought before them for trial, unless controlled
by express legislation to the contrary.

Civil courts have jurisdiction to try members of the military except
when the offense is service-connected.
Members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and other
persons subject to military law, including members of the citizens
Armed Forces Geographical Units, who commit crimes or offenses
penalized under the Revised Penal Code, other special penal laws, or
9

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
local government ordinances shall be tried by the proper civil court
except when the offense, as determined before arraignment by the
civil court, is service-connected, in which case the offense shall be
tried by court-martial. The President of the Philippines may, in the
interest ofjustice, order or direct at any time before arraignment that
any such crimes or offenses be tried by the proper civil courts. (See
Sec. 1, R.A. No. 7055)
Service-connected crimes under the Articles of War are tried by
court-martial.

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

(e) War Offenses - Misbehavior before the Enemy (Art. 76);
Subordinates Compelling Commander to Surrender
(Art. 77); Improper Use of Countersign (Art. 78); Forcing
a Safeguard (Art, 79); Neglect or Misappropriation of
Captured Property (Art. 80); Dealing in Captured or
Abandoned Property (Art. 81); Relieving, Corresponding
with, or Aiding the Enemy (Art. 82); Spies (Art. 83).
(f)

Service-connected crimes or offenses shall be limited to those
defined in Articles 54 to 70, Articles 72 to 92, and Articles 95 to 97
of the Articles of War or Commonwealth Act No. 408, as amended.
(See Sec. 1, R.A. No. 7055)
These crimes or offenses fall under:
(a) Enlistment, Muster, Returns - Fraudulent Enlistment
(Art. 54); Officer Making Unlawful Enlistment (Art. 55);
False Muster (Art. 56); False Returns and Omission to
Render Returns (Art. 57).
(b) Desertion, Absence Without Leave - Desertion (Arts. 58
and 59); Advising or Aiding Another to Desert (Art. 60);
Entertaining a Deserter (Art. 61); Absence Without Leave
(Art. 62).
(c)

Disrespect, Insubordination, Mutiny - Disrespect toward
the President, Vice President, Congress of the Philippines,
or Secretary of National Defense (Art. 63); Disrespect
toward Superior Officer (Art. 64); Assaulting or Willfully
Disobeying Superior Officer (Art. 65); Insubordinate
Conduct toward Non-Commissioned Officer (Art. 66);
Mutiny or Sedition (Art. 67); Failure to Suppress Mutiny
or Sedition (Art. 68); Quarrels; Frays; Disorders (Art. 69).

(d) Arrest; Confinement - Refusal to Receive and Keep
Prisoners (Art. 72); Failure to Make Report of Prisoner
Received (Art. 73); Releasing Prisoner without Proper
Authority (Art. 74); Refusal or Neglect to Deliver Offenders
to Civil Authorities (Art. 75).

Miscellaneous Crimes and Offenses - Military Property,
Willful or Negligent Loss, Damage, or Wrongful Disposition
of Military Property (Art. 84); Waste or Unlawful
Disposition of Military Property Issued to Soldiers (Art. 85 );
Drunk on Duty (Art. 86); Misbehavior ofSentinel (Art. 87);
Personal Interest in Sale ofProvisions (Art. 88); Unlawfully
Influencing Action of the Court (Art, 88-A); Intimidation of
Persons Bringing Provisions (Art. 89); Failure to Maintain
Good Order and to Redress Wrongs (Art. 90); Provoking
Speeches or Gestures (Art. 91); Dueling (Art. 92); Frauds
against the Government (Art. 95); Conduct Unbecoming an
Officer and Gentleman (Art. 96); All disorders and neglects
to the prejudice ofgood order and military discipline, and
all conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the military
service (Art. 97).

Republic Act No. 7055 did not divest military courts of jurisdiction
to try service-connected offenses under the Articles of War.
Navales, et al. v. Abaya
(484 Phil. 367)

Facts: An Information for violation of Article 134-A (coup d'etat) of the
Revised Penal Code was filed with the Regional Trial Court of Makati City
against 321 of the soldiers who took part in the "Oakwood Incident." The
Regional Trial Court later admitted an Amended Information charging only
31 of the original accused. Thereafte r, Petitioners, who were earlier dropped as
accused in the coup d'etat case, were charged before the General Court-Martial
with violations of the Articles of War (AW), particularly: AW 67 Mutiny),
AW 97 (Conduct Prejudicial to Good Order and Military Discipline), AW 96
(Conduct Unbecoming an Officer and a Gentleman), AW 63 (Disrespect to
th« Pr sident, the Secretary of Defense, etc.), and AW 64 (Disrespect towards
.""" omer. Petitioners fled a Petition for Prohibition alleging that

,,,kn{

ioss, the respondents sna the general court-martial are
without any jurisdiction to furt her conduct proceedings against the Petitioners

because the Regional Trial Court has already determined that the offenses
11

10

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
are not service-related and are properly within thejurisdiction of the civilian
courts.

Held: Republic Act No. 7055 did not divest the military courts of
jurisdiction to try cases involving violations of Art icles 54 to 70, Articles

72 to 92 and Articles 95 to 97 of the Articles of War as these are considered
service-connected crimes or offenses." In fact, it mandates that these shall

be tried by the court-martial.
In view of the clear mandate ofR.A. No. 7055, the RTC (Branch 148)
cannot divest the General Court-Martial of itsjurisdiction over those charged
with violations of Articles 63 (Disrespect toward the President etc.), 64
(Disrespect toward Superior Officer), 67 (Mutiny or Sedition), 96 (Conduct
Unbecoming an Officer and a Gentleman), and 97 (General Article) of the
Articles of War, as these are specifically included as "service-connected
offenses or crimes" under Section 1 thereof. Pursuant to the same provision
of law, the military courts have jurisdiction over these crimes or offenses.

The Revised Penal Code or other penal law is not applicable when
a military court takes cognizance of the case.
When the military court takes cognizance of the case involving
a person subject to military law, the Articles of War apply, not the
R.P.C. or other penal law.
"By their acceptance of appointments as officers in the Bolo
Area from the General Headquarters of the 6th Military District,
the accused, who were civilians at the outbreak of the war, became
members of the Philippine Army amenable to the Articles of War."
(Ruffy, et al. v. Chief of Staff, et al., 75 Phil. 875)

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

The opening sentence of Article 2 of the R.P.C. says that the
provisions of this Code shall be enforced within the Philippine
Archipelago, "except as provided in the treaties and laws ofpreferential
application."
Article 14 of the new Civil Code provides that penal laws and
those of public security and safety shall be obligatory upon all who
live or sojourn in Philippine territory, subject to the principles ofpublic
international law and to treaty stipulations.
Treaties or treaty stipulations.

An example of a treaty or treaty stipulation as an exception
to the general application of our criminal law is the Visiting Forces
Agreement (VFA) between the Philippines and the U.S.A., which was
signed on February 10, 1998, which provides the following:
(a)

Philippine authorities shall have jurisdiction over U.S.
personnel with respect to offenses committed within
the Philippines and punishable under the laws of the
Philippines.

b)

U.S. military authorities shall have the right to exercise
within the Philippines all criminal and disciplinary
jurisdiction conferred on them by the military law of the
U.S. over U.S. personnel in the Philippines.

(c)

Philippine authorities exercise exclusive jurisdiction over
U.S. personnel with respect to offenses, including offenses
relating to the security of the Philippines, i.e., treason;
sabotage, espionage or violation of any law relating
to national defense, punishable under the laws of the
Philippines, but not under the laws of the United States.

(d)

U.S. authorities exercise exclusive jurisdiction over U.S.
personnel with respect to offenses, including offenses
relating to the security of the U.S., i.e., treason; sabotage,
espionage or violation of any law relating to national
defense, punishable under the laws of the U.S., but not
under the laws of the Philippines.

(e)

U.S. military authorities shall have the primary right to
exercise jurisdiction over U.S. personnel subject to the
military Jaw of the U.S. in relation to: (1) offenses solely

The prosecution of an accused before a court-martial Is a bar to
another prosecution for the same offense.
A court-martial is a court, and the prosecution of an accused
before it is a criminal, not an administrative case, and therefore it
would be, under certain conditions, a bar to another prosecution of
the accused for the same offense, because the latter would place the
accused in double jeopardy. (Marcos and Concordia u. Chiefof Staff,
AFP, 89 Phil. 246)
Exceptions to the general application of Criminal Law.
There are cases where our Criminal Law does not apply even

if the crime is committed by a person residing or sojourning in the
Philippines. These constitute the exceptions.
12

13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

against the property or security of the U.S. or against
the property or person of U.S. personnel; and (2) offenses
arising out of any act or omission done in performance of
official duty.

of Foreign Affairs, and transmitted by the Secretary
of Foreign Affairs to the Chief of Police of the City of
Manila. (Sec. 5)

In Bayan v. Zamora, G.R. No. 138570, October 10, 2000, the
Supreme Court declared the VFA to be a treaty when it held that:

Persons exempt from the operation of our criminal laws by virtue
of the principles of public international law.

The records reveal that the United States Government,
through Ambassador Thomas C. Hubbard, has stated that the
United States government has fully committed to living up to the
terms of the VFA. For as long as the United States of America
accepts or acknowledges the VFA as a treaty, and binds itself
further to comply with its obligations under the treaty, there is
indeed marked compliance with the mandate of the Constitution.

The Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations lists the heads
of diplomatic missions to include:

Worth stressing too, is that the ratification, by the
President, of the VFA and the concurrence of the Senate should
be taken as a clear an unequivocal expression of our nations
consent to be bound by said treaty, with the concomitant duty to
uphold the obligations and responsibilities embodied thereunder.
Law of preferential application.
Example of a law ofpreferential application:
Republic Act No. 75 may be considered a law of preferential
application in favor of diplomatic representatives and their
domestic servants. It exempts from arrest or imprisonment
ambassadors or public ministers of any foreign State, authorized
and received as such by the President, or any domestic or
domestic servant of any such ambassador or minister, provided
that the foreign State provides similar protection to Philippine
diplomatic representatives.
Exceptions:
(1)

A citizen or inhabitant of the Republic of the

Philippines, in the service of an ambassador or a
public min.ister, and the process is founded upon a
debt contracted before he entered upon such service;
(2)

A domestic servant of an ambassador or a public
minister, unless the name of the servant has, before
the issuing thereof, been registered in the Department
14

(1)

Ambassadors and other heads of mission of equivalent rank
who are accredited to the host heads of state;

(2)

Envoys extraordinary, ministers plenipotentiary, and other
representatives who are accredited to the host heads of
state; and

(3)

Charges d'affaires, who are accredited to the minister of
foreign affairs.

It is a well-established principle of international law that
diplomatic representatives, such as ambassadors or public ministers
and their official retinue, possess immunity from the criminal
jurisdiction of the country of their sojourn and cannot be sued, arrested
or pun.ished by the law of that country. (II Hyde, International Law,
2nd Ed., 1266)
Only the heads of missions and members of the dlplomatlc staff
have blanket immunity from civil and criminal suits.
Comprising the "staff of the (diplomatic) mission" are the
diplomatic staff, the administrative staff and the technical and service
staff. Only the heads of missions, as well as members of the diplomatic
staff, excluding the members of the administrative, technical and
service staff of the mission, are accorded diplomatic rank. Only
diplomatic agents," under the terms of the Convention, are vested
with blanket diplomatic immunity from civil and criminal suits. The
Convention defines "diplomatic agents" as the heads of missions or
members of the diplomatic staff, thus impliedly withholding the same
privileges from all others. The main yardstick in ascertaining whether
a person is a diplomat entitled to immunity is the determination of
whether or not he performs duties of diplomatic nature. (Minucher
v. CA., G.R. No. 142396, February 11, 2003)
15

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

A consul is not entitled to the privileges and immunities accorded
diplomats.

accepted principles of international law that we have adopted as part
of the law of the land.

Consuls, who represent their respective states in concerns
of commerce and navigation and perform certain administrative
and notarial duties, such as the issuance of passports and visas,
authentication of documents, and administration of oaths, do not
ordinarily enjoy the traditional diplomatic immunities and privileges
accorded diplomats, mainly for the reason that they are not charged
with the duty of representing their states in political matters.
(Mincher v. CA, G.R. No. 142396, supra)

While the doctrine appears to prohibit only suits against the
state without its consent, it is also applicable to complaints filed
against officials of the state for acts allegedly performed by them in
the discharge of their duties. The rule is that if the judgment against
such officials will require the state itself to perform an affirmative act
to satisfy the same, such as the appropriation of the amount needed to
pay the damages awarded against them, the suit must be regarded as
against the state itself although it has not been formally impleaded.
(Garcia v. Chiefof Staff, 16 SCRA 120) In such a situation, the state
may move to dismiss the complaint on the ground that it has been
filed without its consent. (United States v. Guinto, 182 SCRA 644)

It is well-settled that a consul is not entitled to the privileges
and immunities of an ambassador or minister, but is subject to
the laws and regulations of the country to which he is accredited.
(Schneckenburger v. Moran, 63 Phil. 250)
In the absence ofa treaty to the contrary, a consul is not exempt
from criminal prosecution for violations of the laws of the country
where he resides.
Consuls, vice-consuls, and other commercial representatives
of foreign nations do not possess the status of, and cannot claim the
privileges and immunities accorded to ambassadors and ministers.
(Wheaton, International Law, Sec. 249)
Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
Article 43 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations
grants immunity from suit to consular officers and consular employees
for acts performed in the exercise of consular functions. However,
such immunity shall not apply in respect of a civil action:
1.

arising out of a contract concluded by a consular officer or
a consular employee in which he did not contract expressly
or impliedly as an agent of the sending State; or

2.

by a third party for damage arising from an accident in the
receiving State caused by a vehicle, vessel or aircraft.

Sovereign immunity from suit.
Article XVI, Section 3 ofthe 1987 Constitution provides that "the
State may not be sued without its consent." This is one ofthe generally
16

Doctrine of sovereign immunity from State, applied to case flied
against State officials.
Petitioners were connected with the Air Force Office of Special
Investigators and were charged precisely with the function of
preventing the distribution, possession and use of prohibited drugs
and prosecuting those guilty of such acts. It cannot for a moment be
imagined that they were acting in their private or unofficial capacity
when they apprehended and later testified against the complainant.
It follows that for discharging their duties as agents of the United
States, they cannot be directly impleaded for acts imputable to their
principal, which has not given its consent to be sued. (United States
v. Guinto, 182 SCRA 644)
The job description of Scalzo has tasked him to conduct
surveillance on suspected drug suppliers and, after having ascertain ed
the target, to inform local law enforcers who would then be expected
to make the arrest. In conducting surveillance activities on Minucher,
later acting as the poseur-buyer during the buy-bust operation,
and then becoming a principal witness in the criminal case against
Minucher, Scalzo hardly can be said to have acted beyond the scope
of his official function or duties. Scalzo, an agent of the United States
Drug Enforcement Agency allowed by the Philippine government to
conduct activities in the country to help contain the problem on the
drug traffic, is entitled to the defense of state immunity from suit.
(Minucher v. CA, G.R. No. 142396, supra)
17

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Criminal Law
Doctrine of sovereign immunity from suit does not apply when
State officials are sued in their private or personal capacity or for
unauthorized acts.

Officers and staff of the Bank, including for the purpose
of this Article experts and consultants performing missions for
the Bank, shall enjoy the following privileges and immunities:
(a) Immunity from legal process with respect to acts
performed by them in their official capacity except when
the Bank waives the immunity.

Shauf v. Court ofAppeals
(191 SCRA 713)
While the doctrine of sovereign immunity against suit appears to
prohibit only suits against the state without its consent, it is also applicable
to complaints filed against officials of the state for acts allegedly performed
by them in the discharge of their duties.
It is a different matter where the public official is made to account in
his capacity as such for acts contrary to law and injurious to the rights of
plaintiff. As we clearly set forth by Justice Zaldivar in Director ofthe Bureau
of Telecommunications, et al. v. Algaen, etc., et al.: "Inasmuch as the State
authorizes only legal acts by its officers, unauthorized acts of government
officials or officers are not acts of the State, and an action against the officials
or officers by one whose rights have been invaded or violated by such acts,
for the protection of his rights, is not a suit against the State within the rule
of immunity of the State from suit. In the same tenor, it has been said that
an action at law or suit in equity against a State officer or the director of a
State department on the ground that, while claiming to act for the State, he
violates or invades the personal and property rights ofthe plaintiff, under an
unconstitutional act or under an assumption of authority which he does not
have, is not a suit against the State within the constitutional provision that
the State may not be sued without its consent." The rationale for this ruling
is that the doctrine of state immunity cannot be used as an instrument for
perpetrating an injustice.
The doctrine of immunity from suit will not apply and may not be
invoked where the public official is being sued in his private and personal
capacity as an ordinary citizen. The cloak of protection afforded the officers
and agents of the government is removed the moment they arc sued in their
individual capacity. This situation usually arises where the public official acts
without authority or in excess ofthe powers vested in him. It is a well-settled
principle of law that a public official may be liable in his personal private
capacity for whatever damage he may have caused by his act done with malice
and in bad faith or beyond the scope of his authority and jurisdiction.
Immunity of ADB officers and staff.
Section 45{a) of the"Agreement between the Asian Development
Bank and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines
Regarding the Headquarters of the Asian Development Bank" states:
18

The slander of a person, by any stretch, cannot be considered as
falling within the purview of the immunity granted to ADB officers
and personnel. (Jeffrey Liang v. People, G.R. No. 125865, March 26,
2001)
Presidential Immunity from suit.
It is settled in jurisprudence that the President enjoys immunity
from suit during his or her tenure of office or actual incumbency.
Conversely, this presidential privilege of immunity cannot be invoked
by a non-sitting president even for acts committed during his or her
tenure. (Lozada v. Arroyo, G.R. Nos. 184379-80, April 24, 2012, citing
David v. Arroyo, 522 Phil. 705, 763-764 and Rodriguez v. Arroyo, G.R.
Nos. 191805 and 193160, November 15, 2011)
II.

TERRITORIAL. Criminal laws undertake to punish crimes
committed within Philippine territory.

The principle of territoriality means that as a rule, penal laws
of the Philippines are enforceable only within its territory.
Extent of Philippine territory for purposes of criminal law.
Article 2 of the R.P.C. provides that the provisions of said code
shall be enforced within the Philippine Archipelago, including its
atmosphere, its interior waters and maritime zone.
Article I of the 1987 Constitution provides that the national
territory comprises the Philippine archipelago, with all the islands
and waters embraced therein, and all other territories over which
the Philippines has sovereignty or jurisdiction, consisting of its
terrestrial, fluvial, and aerial domains, including its territorial sea,
the seabed, the subsoil, the insular shelves, and other submarine
areas. The waters around, between, and connecting the islands of the
archipelago, regardless of their breadth and dimensions, form part
of the internal waters of the Philippines.
19

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
Exceptions to the territorial application of criminal law.
Article 2 of the R.P.C. provides that its provisions shall be
enforced outside of the jurisdiction of the Philippines against those
who:

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

As such, our courts have territorial jurisdiction over the offense
charged against respondent. x x x" (Del Socorro vu. Van Wilsem,
G.R. No. 194707, December 10, 2014)

AAAu.BBB

1.

should commit an offense while on a Philippine ship or
airship;

(G.R. No. 212448 /2018])

2.

should forge or counterfeit any coin or currency note of
the Philippines or obligations and securities issued by the
Government of the Philippines;

3.

should be liable for acts connected with the introduction
into the Philippines of the obligations and securities
mentioned in the preceding number;

Issue: May Philippine courts exercise jurisdiction over an offense
constituting psychological violence under R.A. No. 9262, otherwise known as
the "Anti-Violence Against Women and their Children Act of2004," committed
through marital infidelity, when the alleged illicit relationship occurred or
is occurring outside the country?

4.
5.

while being public officers or employees, should commit an
offense in the exercise of their functions; or
should commit any of the crimes against national security
and the law of nations, defined in Title One of Book Two
of the R.P.C.

Held: What R.A. No. 9262 criminalizes is not the marital infidelity per
se but the psychological violence causing mental or emotional suffering on the

wife. Otherwise stated, it is the violence inflicted under the said circumstances
that the law seeks to outlaw. Marital infidelity es cited in the law is only
one of the various acts by which psychological violence may be committed.

Moreover, depending on the circumstances of the spouses and for a myriad
of reasons, the illicit relationship may or may not even be causing mental

or emotional anguish on the wife. Thus, the mental or emotional suffering
of the victim is an essential and distinct element in the commission of the
offense.

Territoriality principle, applied.
A criminal case for violation ofR.A. No. 9262, otherwise known
as the"Anti-Violence Against Women and Their Children Act of2004,"
was filed against a foreign national due to his unjustified failure
to support his minor child. The lower court dismissed the criminal
case on the ground that the facts charged in the information do not
constitute an offense as the respondent was an alien. In reversing
the dismissal of the case, the Supreme Court held:
xxx Considering that respondent is currently living in
the Philippines, we find strength in petitioner's claim that the
Territoriality Principle in criminal law, in relation to Article 14
of the New Civil Code, applies to the instant case, which provides
that: "[pJenal laws and those of public security and safety shall
be obligatory upon all who live and sojourn in Philippine territory, subject to the principle of public international law and to
treaty stipulations." On this score, it is indisputable that the
alleged continuing acts of respondent in refusing to support his
child with petitioner is committed here in the Philippines as all
of the parties herein are residents of the Province of Cebu City.
20

In Section 7 of R.A. No. 9262, venue undoubtedly pertains to
jurisdiction. As correctly pointed out by AAA, Section 7 provides that the
case may be filed where the crime or any of its elements was committed at
the option of the complainant. While the psychological violence es the means
employed by the perpetrator is certainly an indispensable element of the
offense, equally essential also is the element ofmental or emotional anguish
which is personal to the complainant.
What may be gleaned from Section 7 of R.A. No. 9262 is that the
law contemplates that acts of violence against women and their children
may manifest as transitory or continuing crimes; meaning that some acts
material and essential thereto and requisite in their conswnmation occur
in one municipality or territory, while some occur in another. In such cases,
the court wherein any of the crime's essential and material acts have been
committed maintainsjurisdiction to try the case; it being understood that the
first court taking cognizance of the same excludes the other. Thus, a person
charged with a continuing or transitory crime may be validly tried in any
municipality or territory where the offense was in part committed.
It is necessary for Philippine courts to have jurisdiction when the
abusive conduct or act of violence under Section 5(i) of R.A. No. 9262 in
relation to Section 3(a), Paragraph (C) was committed outside Philippine
21

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

territory, that the victim be a resident of the place where the complaint is
filed in view of the anguish suffered being a material element of the offense.
In the present scenario, the offended wife and children ofrespondent husband
are residents ofPasig City since March of2010. Hence, the RTC ofPasig City
may exercise jurisdiction over the case.

Whenever a new statute dealing with crime establishes conditions more lenient or favorable to the accused, it can be given a
retroactive effect.

Even ifthe alleged extramarital affair causing the offended wife mental
and emotional anguish is committed abroad, the same does not place a
prosecution under R.A. No. 9262 absolutely beyond the reach of Philippine
courts.

But this exception has no application:
1.

Where the new law is expressly made inapplicable to
pending actions or existing causes of action. (Tavera v.
Valdez, 1 Phil. 463, 470-471)

2.

Where the offender is a habitual criminal under Rule 5,
Article 62, R.P.C. (Art. 22, R.P.C.)

III. PROSPECTIVE. As a general rule, penal laws shall have no
retroactive application, lest they acquire the character of an ex
post facto law. (Mejia v. Pamaran, 160 SCRA 457, 472)
This general principle of criminal law is embodied in Article
21 of the Revised Penal Code which provides that "no felony shall
be punishable by any penalty not prescribed by law prior to its
commission."
Principle of prospectivity of penal laws, applied.
Republic Act No. 7659 (1983) amended Article 248 of the Code by
imposing a heavier penalty for murder than that originally prescribed,
the new penalty provided in Section 6 of said amendatory statute
being reclusion perpetua to death.
Being a penal law, such provision of R.A. No. 7659 may not
be applied to the crime of murder committed in 1982 by appellant,
based on the principle of prospectivity of penal laws. Further, the
presumption is that laws operate prospectively, unless the contrary
clearly appears or is clearly, plainly and unequivocally expressed
or necessarily implied. In every case of doubt, the doubt will be
resolved against the retroactive operation of laws. Nor can the
prospective application of R.A. No. 7659 be doubted just because of the
constitutional provision leaving to Congress the matter of the death
penalty in cases of heinous crimes, since Congress did not otherwise
provide. (People v. Derlo, G.R. No. 117878, April 18, 1997)
Exceptions to the prospective application of criminal laws.
A penal law may have retroactive effect only when it is favorable
to the accused.

22

Valeroso v. People
(G.R. No. 164815 (2008))

Facts: Petitioner was charged with the crime of illegal possession of
firearms and ammunition. Presidential Decree No. 1866 was the governing
law at the time petitioner committed the offense and imposed the penalty of
reclusion temporal in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua. During the
pendency of the case with the trial court, R.A. No. 8294 amended P.D. No.
1866 and imposed the penalty of prision correccional in its maximum period
and a fine of not less than Pl5,000.00.
Held: Although an additional fine of 1'15,000.00 is imposed by R.A.
No. 8294, the same is still advantageous to the accused, considering that
the imprisonment is lowered to prision correccional in its maximum period
from reclusion temporal in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua under
P.D. No. 1866.

Different effects of repeal on penal law.
1.

If the repeal makes the penalty lighter in the new law,
the new law shall be applied, except when the offender is
a habitual delinquent or when the new law is made not
applicable to pending action or existing causes of action.

2.

If the new law imposes a heavier penalty, the law in
force at the time of the commission of the offense shall
be applied.

3.

If the new law totally repeals the existing law so that the
act which was penalized under the old law is no longer
punishable, the crime is obliterated.

23

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

CRIMJNALLAWINGENERAL

When the repeal Is absolute, the offense ceases to be criminal.

not have the effect of thereafter depriving the courts ofjurisdiction to try,
convict, and sentence offenders charged with violations of the old law prior
to its repeal.

Tuates v. Bersamin
(G.R. No. 138962, October 4, 2002)
Facts: Petitioners were convicted of the crime of violation of
P.D. No. 772 or the Anti-Squatting Law. Upon appeal to the Regional Trial
Court, their conviction was affirmed. Pending resolution of their Motion for
Reconsideration, R.A. No. 8368 repealed P.D. No. 772.
Held: The repeal of P.D. No. 772 is explicit, categorical, definite and
absolute. As such, the act that was penalized by P.D. No. 772, i.e., squatting,
ceases to be criminal under R.A. No. 8368, and the previous offense is
obliterated.

The penalty prescribed by Act No. 1761 is not more favorable
to the accused than that prescribed in Act No. 1461, the penalty in

both Acts being the same.
When the repealing law fails to penalize the offense under the old
law, the accused cannot be convicted under the new law.
People v. Sindiong and Pastor
(77 Phil. 1000)

In the same vein, the absolute repeal of P.D. No. 772 has the effect of
depriving a court of its authority to punish a person charged with violation
of the old law prior to its repeal. Th.is is because an unqualified repeal of
a penal law constitutes a legislative act of rendering legal what had been
previously declared as illegal, such that the offense no longer exists and it is
as if the person who committed it never did so.

Facts: The accused was prosecuted for neglecting to make a return of
the sales ofnewspapers and magazines with.in the time prescribed by certain
sections of the Revised Administrative Code. Said sections of the Revised
Administrative Code were repealed by the National Internal Revenue Code
which does not require the making of return of sales of newspapers and
magazines.

People v. Tamayo
(61 Phil. 225)

Ruling: The court loses jurisdiction where the repealing law wholly fails
to penalize the act defined and penalized as an offense in the old law. The
accused, charged with violations of the old law prior to the repeal, cannot be
legally prosecuted after such repeal.

Facts: The accused was prosecuted for and convicted of a violation
of an ordinance. While the case was pending appeal, the ordinance was
repealed by eliminating the section under which the accused was being
prosecuted.

The provisions ofsaid sections ofthe Revised Administrative Code were
not reenacted, even substantially, in the National Internal Revenue Code.

Ruling: The repeal is absolute. Where the repeal is absolute, and not a
reenactment or repeal by implication, the offense ceases to be criminal. The
accused must be acquitted.

A person charged under a repealed statute may be punished under
the repealing statute.

When the new law and the old law penalize the same offense, the
offender can be tried under the old law.

Facts: Private respondent, wh.ile being a member of the Sangguniang
Bayon of Sta. Cruz, Zambales, and its Committee on Bids and Awards,
entered into a lease contract with the municipality covering two public market
stalls. An Information for violation of Section 411)of B.P. Blg. 337, otherwise
known as the "Local Government Code of 1983" was filed against private
respondent. Said Section makes it unlawful for any government official to
engage in any business transaction with the local government unit ofwh.ich
he is an official.
Held: Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government
Code of 1991," which repealed B.P. Blg. 337, reenacted in its Section 89 the
legal provision of Section 41 ofB.P. Blg. 337 under which private respondent

U.S. v. Cuna
(12 Phil. 241)
Facts: The accused was charged with selling opium in violation of
Act No. 1461 of the Philippine Commission. During the pendency of the case,
Act No. 1761 took effect repealing the former law, but both Act No. 1461 and
Act No. I761 penalize offenses against the opium laws.
Ruling: Where an Act of the Legislature which penalizes an offense
repeals a former Act wh.ich penalized the same offense, such repeal does
24

People u. Hon. Toledano
(G.R. No. 110220, May 18, 2000)

25

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

CRIMINAL LAW IN GENERAL

Criminal Law
Bunao was charged and penalizes the same act previously penalized under the
repealed law, such that the act committed before the reenactment continuous
to be a crime. Hence, prosecution will proceed under the provisions of Section

89 in relation to Section 514 of R.A. No. 7160.
A new law which omits anything contained in the old law dealing on
the same subject, operates as a repeal of anything not so included
in the amendatory act.

The Agricultural Land Reform Code superseded the Agricultural
Tenancy Law (except as qualified in Sections 4 and 35 of the Code).
The Code instituted the leasehold system and abolished share
tenancy subject to certain conditions indicated in Section 4 thereof.
It is significant that Section 39 is not reproduced in the Agricultural
Land Reform Code whose Section 172 repeals "all laws or part of any
law inconsistent with" its provisions. Under the leasehold system,
the prohibition against pre-threshing has no more raison d' etre
because the lessee is obligated to pay a fixed rental as prescribed
in Section 34 of the Agricultural Land Reform Code, or the Code of
Agrarian Reforms, as redesignated in R.A. No. 6389 which took effect
on September 10, 1971. Thus, the legal maxim, cessante ratione legis
cessat ipsa lex (the reason for the law ceasing, the law itself also
ceases), applies to this case. (People v. Almuete, 69 SCRA 410)
Self-repealing law.

The anomalous act attributed to Pedro de los Reyes as described
in the information is undoubtedly a violation of R.A. No. 650 being a
"material misrepresentation in any document required" by said Act
"or the rules and regulations issued thereunder" and was committed
while said Act was in force. It was punishable under Section 18 of
said Act with fine or imprisonment, or both, and with forfeiture of the
goods or commodities imported in violation thereof. (See. 18, R.A. No.
650) But since R.A. No. 650 expired by its own limitation on June 30,
1953, the forfeiture therein provided could no longer be subsequently
enforced. And, as correctly stated by the Undersecretary of Justice
in his Opinion No. 138, dated July 22, 1953, "the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner of Customs to proceed with the forfeiture of goods
and commodities imported in violation of the Import Control Law
was lost and that all proceedings of forfeiture, as well as criminal
actions pending on June 30, 1953, abated with the expiration of
R.A. No. 650."
26

The falsification or misrepresentation allegedly committed on the
import license could no longer be a basis for the penalty of forfeiture
at the time of the release of goods. Where an act expires by its own
limitation, the effect is the same as though it had been repealed at the
time of its expiration; and it is a recognized rule in this jurisdiction
that the repeal of a law carries with it the deprivation of the courts
of jurisdiction to try, convict and sentence persons charged with
violation of the old law prior to the repeal. (People v. Jacinto, C.A.,
54 O.G. 7587)
Construction of penal laws.

1.

Penal laws are strictly construed against the Government
and liberally in favor of the accused. (U.S. w. Abad Santos,
36 Phil. 243; People v. Yu Hai, 99 Phil. 728) The rule that
penal statutes should be strictly construed against the
State may be invoked only where the law is ambiguous
and there is doubt as to its interpretation. Where the
law is clear and unambiguous, there is no room for the
application of the rule. (People v. Gatchalian, 104 Phil.
664)

2.

In the construction or interpretation of the provisions of
the R.P.C., the Spanish text is controlling, because it was
approved by the Philippine Legislature in its Spanish text.
(People v. Manaba, 58 Phil. 665, 668)
People v. Garcia
(94 Phil. 814,815)

Facts: Accused Garcia was prosecuted for having sold tickets for "llave"
races of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes, in violation of Act 4130, as
amended by C.A. No. 301, which penalizes any person who, without being a
duly authorized agent of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes, sold tickets of
said corporation. The tickets sold by the accused were different from, and not,

the tickets issued by said corporation. The law relied upon does not include
"lave" tickets for Sweepstakes races.
Held: The accused must be acquitted, the act imputed to him not being
punished by Act 4130, as amended.
No person should be brought within the terms of criminal statutes who
is not clearly within them, nor should any act be pronounced criminal which

is not clearly made so by the statute. (U.S. vu. Abad Santos, 36 Phil. 243,246)
27

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
People v. Mangulabnan
(99 Phil. 992, 998)
Facts: During the robbery in a dwelling house, one of the culprits fired
his gun upward in the ceiling, not knowing that there was a person in the
ceiling of the house. The owner of the house who was up in the ceiling was
hit by the slug that passed through it and was killed.
Article 294, paragraph 1, ofthe R.P.C. provides, according to its English
text, that the crime is robbery with homicide "when by reason or on occasion
of the robbery the crime of homicide shall have been committed."
The Spanish text of the same provision reads, as follows: "Cuando con
motivo o con ocasion del robo resultare homicidio."
Held: In view of the Spanish text which must prevail, the crime
committed is robbery with homicide, even if the homicide supervened by
mere accident.
While the English text of Article 294, paragraph 1, of the R.P.C.
seems to convey the meaning that the homicide should be intentionally
committed, the Spanish text means that it is sufficient that the
homicide shall have resulted, even if by mere accident.
Other cases of incorrect translation of the Spanish text into the
English text
1.

"sosteniendo combate" into "engaging in war" in Article
135. (People v. Geronimo, 100 Phil. 90, 95-96)

2.

"sufriendo privacion de libertad" into "imprisonment" in
Article 157. (People v. Abilong, 82 Phil. 172, 174)

3.

"nuevo delito" into "another crime" in the headnote ofArticle
160. (People v. Yabut, 58 Phil. 499, 504)

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
(Act No. 3815, as amended)
AN ACT REVISING THE PENAL CODE
AND OTHER PENAL LAWS
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Legislature assembled and by the authority of
the same.
PRELIMINARY ARTICLE - This law shall be known as "The Revised
Penal Code."

BOOK ONE
General Provisions Regarding the Date of
Enforcement and the Application of the Provisions
of this Code, and Regarding the Offenses, the
Persons Liable and the Penalties
Preliminary Title

4.

"semilla alimenticia" into "cereal" in Article 303. (People
v. Mesias, 65 Phil. 267, 268)

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

5.

"filed" in the third paragraph of Article 344 which is not
found in the Spanish text. (People v. Manaba, 58 Phil. 665,
668)

History of the Revised Penal Code.

- oOo-

28

This Code is called "Revised Penal Code," because the
Committee which was created by Administrative Order No. 94 of the
Department of Justice, dated October 18, 1927, composed of Anacleto
29

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

Diaz, as chairman, and Quintin Paredes, Guillermo Guevara, Alex
Reyes and Mariano H. de Joya, as members, was instructed to revise
the old Penal Code, taking into consideration the existing conditions,
the special penal laws, and the rulings laid down by the Supreme
Court.

Book Two defines felonies with the corresponding penalties,
classified and grouped under 14 different titles (Arts. 114-365).

The Committee did not undertake the codification of all penal
laws in the Philippines. What the Committee did was merely to revise
the old Penal Code and to include in the draft the other penal laws
related to it.
The R.P.C. does not embody the latest progress of criminal
science, as the results of the application of advanced and radical
theories "still remain to be seen."
The old Penal Code, which was revised by the Committee, took
effect in the Philippines on July 14, 1887, and was in force up to
December 31, 1931.
In the case of U.S. • Tamparong, 31 Phil. 321,323, the Supreme
Court traced the history of the old Penal Code, as follows:
"The royal order dated December 17, 1886, directed the
execution of the royal decree of September 4, 1884, wherein it
was ordered that the Penal Code in force in the Peninsula, as
amended in accordance with the recommendations of the code
committee, be published and applied in the Philippine Islands
xx x. (This law) having been published in the Official Gazette
of Manila on March 13 and 14, 1887, became effective four
months thereafter."

Art. 1

Date of effectiveness.
Article 1. Time when Act takes effect. - This Code shall
take effect on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and
thirty-two.

The Revised Penal Code Is based mainly on principles of the
classical school.
This R.P.C. continues, like the old Penal Code, to be based on
the principles of the old or classical school, although some provisions
of eminently positivistic tendencies (those having reference to the
punishment of impossible crimes, juvenile delinquency, etc.) were
incorporated in the present Code.
Two theories In Criminal Law.
There are two important theories in criminal law: (1) the classical
theory; and (2) the positivist theory.
Characteristics of the classical theory.
1.

The R.P.C., as enacted by the Philippine Legislature, was
approved on December 8, 1930. It took effect on January 1, 1932.
Felonies and misdemeanors, committed prior to January 1, 1932,
were punished in accordance with the Code or Acts in force at the
time of their commission, as directed by Article 366 of the R.P.C.

The basis of criminal liability is human free will and the
purpose of the penalty is retribution.

2.

That man is essentially a moral creature with an
absolutely free will to choose between good and evil,
thereby placing more stress upon the effect or result of the
felonious act than upon the man, the criminal himself.

The Revised Penal Code consists of two books.

3.

It has endeavored to establish a mechanical and direct
proportion between crime and penalty.

4.

There is a scant regard to the human element. (Basic
Principles, Rationale, p. 2, by the Code Commission on
Code of Crimes)

The R.P.C. consists of two books, namely: (1) Book One; and (2)
Book Two.
Book One consists of two parts: (a) basic principles affecting
criminal liability (Arts. 1-20); and (b) the provisions on penalties
including criminal and civil liability (Arts. 21-113).
30

31

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 2

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

Criminal Law

Characteristics of the positivist theory.
1.

That man is subdued occasionally by a strange and morbid
phenomenon which constrains him to do wrong, in spite of
or contrary to his volition.

2.

That crime is essentially a social and natural phenomenon,
and as such, it cannot be treated and checked by the
application of abstract principles oflaw and jurisprudence
nor by the imposition ofa punishment, fixed and determined
a priori; but rather through the enforcement of individual
measures in each particular case after a thorough, personal
and individual investigation conducted by a competent
body of psychiatrists and social scientists. (Basic Principles,
Rationale, pp. 2 and 3, by the Code Commission on Code
of Crimes)

Art. 2. Application of itsprovisions. Except as provided
in the treaties and laws of preferential application, the
provisions of this Code shall be enforced not only within the
Philippine Archipelago, including its atmosphere, its interior
waters and maritime zone, but also outside of its jurisdiction,
against those who:
1.

Should commit an offense while on a Philippine ship
or airship;

2.

Should forge or counterfeit any coin or currency
note of the Philippine Islands or obligations
and securities issued by the Government of the
Philippine Islands;

5.

Art. 2

Should commit any of the crimes against national
security and the law of nations, defined in Title One
of Book Two of this Code.

Scope of the application of the provisions of the Revised Penal
Code.
The sovereignty of the Philippines extends, beyond its land
territory and internal waters and its archipelagic waters, to an
adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea. This sovereignty
extends to the air space over the territorial sea as well as to its bed
and subsoil. (Art. 2, Sec. 1, United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea) The breadth of the territorial sea is 12 nautical miles from
the archipelagic baselines.
The provisions of the R.P.C. shall be enforced not only within the
Philippine Archipelago, but also outside of its jurisdiction in certain
cases.
The five paragraphs of Article 2 treat of the application of the
R.P.C. to acts committed in the air, at sea, and even in a foreign
country when such acts affect the political or economic life of the
nation.
In what cases are the provisions of the Revised Penal Code
applicable even if the felony is committed outside of the
Philippines?
They are applicable in the following cases:
1.

When the offender should commit an offense while on a
Philippine ship or airship.

3.

Should be liable for acts connected with the introduction into these Islands of the obligations and
securities mentioned in the preceding number;

A Philippine vessel, although beyond 12 nautical miles
from the archipelagic baseline, is considered part of the national
territory.

4.

While being public officers or employees, should
commit an offense in the exercise of their functions;
or

Thus, any person who committed a crime on board a
Philippine ship or airship while the same is outside of the
Philippine territory can be tried before our civil courts for
violation of the Penal Code.

32

33

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 2

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

Criminal Law

But when the Philippine vessel or aircraft is in the territory
of a foreign country, the crime committed on said vessel or
aircraft is subject to the laws of that foreign country.
A Philippine vessel or aircraft must be understood as that
which is registered in the Philippine Bureau of Customs.
It is the registration of the vessel or aircraft. in accordance
with the laws of the Philippines, not the citizenship of its owner,
which makes it a Philippine ship or airship. A vessel or aircraft
which is unregistered or unlicensed does not come within the
purview of paragraph No. 1 of Article 2.
Thus, if a crime is committed 15 nautical miles from
the archipelagic baseline of the Philippines on board a vessel
belonging to a Filipino, but the same is not registered or
licensed in accordance with the laws of the Philippines,
paragraph No. 1 of Article 2 is not applicable.
The Philippine court has no jurisdiction over the crime of
theft committed on the high seas on board a vessel not registered
or licensed in the Philippines. (U.S. v. Fowler, 1 Phil. 614)
2.

When the offender should forge or counterfeit any coin or
currency note ofthe Philippines or obligations and securities
issued by the Government.

Thus, any person who makes false or counterfeit coins
(Art. 163) or forges treasury or bank notes or other obligations
and securities (Art. 166)in a foreign country may be prosecuted
before our courts for violation of Art. 163 or Art. 166 of the
R.P.C.
3.

When the offender should be liable for acts connected with
the introduction into the Philippines ofthe "obligations and
securities" mentioned in the "preceding number."

The reason for this provision is that the introduction
of forged or counterfeited obligations and securities into the
Philippines is as dangerous as the forging or counterfeiting of
the same, to the economical interest of the country.
4.

When the offender, while being a public officer or employee,
should commit an offense in the exercise of his functions.

The crimes that may be committed in the exercise of
public functions are direct bribery (Art. 210), indirect bribery
34

Art. 2

(Art. 211), frauds against the public treasury (Art. 213),
possession of prohibited interest (Art. 216), malversation of
public funds or property (Art. 217), failure of accountable
officer to render accounts (Art. 218), illegal use of public funds
or property (A.rt. 220), failure to make delivery of public funds
or property (A.rt. 221), and falsification by a public officer or
employee committed with abuse of his official position. (Art.
171)
When any of these felonies is committed abroad by any
of our public officers or employees while in the exercise of his
functions, he can be prosecuted here.
5.

When the offender should commit any ofthe crimes against
the national security and the law of nations.

The crimes against the national security and the law of
nations are treason (Art. 114), conspiracy and proposal to commit
treason (Art. 115), espionage (Art. 117), inciting to war and
giving motives for reprisals (Art. 118), violation of neutrality
(A.rt. 119), correspondence with hostile country (Art. 120), flight
to enemy's country (Art. 121), and piracy and mutiny on the high
seas. (Art. 122)
Crimes punishable in the Philippines under Article 2 are cognizable
by the Regional Trial Court in which the charge is filed.

The crimes committed outside of the Philippines but punishable
therein under Article 2 of the R.P.C. shall be cognizable by the
Regional Trial Court in which the charge is first filed. (Rule 110,
Sec. 15[dl, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRA SES IN ARTICLE 2.

1.

"Except as provided in the treaties and laws ofpreferential
application."
This phrase means that while the general rule is that
the provisions of the R.P.C. shall be enforced against any
person who violates any of its provisions while living or
sojourning in the Philippines, the exceptions to that rule
may be provided by the treaties and laws of preferential
applications, like the RP-U.S. Visiting Forces Accord, the
Military Bases Agreement between the Republic of the
35

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 2

Philippines and the United States of America, and the
provisions of R.A. No. 75.
2.

"its atmosphere."
The sovereignty of the subjacent State, and therefore
its penal laws extend to all the air space which covers its
territory, subject to the right of way or easement in favor
of foreign aircrafts.

3.

"interior waters."
The phrase "interior waters" includes creeks, rivers,
lakes and bays, gulfs, straits, coves, inlets and roadsteads.
Under Section 1, Article 8 of UNCLOS, waters on the
landward side of the baseline of the territorial sea form
part of the internal waters.

4.

"maritime zone."

"Maritime zones" includes the territorial waters [12
nautical miles from the baselines], contiguous zone [24
nautical miles from the baselines], exclusive economic zone
[200 nautical miles from the baselines], and continental
shelves. (Magallona v. Ermita, G.R. No. 187167, August
16, 2011)

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

Art. 2

courts of the Philippines when the forbidden conditions existed
during the time the ship was within territorial waters, regardless of
the fact that the same conditions existed when the ship sailed from
the foreign port and while it was on the high seas. (U.S. v. Bull, 15
Phil. 7)
Rules as to jurisdiction over crimes committed aboard foreign
merchant vessels.
There are two rules as to jurisdiction over crimes committed
aboard merchant vessels while in the territorial waters of another
country.
French Rule. - Such crimes are not triable in the courts of that
country, unless their commission affects the peace and security of the
territory or the safety of the state is endangered.
English Rule. - Such crimes are triable in that country, unless
they merely affect things within the vessel or they refer to the internal
management thereof.
Under the UNCLOS, the criminal jurisdiction of the coastal
State should not be exercised on board a foreign ship passing through
the territorial sea to arrest any person or to conduct any investigation
in connection with any crime committed on board the ship during its
passage, except:

Crimes committed on board a foreign merchant ship or airship.

(a) if the consequences of the crime extend to the coastal State;

Just as our merchant ship is an extension of our territory,
foreign merchant ship is considered an extension of the territory of
the country to which it belongs. For this reason, an offense committed
on the high seas on board a foreign merchant vessel is not triable by
our courts. (U.S. • Fowler, 1 Phil. 614)

(b) if the crime is ofa kind to disturb the peace of the country
or the good order of the territorial sea;

Continuing offense on board a foreign vessel.

(d) if such measures are necessary for the suppression of illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.

But a continuing crime committed on board a Norwegian
merchant vessel sailing from Formosa to the Philippines, by failing
to provide stalls for animals in transit in violation of Act No. 55, is
triable in the Philippines.

(cl

if the assistance of the local authorities has been requested
by the master of the ship or by a diplomatic agent or
consular officer of the flag State; or

However, the coastal State has the right to take any steps
authorized by its laws for the purpose of an arrest or investigation on
board a foreign ship passing through the territorial sea after leaving
internal waters.

The offense of failing to provide suitable means for securing
animals while transporting them on a (foreign) ship from a foreign
port to a port of the Philippines is within the jurisdiction of the

The coastal State may not take any steps on board a foreign ship
passing through the territorial sea to arrest any person or to conduct

36

37

Art. 2

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

any investigation in connection with any crime committed before the
ship entered the territorial sea, if the ship, proceeding from a foreign
port, is only passing through the territorial sea without entering
internal waters. (Art. 27, Sec. 1)
Do the Philippine courts have jurisdiction over the crime of homicide
committed on board a foreign merchant vessel by a member of the
crew against another?

Disorders which disturb only the peace of the ship or those on
board are to be dealt with exclusively by the sovereignty of the home of
the ship, but those which disturb the public peace may be suppressed,
and, if need be, the offenders punished by the proper authorities of
the local jurisdiction.
It may not be easy at all times to determine to which of the
two jurisdictions a particular act of disorder belongs. Much will
undoubtedly depend on the attending circumstances of the particular
case, but all must concede that felonious homicide is a subject for the
local jurisdiction, and that if the proper authorities are proceeding
with the case in the regular way, the consul has no right to interfere
to prevent it. (Mali and Wildenhus v. Keeper of the Common Jail,
120 U.S. 1, cited in People v. Wong Cheng, 46 Phil. 729, 731-732)
Crimes not involving a breach of public order committed on board
a foreign merchant vessel in transit not triable by our courts.

Mere possession of opium aboard a foreign merchant vessel in
transit is not triable in Philippine courts, because that fact alone
does not constitute a breach of public order. The reason for this
ruling is that mere possession of opium on such a ship, without
being used in our territory, does not bring about in this country
those disastrous effects that our law contemplates avoiding. But
said courts acquire jurisdiction when the tins of opium are landed
from the vessel on Philippine soil. Landing or using opium is an
open violation of the laws of the Philippines. (U.S. v. Look Chaw,
18 Phil. 573, 577-578)
When the foreign merchant vessel is not in transit because the
Philippines is its terminal port, the person in possession ofopium on
board that vessel is liable, because he may be held guilty of illegal
importation of opium. (U.S. v. Ah Sing, 36 Phil. 978, 981-982)
38

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION
OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE

Art. 2

Smoking opium constitutes a breach of public order.

Smoking opium aboard an English vessel while anchored two
and one-half miles in Manila Bay constitutes a breach of public order,
because the primary object of the law in punishing the use of opium
is to protect the inhabitants of this country against the disastrous
effects entailed by the use of such drug. And to smoke opium within
our territorial limits, even though aboard a foreign merchant ship,
is certainly a breach of the public order here established, because it
causes such drug to produce its pernicious effects within our territory.
Philippine courts have jurisdiction over crimes constituting a breach
of public order aboard merchant vessels anchored in Philippine
jurisdictional waters. (People v. Wong Cheng, 46 Phil. 729, 733)
Philippine courts have no Jurisdiction over offenses committed on
board foreign warships in territorial waters.

In case vessels are in the ports or territorial waters of a foreign
country, a distinction must be made between merchant ships and
warships; the former are more or less subjected to the territorial
laws. (See U.S. v. Bull, 15 Phil. 7; U.S. v. Look Chaw, 18 Phil. 573;
and People v. Wong Cheng, 46 Phil. 729)
Warships are always reputed to be the territory of the country
to which they belong and cannot be subjected to the laws of another
state. A United States Army transport is considered a warship. (U.S.
v. Fowler, 1 Phil. 614)
Extra-territorial application of Republic Act No. 9372.

Republic Act No. 9372, otherwise known as the "Human Security
Act of2007," which was passed into law on March 6, 2007, has extraterritorial application.
Section 58 ofR.A. No. 9372 provides that subject to the provision
of an existing treaty of which the Philippines is a signatory and to
any contrary provision of any law of preferential application, the
provisions of the Act shall apply:
(1)

to individual persons who commit any of the crimes
defined and punished in the Act within the terrestrial
domain, interior waters, maritime zone, and airspace of
the Philippines;
39

,....

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 2

(2)

to individual persons who, although physically outside
the territorial limits of the Philippines, commit, conspire
or plot any of the crimes defined and punished in the Act
inside the territorial limits of the Philippines;

(3)

to individual persons who, although physically outside the
territorial limits of the Philippines, commit any of the said
crimes on board Philippine ship or airship;

(4)

(5)

(6)

Title One
FELONIES AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH
AFFECT CRIMINAL LIABILITY

to individual persons who commit any of said crimes within
any embassy, consulate or diplomatic premises belonging
to or occupied by the Philippine government in an official
capacity;
to individual persons who, although physically outside the
territorial limits of the Philippines, commit said crimes
against Philippine citizens or persons of Philippine descent,
where their citizenship or ethnicity was a factor in the
commission of the crime; and
to individual persons who, although physically outside the
territorial limits of the Philippines, commit said crimes
directly against the Philippine government.

Chapter One
FELONIES
Art. 3. Definition. - Acts and omissions punishable by
law are felonies (delitos).
Felonies are committed not only by means of deceit (dolo)
but also by means of fault (culpa).
There is deceit when the act is performed with deliberate
intent; and there is fault when the wrongful act results from
imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight, or lack of skill.

Felonies, defined.
Felonies are acts and omissions punishable by the R.P.C.
Elements of felonies.
The elements of felonies in general are:
1.

That there must be an act or omission.

2.

That the act or omission must be punishable by the
R.P.C.

3.

That the act is performed or the omission incurred by means
ofdolo or culpa. (People u. Gonzales, G.R. No. 80762, March
19, 1990, 183 SCRA 309, 324)

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 3

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES IN ARTICLE 3.

2.

An officer entrusted with collection oftaxes who voluntarily
fails to issue a receipt as provided by law, is guilty of illegal
exaction. (Art. 213, par. 2[b])

3.

Every person owing allegiance to the Philippines, without
being a foreigner, and having knowledge of any conspiracy
against the government, who does not disclose and make
known the same to the proper authority, is liable for
misprision of treason. (Art. 116)

Meaning of the word "act."
By act must be understood any bodily movement tending to
produce some effect in the external world, it being unnecessary that
the same be actually produced, as the possibility of its production is
sufficient. (See People v. Gonzales, supra)
But the act must be one which is defined by the R.P.C. as
constituting a felony; or, at least, an overt act of that felony, that is,
an external act which has direct connection with the felony intended
to be committed. (See Art. 6)
Example of felony by performing an act.
A took the watch ofB with intent to gain and without the consent
of the latter. The act of taking the watch of B, with intent to gain,
constitutes the crime of theft.
Only external act Is punished.
The act must be external, because internal acts are beyond the
sphere of penal law. Hence, a criminal thought or a mere intention,
no matter how immoral or improper it may be, will never constitute
a felony.
Thus, even if A entertains the idea of killing B, as long as he
does not commence the commission of the crime directly by overt act,
A is not criminally liable.
Meaning of the word "omission."
By omission is meant inaction, the failure to perform a positive
duty which one is bound to do. There must be a law requiring the
doing or performance of an act.
Examples of felony by omission.
1.

Anyone who fails to render assistance to any person whom
he finds in an uninhabited place wounded or in danger of
dying, is liable for abandonment of persons in danger. (Art.
275, par. 1)
42

Art. 3

Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

It will be noted that in felonies by omission, there is a law
requiring a certain act to be performed and the person required to
do the act fails to perform it.
The omission must be punishable by law.
Because there is no law that punishes a person who does
not report to the authorities the commission of a crime which he
witnessed, the omission to do so is not a felony.
The omission to indicate what kind of taxes the Tax Numeric
Codes (TNCs) stand for was not a criminal act. Employees of the
BIR were expected to know what the TN Cs stand for. If they do not,
there is a "Handbook of Tax Numeric Code of Revenue Sources"
which they can consult. With this, petitioner should not be required
to describe in words the kinds of tax for which each TNC used stands
for. Precisely, the purpose of introducing the use of tax numeric
codes in the Bureau was to do away with these descriptive words, in
order to expedite and facilitate communications among the different
divisions therein. Applicable here is the familiar maxim in criminal
law: Nullum crimen nulla poena sine lege. There is no crime where
there is no law punishing it. (Evangelista v. People and the Honorable
Sandiganbayan, G.R. Nos. 108135-36, August 14, 2000)
People v. Silvestre and Atienza
(56 Phil. 353)
Facts: Martin Atienza was convicted as principal by direct participation
and Romana Silvestre as accomplice of the crime of arson by the Court of
First Instance.
On the night of November 25, 1930, while Nicolas de la Cruz and
his wife, Antonia de la Cruz, were gathered together with the appellants
herein after supper, Martin Atienza told said couple to take their furniture
43

Art. 3

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

out of the house because he was going to set fire to it. Upon being asked by
Nicolas and Antonia why he wanted to set fire to the house, he answered
that it was the only way he could be revenged upon the people ofMasocol,
who, he said, had instigated the charge of adultery against him and his
co-defendant, Romana Silvestre. As Martin Atienza was at that time armed
with a pistol, no one dared say anything to him, not even Romana Silvestre,
who was about a meter away from her co-defendant. Alarmed at what
Martin Atienza had said, the couple left the house at once to communicate
with the barrio lieutenant, Buenaventura Ania, as to what they had just
heard Martin Atienza say; but they had hardly gone a hundred arms'
length when they heard cries of"Fire! Fire!" Turning back they saw their
home in flames. The fire destroyed about 48 houses.
Romana listened to her co-defendant's threat without raising a protest,
and did not give the alarm when the latter set fire to the house.
Held: Mere passive presence at the scene ofanother's crime, mere silence
and failure to give the alarm, without evidence of agreement or conspiracy,
is not punishable.
Romana Silvestre was acquitted.
"Punishable by law."
THis is the other element of a felony. This is based upon the
maxim, "nullum crimen, nulla poena sine lege," that is, there is no
crime where there is no law punishing it.
The phrase "punished by law" should be understood to mean
"punished by the Revised Penal Code" and not by a special law. That
is to say, the term "felony" means acts and omissions punished in the
R.P.C., to distinguish it from the words "crime" and "offense" which
are applied to infractions of the law punished by special statutes.
Classification of felonies according to the means by which they
are committed.
Article 3 classifies felonies, according to the means by which
they are committed: (1) intentional felonies; and (2) culpable
felonies.
Thus, the second paragraph of Article 3 states that felonies are
committed not only by means of deceit (dolo) but also by means of
fault (culpa).

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability
Intentional felonles and culpable felonies distinguished.

Art. 3

In intentional felonies, the act or omission of the offender is
malicious. In the language of Article 3, the act is performed with
deliberate intent (with malice). The offender, in performing the act
or in incurring the omission, has the intention to cause an injury to
another. In culpable felonies, the act or omission of the offender is
not malicious. The injury caused by the offender to another person is
"unintentional, it being simply the incident of another act performed
without malice." (People v. Sara, 55 Phil. 939) As stated in Article 3,
the wrongful act results from imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight
or lack of skill.
Felonies committed by means of dolo or with malice.
The word "deceit" in the second paragraph ofArticle 3 is not the
proper translation of the word "dolo." Dolus is equivalent to malice,
which is the intent to do an injury to another. (I Wharton's Criminal
Law 180)
When the offender, in performing an act or in incurring an
omission, has the intention to do an injury to the person, property, or
right of another, such offender acts with malice. If the act or omission
is punished by the R.P.C., he is liable for intentional felony.
Most of the felonies defined and penalized in Book II of the R.P.C.
are committed by means of dolo or with malice.
Felonies committed by means of fault or culpa.
Between an act performed voluntarily and intentionally, and
another committed unconsciously and quite unintentionally, there
exists another, performed without malice, but at the same time
punishable, though in a lesser degree and with an equal result, an
intermediate act which the Penal Code qualifies as imprudence or
negligence.
There are few felonies committed by means of fault or culpa.
Article 217 punishes malversation through negligence. Article 224
punishes evasion through negligence. Article 365 punishes acts by
imprudence or negligence, which, had they been intentional, would
constitute grave, less grave or light felonies.
45

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

There are crimes which cannot be committed through imprudence or negligence, such as, murder, treason, robbery, and malicious
mischief.

does not mean that an involuntary act may constitute a felony. As
in the old Penal Code, the act or omission must be voluntary and
punishable by law to constitute a felony. Article 3 classifies felonies
into (1) intentional felonies and (2) culpable felonies. An intentional
felony is committed when the act is performed with deliberate intent,
which must necessarily be voluntary.

Art. 3

A person who caused an injury, without intention to cause an evil,
may be held liable for culpable felony.
The defendant, who was not a medical practitioner, tied a girl,
wrapped her feet with rags saturated with petroleum and thereafter
set them on fire, causing injuries. His defense was that he undertook
to render medical assistance in good faith and to the best of his ability
to cure her of ulcer. It was held that while there was no intention to
cause an evil but to provide a remedy, the defendant was liable for
physical injuries through imprudence. (U.S. w. Diwino, 12 Phil. 175,
190)
Imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight or lack of skill.
Imprudence indicates a deficiency ofaction. Negligence indicates
a deficiency of perception. If a person fails to take the necessary
precaution to avoid injury to person or damage to property, there is
imprudence. If a person fails to pay proper attention and to use due
diligence in foreseeing the injury or damage impending to be caused,
there is negligence. Negligence usually involves lack of foresight.
Imprudence usually involves Jack of skill.
Reason for punishing acts of negligence (culpa).

Art. 3

On the other hand, in culpable felony, which is committed when
the wrongful act results from imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight
or lack of skill, the act is also voluntary.
The only difference between intentional felonies and culpable
felonies is that, in the first, the offender acts with malice; whereas,
in the second, the offender acts without malice.
The definition of reckless imprudence in Article 365 says
"reckless imprudence consists in voluntarily, but without malice,
doing or failing to do an act from which material damage results."
Thus, a hunter who seemed to have seen with his lantern
something like the eyes of a deer about 50 meters from him and then
shot it, but much to his surprise, on approaching what he thought
was a deer, it proved to be his companion, performed a voluntary act
in discharging his gun, although the resulting homicide is without
malice, because he did not have the intent to kill the deceased. But the
hunter, knowing that he had two companions, should have exercised
all the necessary diligence to avoid every undesirable accident, such
as the one that unfortunately occurred on the person of one of his
companions. The hunter was guilty of the crime of homicide through
reckless imprudence. (People v. Ramirez, 48 Phil. 206)

A man must use common sense, and exercise due reflection in all
his acts; it is his duty to be cautious, careful and prudent, if not from
instinct, then through fear of incurring punishment. He is responsible
for such results as anyone might foresee and for his acts which no one
would have performed except through culpable abandon. Otherwise,
his own person, rights and property, and those of his fellow beings,
would ever be exposed to all manner of danger and injury. (U.S. v.
Maleza, 14 Phil. 468, 470)

A criminal act is presumed to be voluntary. Fact prevails over
assumption, and in the absence of indubitable explanation, the act
must be declared voluntary and punishable. (People v. Macalisang,
22 SCRA 699)

In felonies committed by means of dolo or with malice and In
felonies committed by means of fault or culpa, the acts or omissions
are voluntary.

(32 Phil. 458 (1915))

The adjective voluntary used in the old Penal Code is suppressed
in the definition of felonies in Article 3 of the R.P.C. This omission
46

Acts executed negligently are voluntary.
U.S. v. Reodique
Facts: Reodique picked up an airgun and asked the owner if it was
loaded. The owner answered in the negative. Afte r receiving instructions as

to the handling and loading of the airgun, Reodique discharged it. However,
47

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 3

TITLE ONE

Art. 3

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
the gun was loaded and, at the time it was discharged, was pointed directly
at the victim, causing a wound in the left breast which later caused her death.
Held: Reodique was convicted of the crime of causing death by gross
or reckless imprudence. He deliberately pulled the trigger of the airgun,
thereby voluntarily and intentionally causing its discharge, with the result
that injury was produced. His act being voluntary and performed without
investigation or real effort to prevent injury, he cannot now be heard to say

(3)
1.

that its consequences were different from those which he anticipated.

He must have INTENT while doing the act or omitting to
do the act.

Freedom. When a person acts without freedom, he is no longer
a human being but a tool; his liability is as much as that of the
knife that wounds, or of the torch that sets fire, or of the key that
opens a door, or of the ladder that is placed against the wall of
a house in committing robbery.

When there is compulsion or prevention by force or intimidation, there
is no voluntariness in the act.

Thus, a person who acts under the compulsion of an irresistible
force is exempt from criminal liability. (Art. 12, par. 5)

Three reasons why the act or omission In felonies must be voluntary.

Likewise, a person who acts under the impulse of an
uncontrollable fear of an equal or greater injury is exempt from
criminal liability. (Art. 12, par. 6)

1.

The R.P.C. continues to be based on the Classical Theory,
according to which the basis of criminal liability is human
free will.

2.

Acts or omissions punished by law are always deemed
voluntary, since man is a rational being. One must prove
that his case falls under Article 12 to show that his act or
omission is not voluntary.

3.

In felonies by dolo, the act is performed with deliberate
intent which must necessarily be voluntary; and in felonies
by culpa, the imprudence consists in voluntarily, but
without malice, doing or failing to do an act from which
material injury results.

Therefore, in felonies committed by means of dolo, as well as in
those committed by means ofculpa, the act performed or the omission
incurred by the offender is voluntary, but the intent or malice in
intentional felonies is replaced by imprudence, negligence, lack of
foresight or lack of skill in culpable felonies.
Requisites of dolo or malice.
In order that an act or omission may be considered as having
been performed or incurred with deliberate intent, the following
requisites must concur:
1)

He must have FREEDOM while doing an act or omitting
to do an act;

(2)

He must have INTELLIGENCE while doing the act or
omitting to do the act;
48

2.

Intelligence. Without this power, necessary to determine the
morality of human acts, no crime can exist. Thus, the imbecile
or the insane, and the infant under nine years of age as, well
as the minor over nine but less than 15 years old and acting
without discernment, have no criminal liability, because they
act without intelligence. (Art. 12, pars. 1, 2, and 3)

3.

Intent. Intent to commit the act with malice, being purely a
mental process, is presumed and the presumption arises from
the proof of the commission of an unlawful act.

All the three requisites of voluntariness in intentional felony
must be present, because "a voluntary act is a free, intelligent, and
intentional act." (U.S. v. Ah Chong, 15 Phil. 488,495)
Intent presupposes the exercise of freedom and the use of
intelligence.
One who acts without freedom necessarily has no intent to do
an injury to another. One who acts without intelligence has no such
intent.
But a person who acts with freedom and with intelligence may
not have the intent to do an injury to another. Thus, a person who
caused an injury by mere accident had freedom and intelligence, but
since he had no fault or intention of causing it, he is not criminally
liable. (Art. 12, par. 4, R.P.C.)
49

Art. 3

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The existence of intent is shown by the overt acts of a person.
Where the defendant carried away articles belonging to another
and concealed them from the owner and from the police authorities,
denying having them in his possession, in the absence ofa satisfactory
explanation, it may be inferred that he acted with intent of gain.
Intent is a mental state, the existence of which is shown by the overt
acts of a person. (Soriano v. People, 88 Phil. 368, 374)
Intent to kill is difficult to prove, it being a mental act. But it can
be deduced from the external acts performed by a person. When the
acts naturally produce a definite result, courts are slow in concluding
that some other result was intended. (U.S. v. Mendoza, 38 Phil. 691693; People v. Mabug-at, 51 Phil. 967, cited in People v. Lao, 11 CA.
Rep. 829)
Criminal intent is presumed from the commission of an unlawful
act.
People v. Sia Teb Ban
/54 Phil. 52, 53!
Facts: The accused took a watch without the owner's consent. He was
prosecuted for theft. The accused alleged as a defense that the prosecution
failed to prove the intent to gain on his part, an element of the crime of
theft.
Held: From the felonious act (taking another's property) ofthe accused,
freely and deliberately executed, the moral and legal presumption ofa criminal
and injurious intent arises conclusively and indisputably, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary.
Criminal intent and the will to commit a crime are always presumed to
exist on the part of the person who executes an act which the law punishes,
unless the contrary shall appear. (U.S. v. Apostol, 14 Phil. 92, 93)
But the presumption of criminal intent does not arise from the proof
of the commission of an act which is not unlawful.
U.S. v. Catolico
(18 Phil. 504, 508)
Facts: The accused was a justice of the peace. He rendered decisions in
certain cases, each one for damages resulting from a breach ofcontract, from
which the defendants appealed. As required by law, the defendants deposited
P16.00 and a bond ofP50.00 for each case. It appeared that the sureties on the
50

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 3

said bonds were insolvent and that the defendants did not present new bonds
within the time fixed by the accused as justice of the peace. Upon petition
of the plaintiffs, the accused dismissed the appeals and ordered said sums
attached and delivered to the plaintiffs in satisfaction of the judgment. The
accused was prosecuted for malversation (a felony punishable now under
Art. 217).
Held: The act of the accused, in permitting the sums deposited with
him to be attached in satisfaction of the judgment rendered by him, was
not unlawful. Everything he did was done in good faith under the belief
that he was acting judiciously and correctly. The act of a person does not
make him a criminal, unless his mind be criminal.
The maxim is: actus non facit reum, nisi mens sit rea a crime is not
committed if the mind ofthe person performing to act complained be innocent.
It is true that a presumption of criminal intent may arise from proof of the
commission of a criminal act; and the general rule is that if it is proved that
the accused committed the criminal act charged, it will be presumed that the
act was done with criminal intention and that it is for the accused to rebut
this presumption. But it must be borne in mind that the act from which such
presumption springs must be a criminal act. In the case at bar, the act was
not criminal.
Where the facts proven are accompanied by other facts which show that
the act complained of was not unlawful, the presumption of criminal intent
does not arise.
There is no felony by dolo if there is no intent.
The presumption of criminal intent from the commission of an
unlawful act may be rebutted by proof of lack of such intent.
Thus, a minor who married without parental consent, in
violation of Article 475 of the old Penal Code which punished "any
minor who shall contract marriage without the consent of his or
her parents," was not liable criminally, because she proved that
she acted without malice. The defendant minor testified that she
believed that she was born in 1879; that so her parents gave her to
understand ever since her tenderest age; and that she did not ask
them concerning her age, because they had already given her to so
understand since her childhood. The presumption of malice was
rebutted by her testimony. One cannot be convicted under Article
475 (similar to Art. 350 of the R.P.C.) when by reason ofa mistake
offact there does not exist the intention to commit the crime. (U.S.
v. Penalosa, 1 Phil. 109)
51

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 3

Also, a person who suddenly got up in his sleep, left the room with
a bolo in his hand, and upon meeting his wife who tried to stop him,
wounded her in the abdomen and attacked others, is not criminally
liable because his acts were not voluntary, for having acted in a
dream; he had no criminal intent. (People v. Taneo, 58 Phil. 255)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 3

2.

That the intention of the accused in performing the act
should be lawful; and

3.

That the mistake must be without fault or carelessness on
the part of the accused.

People v. Beronilla
(96 Phil. 566)

Lack of intent to commit a crime may be inferred from the facts of
the case.

Facts: The accused was a military major of La Paz, Abra, in 1944. He
received an order from the regional commander of an infantry, Philippine
Army, operating as a guerrilla unit, to prosecute Arsenio Borjal for treason
aod to appoint a jury of 12 bolomen. The jury found Borja! guilty of the charge
and the recommendation of the jury was approved by the Headquarters of
the guerrilla unit. For the execution of Borjal, the accused was prosecuted
for murder.

The accused was charged with theft for cutting and carrying
away 33 coconut trees from the plantation ofMenandro. Atanacio, who
owned the property adjacent to the plantation ofMenandro, testified
that he authorized the accused to cut down coconut trees within the
boundary of his property. The barangay captain likewise testified that
accused sought his permission to cut down coconut trees on the land
of Atanacio. The Supreme Court held that assuming that the trees
were within Menandro's land, no malice or criminal intent could be
attributed to the accused as he went to the plantation to cut down trees
belonging to Atanacio upon the latter's instructions. If, indeed, in the
course of executing Atanacio's instructions, the accused encroached on
the land of Menandro, because he missed the undetectable boundary
between the two lots, and cut down some of Menandro's trees, such
act merely constituted mistake or judgmental error. The criminal
mind is indeed wanting in the situation where accused even sought
prior permission from the barangay captain to cut down the coconut
trees which was done openly and during broad daylight, effectively
negating malice and criminal intent on their part. It defies reason
that the accused would still approach the barangay captain if the real
intention was to steal the coconut trees of Menandro. The accused
was acquitted. (Magsumbol v. People, G.R. No. 207175, November 26,
2014)

The accused acted upon orders of superior officers which turned out to
be illegal. As a military subordinate, he could not question the orders of his
superior officers. He obeyed the orders in good faith, without being aware of
their illegality, without any fault or negligence on his part.
Held: Criminal intent was not established. To constitute a crime, the
act must, except in certain crimes made such by statute, be accompanied by a
criminal intent, or by such negligence or indifference to duty or to consequences,
as in law,is equivalent to criminal intent. (U.S. v. Catolico, 18 Phil. 507) The
accused was acquitted.
Mistake of fact.
While ignorance of the law excuses no one from compliance
therewith (ignorantia legis non excusat), ignorance or mistake of fact
relieves the accused from criminal liability (ignorantia facti excusat).
Mistake of fact is a misapprehension of fact on the part of the
person who caused injury to another. He is not, however, criminally
liable, because he did not act with criminal intent.
An honest mistake of fact destroys the presumption of criminal
intent which arises upon the commission of a felonious act. (People
v. Caching, et al., C.A., 52 0.G. 293, citing People v. Oanis, 74 Phil.
257)
Requisites of mistake of fact as a defense:
1.

That the act done would have been lawful had the facts
been as the accused believed them to be;
62

In mistake of fact, the act done would have been lawful, had the
facts been as the accused believed them to be.
In other words, the act done would not constitute a felony had
the facts been as the accused believed them to be.
Thus, in the cases of U.S. v. Penalosa and People v. Beronilla,
supra, the accused in the first case believed that she was already of
age when she contracted marriage and the accused in the second case
believed that the orders of his superior officer were legal. Had they
been the real facts, there would not be any felony committed. But
53

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

even if they were not the real facts, since the accused acted in good
faith, they acted without intent. Hence, their acts were involuntary.

suspected house, they went into a room and on seeing a man sleeping with
his back towards the door, simultaneously fired at him with their revolvers,
without first making any reasonable inquiry as to his identity. 'The victim
turned out to be an innocent man, Tecson, and not the wanted criminal.

Art. 3

In mistake of fact, the act done by the accused would have
constituted (1) a justifying circumstance under Article 11, (2) an
absolutory cause, such as that contemplated in Article 247, par. 2,
or (3) an involuntary act.
U.S. v. Ah Chong
(I 5 Phil. 488)
Facts: Ah Chong was a cook in Ft. McKinley. He was afraid of bad
elements. One evening, before going to bed, he locked himself in his room by
placing a chair against the door. After having gone to bed, he was awakened
by someone trying to open the door. He called out twice, "Who is there?"
but received no answer. Fearing that the intruder was a robber, he leaped
from his bed and called out again, "Ifyou enter the room I will kill you." But
at that precise moment, he was struck by the chair that had been placed
against the door, and believing that he was being attacked he seized a kitchen
knife and struck and fatally wounded the intruder who turned out to be his
roommate.
Held: Ah Chong must be acquitted because of mistake of fact.
Had the facts been as Ah Chong believed them to be, he would
have been justified in killing the intruder under Article 11, paragraph
1, of the R.P.C., which requires, to justify the act, that there be
(I)
unlawful aggression on the part of the person killed, (2)
reasonable necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it, and (3)
lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the person defending himself. If
the intruder was really a robber, forcing his way into the room of Ah Chong,
there would have been unlawful aggression on the part of the intruder. There
would have been a necessity on the part of Ah Chong to defend himself and/
or his home. The knife would have been a reasonable means to prevent or
repel such aggression. And Ah Chong gave no provocation at all. Under
Article 11 of the R.P.C., there is nothing unlawful in the intention as well
as in the act of the person making the defense.

People v. Oanis
(74 Phil. 257)
Facts: Chief of Police Oanis and his co-accused Corporal Galanta were
under instructions to arrest one Balagtas, a notorious criminal and escaped
convict, and if overpowered, to get him dead or alive. Proceeding to the
64

Art. 3

Held: Both accused arc guilty of murder.
Even if it were true that the victim was the notorious criminal,
the accused would not be justified in killing him while the latter was
sleeping.
In apprehending even the most notorious criminal, the law does
not permit the captor to kill him. It is only when the fugitive from
justice is determined to fight the officers of the law who are trying to
capture him that killing him would be justified.
The mistake must be without fault or carelessness on the part of
the accused.
Ah Chong case and Oanis case distinguished.
In the Ah Chong case, there is an innocent mistake of fact
without any fault or carelessness on the part of the accused, because,
having no time or opportunity to make any further inquiry, and being
pressed by circumstances to act immediately, the accused had no
alternative but to take the facts as they then appeared to him, and
such facts justified his act of killing the deceased.
In the Oanis case, the accused found no circumstances whatever
which would press them to immediate action. The person in the room
being then asleep, the accused had ample time and opportunity to
ascertain his identity without hazard to themselves, and could even
effect a bloodless arrest if any reasonable effort to that end had been
made, as the victim was unarmed. This, indeed, is the only legitimate
course of action for the accused to follow even if the victim was really
Balagtas, as they were instructed not to kill Balagtas at sight, but to
arrest, and to get him dead or alive only if resistance or aggression
is offered by him.
Hence, the accused in the Oanis case were at fault when they
shot the victim in violation of the instructions given to them. They
were also careless in not verifying first the identity of the victim.

55

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Lack of Intent to kill the deceased, because his intention was to kill
another, does not relieve the accused from criminal responsibility.

the daughter of the owner of the house as to who the unknown person
might be.

Art. 3

That the accused made a mistake in killing one man instead of
another cannot relieve him from criminal responsibility, he having
acted maliciously and wilfully. (People v. Gona, 54 Phil. 605)
In mistake of fact, the Intention of the accused In performing the
act should be lawful.

Art. 3

The defense of mistake of fact is untenable when the accused is
charged with a culpable felony. In mistake of fact, what is involved
is lack of intent on the part of the accused. In felonies committed
through negligence, there is no intent to consider, as it is replaced
by imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight or lack of skill.

Thus, in error in personae or mistake in the identity of the victim,
the principle of mistake of fact does not apply.

Criminal Intent is necessary in felonies committed by means of
dolo.

Example: A wanted to kill B by shooting him with a pistol.
Thinking that the person walking in dark alley was B, A shot the
person. It turned out that the person killed was C, the brother of A.
A had no intention to kill C. Since the act and intention ofA in firing
his pistol are unlawful, A cannot properly invoke the principle of
mistake of fact in his defense.

Criminal intent is necessary in felonies committed by means of
dolo because of the legal maxims
Actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea, "the act itself does not
make a man guilty unless his intention were so."
Actus me invito factus non est meus actus, "an act done by me
against my will is not my act." (U.S. v. Ah Chong, 15 Phil. 499)

No crime of resistance when there Is a mistake of fact.
One who resists an arrest, believing that the peace officer is
a bandit, but who submits to the arrest immediately upon being
informed by the peace officer that he is a policeman, is not guilty of
the crime of resistance to an agent of the authorities under Article
151 of the R.P.C., because of mistake of fact. (See U.S. v. Bautista,
31 Phil. 308)
When the accused Is negligent, mistake of fact Is not a defense.
People v. de Fernando
(49 Phil. 75)
Facts: The accused, a policeman, was informed that three convicts
had escaped. In the dark, he saw a person going up the stairs of a house,
carrying a bolo and calling for someone inside. The daughter of the owner
of the house was at that time with the accused who fired a shot in the air.
As the unknown person continued to ascend the stairs and believing that
he was one of the escaped convicts, the accused fired directly at the man
who turned out to be the nephew of the owner of the house.
Held: He is guilty of homicide through reckless negligence. The
victim called for someone in the house. That fact indicated that he was
known to the owner of the house. The accused should have inquired from

Distinction between general intent and specific intent.
In felonies committed by dolus, the third element ofvoluntariness
is a general intent; whereas, in some particular felonies, proof of
particular specific intent is required. Thus, in certain crimes against
property, there must be the intent to gain (Art. 293- robbery; Art.
308 - theft). Intent to kill is essential in frustrated or attempted
homicide (Art. 6 in relation to Art. 249); in forcible abduction (Art.
342), the specific intent of lewd designs must be proved.
When the accused is charged with intentional felony, absence of
criminal Intent is a defense.
In the absence of criminal intent, there is no liability for
intentional felony. All reasonable doubt intended to demonstrate error
and not crime should be indulged in for the benefit of the accused.
(People v. Pacana, 47 Phil. 48)
If there is only error on the part of the person doing the act,
he does not act with malice, and for that reason he is not criminally
liable for intentional felony.

57
66

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Criminal intent is replaced by negligence and imprudence In felonies
committed by means of culpa.

in killing them also in order to attain his main purpose of killing the
President.

In felonies committed by means of culpa, since the doing of or
failing to do an act must also be voluntary, there must be freedom
and intelligence on the part of the offender, but the requisite of
criminal intent, which is required in felonies by dolo, is replaced by
the requisite of imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight, or lack of
skill.

Held: The facts do not support the contention of counsel for appellant
that the latter is guilty only of homicide through reckless imprudence in
regard to the death of Simeon Varela and of less serious physical injuries
in regard to Alfredo Eva, Jose Fabio, Pedro Carillo, and Emilio Maglalang.

Art. 3

Such negligence or indifference to duty or to consequence is, in
law, equivalent to criminal intent. (U.S. v. Catolico, 18 Phil. 507)
But in felonies committed by means of culpa, the mind of
the accused is not criminal. However, his act is wrongful, because
the injury or damage caused to the injured party results from the
imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight or lack of skill of the accused.
Therefore, in order that the act or omission in felonies committed
by means of fault or culpa may be considered voluntary, the following
requisites must concur:
(1)

He must have FREEDOM while doing an act or omitting
to do an act;

(2)

He must have INTELLIGENCE while doing the act or
omitting to do the act;

(3)

He is IMPRUDENT, NEGLIGENT or LACKS FORESIGHT
or SKILL while doing the act or omitting to do the act.

In culpable felonies, the injury caused to another should be
unintentional, it being simply the incident of another act performed
without malice.
People v. Guillen
(85 Phil. 307)
Facts: Guillen, testifying in his own behalf, stated that he performed
the act voluntarily; that his purpose was to kill the President, but that it
did not make any difference to him if there were some people around the
President when he hurled that bomb, because the killing of those who
surrounded the President was tantamount to killing the President, in view
of the fact that those persons, being loyal to the President, were identified
with the latter. In other words, although it was not his main intention
to kill the persons surrounding the President, he felt no compunction

In throwing the hand grenade at the President with the intention of
killing him, the appellant acted with malice. He is therefore liable for all
the consequences of his wrongful act; for in accordance with Article 4 of
the R.P.C., criminal liability is incurred by any person committing a felony
(delito) although the wrongful act done be different from that which he
intended. In criminal negligence, the injury caused to another should be
unintentional, it being simply the incident of another act performed without
malice. (People v. Sara, 55 Phil. 939) In the words of Viada, "in order that
an act may be qualified as imprudence it is necessary that neither malice
nor intention to cause injury should intervene; where such intention exists,
the act should be qualified by the felony it has produced even though it may
not have been the intention of the actor to cause an evil of such gravity as
that produced." (Viada's comment on the Penal Code, Vol. 7, 5th Ed., p. 7)
And, as was held by this court, deliberate intent to do an unlawful act is
essentially inconsistent with the idea of reckless imprudence. (People v.
Nanquil, 43 Phil. 232)
Mistake In the Identity of the Intended victim Is not reckless
Imprudence.

A deliberate intent to do an unlawful act is essentially
inconsistent with the idea of reckless imprudence. Where such an
unlawful act is willfully done, a mistake in the identity of the intended
victim cannot be considered as reckless imprudence. (People v. Guillen,
85 Phil. 307, citing People v. Nanquil, 43 Phil. 232, and People v. Guia,
54 Phil. 605)
A person causing damage or injury to another, without malice or
fault, is not criminally liable under the Revised Penal Code.
Since felonies are committed either by means of deceit (dolo) or
by means of fault (culpa), if there is neither malice nor negligence
on the part of the person causing damage or injury to another, he is
not criminally liable under the R.P.C.
In such case, he is exempt from criminal liability, because he
causes an injury by mere accident, without fault or intention of
causing it. (Art. 12, par. 4, R.P.C.)
59

68

Art. 3

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 3

Illustration:
Three men, Ramos, Abandia and Catangay, were hunting deer
at night. Ramos carried a lantern fastened to his forehead. Abandia
and Catangay were following him. They saw a deer. Catangay whose
gun was already cocked and aimed at the deer stumbled against
an embankm ent which lay between him and Ramos. His gun was
accidentally discharged, hitting and killing Ram os. It was held that
Catangay was not criminally liable because he had no criminal intent

and was not negligent. (U.S. v. Catangay, 28 Phil. 490)
The act perfonned must be lawful.
In the foregoing illustration, the act of aiming the gun at the
deer while hunting is lawful, it not being prohibited by any law.
But the act of discharging a gun in a public place is unlawful.

TITLE ONE

Art. 3

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Crimmai Liability
People v. Bayona
(61 Phil. 181)
Facts: Defendant was driving his automobile on a road in front of

electoral precinct No. 4 in Barrio de Aranguel, Pilar, Capiz. He had a
revolver with him. He was called by his friend, Jose D. Benliro. He alighted
from his automobile and approached him to find out what he wanted. He
did not leave his revolver in the automobile, because there were many

people in the road in front of the polling place and he might lose it. He was
within the fence surrounding the polling place when Jose E. Desiderio, a
representative of the Department of the Interior, took possession of the
revolver defendant was carrying.

The Solicitor-General was for his acquittal.
Held: The law which defendant violated is a statutory provision, and
the intent with which he violated is immaterial. It may be conceded that
defendant did not intend to intimidate any elector or to violate the law

(Art. 155, R.P.C.) In such case, if a person is injured as a result of

in any other way, but when he got out of his automobile and carried his
revolver inside of the fence surrounding the polling place, he committed the

the discharge of the gun, the one discharging it in a public place is
criminally liable for the injury caused.

act complained of, and he committed it wilfully. The Election Law does not
require for its violation that the offender has the intention to intimidate the
voters or to interfere otherwise with the election.

The third class of crimes are those punished by special laws.
There are three classes of crimes. The R.P.C. defines and
penalizes the first two classes of crimes: (1) the intentional felonies,
and (2) the culpable felonies. The third class of crimes are those
defined and penalized by special laws which include crimes punished
by municipal or city ordinances.

The rule is that in acts mala in se, there must be a criminal
intent; but in those mala prohibita, it is sufficient if the prohibited
act was intentionally done.
Since the Election Code prohibits and punishes the carryin g of
a firearm inside the polling place, and that person did the prohibited
act freely and consciously, he had the intent to perpetrate the act.

Dolo Is not required in crimes punished by special laws.
When the crime is punished by a special law, as a rule, intent
to commit the crime is not necessary. It is sufficient that the offender
has the intent to perpetrate the act prohibited by the special law.
Intent to commit the crime and intent to perpetrate the act
must be distinguished. A person may not have consciously intended
to commit a crime; but he did intend to commit an act, and that act
is, by the very nature of things, the crime itself. (U.S. v. Go Chico,

14 Phil. 128)
In the first (intent to commit the crime), there must be criminal
intent; in the second (intent to perpetrate the act), it is enough that
the prohibited act is done freely and consciously.

No Intent to perpetrate the act prohibited.
If a man with a revolver merely passes along a public road on
election day, within 50 meters of a polling place, he does not violate
the provision of the law in question, because he had no intent to
perpetrate the act prohibited, and the same thing would be true of a
peace officer in pursuing a criminal; nor would the prohibition extend
to persons living within 50 meters of a polling place, who merely clean
or handle their firearms within their own residences on election day,
as they would not be carrying firearms within the contemplation of
the law. (People v. Bayona, supra)

61
60

Art. 3

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 3

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
In those crimes punished by special laws, the act alone, irrespective
of its motives, constitutes the offense.
The Intellectual Property Code is malum prohibitum and
prescribes a strict liability for copyright infringement. Good faith,
lack of knowledge of the copyright, or lack of intent to infringe is not
a defense against copyright infringement, (ABS-CBN Corporation u.
Gozon, G.R. No. 195956, March 11, 2015)
Tan v. Ballena
(G.R. No. 168111 [2008})

Facts: Petitioners were charged with violations ofthe SSS Law for their
failure to either promptly report some of the respondents for compulsory
coverage/membership with the SSS or remit their SSS contributions and
loan amortizations. Petitioners did not deny their fault in not remitting the
SSS contributions and loan payments of the respondents in violation of the
SSS Law. Instead, petitioners interposed the defenses of lack of criminal
intent and good faith, as their failure to remit was brought about by alleged
economic difficulties, and they have already agreed to settle their obligations
with the SSS through a memorandum of agreement to pay in installments.
Held: The claims of good faith and absence of criminal intent for the
petitioners' acknowledged non-remittance of the respondents' contributions
deserve scant consideration. The violations charged in this case pertain to
the SSS Law, which is a special law. As such, it belongs to a class of offenses
known as mala prohibita.
The law has long divided crimes into acts wrong in themselves called
acts ma/a in se; and acts which would not be wrong but for the fact that
positive law forbids them, called acts mala prohibita. This distinction is
important with reference to the intent with which a wrongful act is done.
The rule on the subject is that in acts mala in se, the intent governs; but in
acts mala prohibita, the only inquiry is, has the law been violated? When an
act is illegal, the intent of the offender is immaterial.
Good faith and absence of criminal intent not valid defenses In
crimes punished by special laws.
Accused was charged with the crime of Illegal Possession of
Firearm. The fact that the firearm in question was issued to the
accused by the Provincial Governor of Lanao de! Norte to be used in
the performance of his duties as Deputy Governor and that the accused
had been issued a permit by the Acting PC Provincial Commander to
carry said firearm outside his residence is not a valid defense in this
62

case. The appellant relies upon the decision of the Court of Appeals in
the case of People u. Asa, 50 O.G. 5853, where members of a civilian
guard organization were acquitted because they had no intention
to commit the offense charged and believed in good faith that, as
civilian guards, they could possess firearms issued by the head of
the civilian guard organization. Good faith and absence of criminal
intent, however, are not valid defenses since the offense committed
is malum prohibitum punished by special law. (People v. Neri,
G.R. No. L-37762, December 19, 1985, 140 SCRA 406)
The appointment to and holding of the position of a secret agent
to the provincial governor does not constitute a sufficient defense
to a prosecution for the crime of illegal possession of firearm and
ammunition. (People u. Mapa, No. L-22301, August 30, 1967)
Exception: Temporary, incidental, casual or harmless possession
or control of a firearm is not a violation of a statute prohibiting the
possessing or carrying of this kind of weapon. A typical example of
such possession is where "a person picks up a weapon or hands it to
another to examine or hold for a moment, or to shoot at some object."
(People v. Estoista, 93 Phil. 647 [1953], citing Sanderson v. State, 5
S. W., 138; C.J., 22)
Mala In se and ma/a proh/bita, distinguished.
There is a distinction between crimes which are mala in se, or
wrongful from their nature, such as theft, rape, homicide, etc., and
those that are mala prohibita, or wrong merely because prohibited
by statute, such as illegal possession of firearms.
Crimes mala in se are those so serious in their effects on society
as to call for almost unanimous condemnation of its members; while
crimes mala prohibita are violations of mere rules of convenience
designed to secure a more orderly regulation of the affairs of society.
(Bouvier's Law Dictionary, Rawle's 3rd Revision)
1)

In acts mala in se, the intent governs; but in those mala
prohibita, the only inquiry is, has the law been violated?
(People u. Kibler, 106 N.Y., 321, cited in the case of U.S. •
Go Chico, 14 Phil. 132)

(2)

The term mala in se refers generally to felonies defined
and penalized by the R.P.C. When the acts are inherently
immoral, they are mala in se, even if punished by special
63

Art. 3

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
laws. On the other hand, there are crimes in the R.P.C.
which were originally defined and penalized by special
laws. Among them are possession and use of opium,
malversation, brigandage, and libel.
The term mala prohibita refers generally to acts made
criminal by special laws.

When the acts are inherently Immoral, they are ma/a in se, even If
punished under special law.
Garcia v. C.A. and People
(G.R. No. 157171 [2006/)
Facts: Petitioner was the Chairman of the Municipal Board of
Canvassers of Alaminos, Pangasinan, She was found guilty by the trial
court of the crime defined under Section 27(b) of The Electoral Reform Law
of 1987 in relation to the Omnibus Election Code for decreasing the votes
of Senator Pimentel by 5,034 votes. On appeal, petitioner contended that
there was no motive on her part to reduce the votes of private complainant.
Respondent contends that good faith is not a defense in the violation of an
election law, which falls under the class of ma/a prohibita.
Held: Section 27b) of R.A. No. 6646 provides that any member of the
board of election inspectors or board of canvassers who tampers, increases,
or decreases the votes received by a candidate in any election shall be guilty
of an election offense. Clearly, the acts prohibited in Section 27b) are mala
in se. lntentionally increasing or decreasing the number of votes received by
a candidate is inherently immoral, since it is done with malice and intent to
injure another. In this case, petitioner admitted that she was indeed the one
who announced the figure of 1,921 and that she was the one who prepared
the Certificate of Canvass (COC), though it was not her duty. To our mind,
preparing the COC even if it was not her task, manifests an intention to
perpetuate the erroneous entry in the COC. The conviction of the petitioner
is affirmed.
The Electoral Reform Law and Omnibus Election Code, as far as their
penal provisions are concerned, are special laws, since they are not part of
the R.P.C. and its amendments.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Motive is not an essential element of a crime, and, hence, need
not be proved for purposes of conviction. (People v. Apo.saga, No.
L-32477, October 30, 1981, 108 SCRA 574, 595)

An extreme moral perversion may lead a man to commit a crime
without a real motive but just for the sake of committing it. Or, the
apparent lack of a motive for committing a criminal act does not
necessarily mean that there is none, but that simply it is not known
to us, for we cannot probe into the depths of one's conscience where
it may be found, hidden away and inaccessible to our observation.
(People w. Taneo, 58 Phil. 255, 256)
One may be convicted of a crime whether his motive appears to
be good or bad or even though no motive is proven. A good motive does
not prevent an act from being a crime. In mercy killing, the painless
killing of a patient who has no chance of recovery, the motive may
be good, but it is nevertheless punished by law.
Motive, when relevant and when not.
(1)

IDENTITY OF ACCUSED
a)

Generally, proofof motive is not necessary to pin a crime on
the accused if the commission of the crime has been proven
and the evidence of identification is convincing. (People v.
Alviar, 59 SCRA 136, 160)

b)

Where the identity ofa person accused of having committed
a crime is in dispute, the motive that may have impelled its
commission is very relevant. (People v. Murray, 105 Phil.
591, 598; People v. Feliciano, 58 SCRA 383, 393)

c)

Motive is essential only when there is doubt as to the
identity of the assailant. It is immaterial when the accused
has been positively identified. (People v. Gadiana, 195
SCRA 211, 214-215; People v. Mandapat, 196 SCRA 157,
165)

d)

Where the defendant admits the killing, it is no longer
necessary to inquire into his motive for doing the act.
(People v. Arcilla, No. L-11792, June 30, 1959)

e)

While the question of motive is important to the person who
committed the criminal act, yet when there is no longer
any doubt that the defendant was the culprit, it becomes

Intent distinguished from motive.
Motive is the moving power which impels one to action for a
definite result. Intent is the purpose to use a particular means to
effect such result.
64

Art. 3

65

Art. 3

THE REVlSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 3

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
unimportant to know the exact reason or purpose for the
commission of the crime. (People v. Feliciano, 58 SCRA
383,393)
I)

(2)

(3)

Where the identification of the accused proceeds from an
unreliable source and the testimony is inconclusive and not
free from doubt, evidence of motive is necessary. (People v.
Beltran, 61 SCRA 246, 254-255)

ANTAGONISTIC THEORIES

Disclosure of the motive is an aid in completing the proof of the
commission of the crime.

Motive is important in ascertaining the truth between
two antagonistic theories or versions of the killing. (People v.
Boholst-Caballero, 61 SCRA 180, 191; People v. Lim, 190 SCRA
706, 714-715; People v. Tabje, 113 SCRA 191, 197)

Thus, the fact that the accused had been losing in their business
operations indicated the motive and therefore the intent to commit
arson for the purpose of collecting the insurance on their stock of
merchandise. (U.S. v. Go Foo Suy, 25 Phil. 187, 204)

NO EYEWITNESSES
Where there are no eyewitnesses to the crime, and where
suspicion is likely to fall upon a number of persons, motive
is relevant and significant. (People v. Melgar, 157 SCRA 718,
725)

(4)

around. Certainly, the causing of those smokes. presumably by nonmembers, which disturbed and interrupted the service, particularly
at the time when the Minister was preaching, is enough motive for
any member of the sect to be offended thereby, particularly appellant
who was a member of some importance. (People v. Ramirez 104 Phil.
720, 726)
"

CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE OR SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE
If the evidence is merely circumstantial, proof of motive is
essential. (People v. Oquin0, 122 SCRA 797, 808)
Proof of motive is not indispensable where guilt is
otherwise established by sufficient evidence. (People v. Corpuz,
107 Phil. 44, 49)

But proof of motive alone is not sufficient to support a conviction.
The existence of a motive, though perhaps an important
consideration, is not sufficient proof of guilt. (People v. Marcos, 70
Phil. 468; People v. Martinez y Godinez, 106 Phil. 597) Mere proof of
motive, no matter how strong, is not sufficient to support a conviction if
there is no reliable evidence from which it may be reasonably deduced
that the accused was the malefactor. (People v. Macatangay, 107 Phil.
188, 194)
Even a strong motive to commit the crime cannot take the
place of proof beyond reasonable doubt, sufficient to overthrow the
presumption of innocence. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is the
mainstay of our accusatorial system of criminal justice. (People v.
Pisalvo, No. L-32886, October 23, 1981, 108 SCRA 211, 226)

How motive is proved.
Generally, the motive is established by the testimony of
witnesses on the acts or statements of the accused before or
immediately after the commission of the offense. Such deeds or words
may indicate the motive. (Barrioquinto v. Fernandez, 82 Phil. 642,
649)
Motive proved by the evidence.
Appellant stabbed the deceased. It was established that there
were two suffocating smokes noticed during the progress of the
religious service of the Iglesia ni Cristo, which made appellant to go
66

Lack of motive may be an aid in showing the Innocence of the
accused.
In a case, the Supreme Court concluded that the defendant acted
while in a dream and his acts, with which he was charged, were not
voluntary in the sense of entailing criminal liability.
Under the special circumstances of the case, in which the victim
was the defendant's own wife whom he dearly loved, and taking into
consideration the fact that the defendant tried to attack also his
father, in whose house and under whose protection he lived, besides
67

Art. 4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
attacking Tanner and Malinao, his guests, whom he himself invited
as may be inferred from the evidence presented, [the Court] find[s]
not only lack of motives for the defendant to voluntarily commit the
acts complained of, but also motives for not committing said acts.
(People v. Taneo, 58 Phil. 255, 257)
Lack of motive to kill the deceased has been held as further
basis for acquitting the accused, where the lone testimony of the
prosecution witness is contrary to common experience and, therefore,
incredible. (People v. Padirayon, No. L-39207, September 25, 1975,
67 SCRA 135)

Art. 4. Criminal liability. - Criminal liability shall be
incurred:
1.
By any person comm itting a felony (delito) although
the wrongful act done be different from that which he
intended.
2.
By any person performing an act which would be
an offense against persons or property, were it not for the
inherent impossibility of its accomplishment or on account
of the employment of inadequate or ineffectual means.

Application of Article 4.
Criminal liability is incurred by any person in the cases
mentioned in the two paragraphs of Article 4. This article has no
reference to the manner criminal liability is incurred. The manner
of incurring criminal liability under the R.P.C. is stated in Article 3,
that is, performing or failing to do an act, when either is punished
by law, by means of deceit (with malice) or fault (through negligence
or imprudence).
One who commits an Intentional felony Is responsible for all the
consequences which may naturally and logically result therefrom,
whether foreseen or intended or not.

where the consequences of the felonious act of the offender are not
intended by him. In those cases, "the wrongful act done" is "different
from that which he intended."
In view of paragraph 1 of Article 4, a person committing a felony
is criminally liable although the consequences ofh.is felonious act are
not intended by him.
There is no question that the death of the victim was brought
about by the rape committed by the accused. Her death was due to
profuse hemorrhage brought about by the laceration of the vagina
caused by a stiffened male organ or by the insertion of a hard
blunt object. That the accused did not intend to kill her was of no
moment. A person who performs a criminal act is responsible for all
the consequences of said act regardless of his intention. (People v.
Mariano, No. L-45966, November JO, 1978)
One is not relieved from criminal liability for the natural
consequences of one's illegal acts, merely because one does not intend
to produce such consequences. (U.S. u. Brobst, 14 Phil. 310)
Thus, one who fired his gun at B, but missed and hit C instead,
is liable for the injury caused to C, although the one who fired the
gun had no intention to injure C.
One who gave a fist blow on the head of D, causing the latter to
fall with the latter's head striking a hard pavement, is liable for the
death of D, which resulted although the one who gave the fist blow
had no intention to kill D.
And one who stabbed another in the dark, believing that the
latter was E, when in fact he was G, is liable for the injury caused
to G, although the one who stabbed him had no intention to
injure G.
Rationale of rule In paragraph 1 of Article 4.
The rationale of the rule in Article 4 is found in the doctrine
that "el que es causa de la causa es causa del mal causado" (he who
is the cause of the cause is the cause of the evil caused). (People v.
Ural, No. L-30801, March 27, 1974, 56 SCRA 138, 144)

Ordinarily, when a person commits a felony with malice, he
intends the consequences of his felonious act. But there are cases
69
68

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRAS ES IN PARA GRAP H l OF
ARTICLE 4.

When a person has not committed a felony, he Is not criminally
liable for the result which is not intended.

Art. 4

1.

"Committing a felony."
Paragraph 1 of Article 4 says that criminal liability shall
be incurred by any person "committing a felony," not merely
performing an act. A felony is an act or omission punishable
by the R.P.C. If the act is not punishable by the Code, it is not
a felony. But the felony committed by the offender should be
one committed by means of dolo, that is, with malice, because
paragraph 1 of Article 4 speaks of wrongful act done "different
from that which he intended."
If the wrongful act results from the imprudence, negligence,
Jack of foresight or lack of skill of the offender, his liability should
be determined under Article 365, which defines and penalizes
criminal negligence.
The act or omission should not be punished by a special
Jaw, because the offender violating a special law may not have
the intent to do an injury to another. In such case, the wrongful
act done could not be different, as the offender did not intend to
do any other injury.

Article 4, paragraph 1, is not applicable in this case.
Defendant, who was not a regular medical practitioner, tied
a girl, wrapped her feet with rags saturated with petroleum and
thereafter set them on fire causing injuries. His defense was that he
undertook to render medical assistance in good faith and to the best
of his ability to cure her of ulcer. He admitted applying petroleum
but denied causing the burns. Held: While there was no intention to
cause an evil but to provide a remedy, accused was liable for injuries
through imprudence. (U.S. v. Divino, 12 Phil. 175)
Note:

Defendant did not commit an intentional felony. If at
all, he committed illegal practice of medicine, which is
punished by a special law. Violation ofa statute is proof
of negligence or imprudence. Defendant is liable for two
offenses: (1) physical injuries through imprudence; and
(2) illegal practice of medicine.
70

Art. 4

(a)

Thus, one who, because of curiosity, snatched the bolo carried by
the offended party at his belt, and the latter instinctively caught
the blade of said bolo in trying to retain it, is not crimin ally liable
for the physical injuries caused, because there is no provision
in the R.P .C. which punishes that act of snatching the property
of another just to satisfy curiosity. (See U.S. v. Villanueva, 31
Phil. 412)

(b)

Thus, also, one who tries to retain the possession of his bolo
wh.ich was being taken by another and because of the struggle,
the tip of the bolo struck and pierced the breast ofa bystander,
is not criminally liable therefor, because the law allows a person
to use the necessary force to retain what belongs to him. (See
People v. Bind0y, 56 Phil. 15)
People v. Bindoy
(56 PhiL. 15)

Facts: In a tuba wineshop in the barrio market, the accused offered
tuba to Pacas' wife; and as she refused to drink having already done so, the
accused threatened to injure her if she would not accept. There ensued an
interchange of words between her and the accused, and Pacas stepped in
to defend his wife, attempting to take away from the accused the bolo he
carried. This occasioned a disturbance which attracted the attention of
Emigdio Omamdam who lived near the market. Emigdio left his house to
see what was happening, while the accused and Pacas were struggling for
the bolo. In the course ofthis struggle, the accused succeeded in disengaging
himself from Pacas, wrenching the bolo from the latter's hand towards the
left behind the accused, with such violence that the point of the bolo reached
Emigdio Omamdam's chest, who was then behind the accused. 'The accused
was not aware of Omamdam's presence in the place.
Held: There is no evidence to show that the accused injured the
deceased deliberately and with the intention of committing a crime. He was
only defending his possession of the bolo, which Pacas was trying to wrench
away from him, and his conduct was perfectly legal. The accused should be
acquitted.
Had the accused attempted to wound Pacas during the struggle,
but instead of doing so, he wounded Omamdam, he would have
been liable for the death of Omamdam, because in attempting to
wound another, the accused would be committing a felony, which
71

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 4

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Whi ch

Affect Criminal Liability
is attempted homicide, if there is intent to kill, under Article 249
in relation to Article 6.
2.

"Although the wrongful act done be different from that which he
intended."
The causes which may produce a result different from that
which the offender intended are: (1) mistake in the identity of
the victim; (2) mistake in the blow, that is, when the offender
intending to do an injury to one person actually inflicts it on
another; and (3) the act exceeds the intent, that is, the injurious
result is greater than that intended.
Under paragraph 1, Article 4, a person committing a felony
is still criminally liable even ifa.

There is a mistake in the identity of the victim - error in
personae. (See the case of People v. Oanis, 74 Phil. 257)

In a case, defendant went out of the house with the
intention of assaulting Dunca, but in the darkness of the evening,
defendant mistook Mapudul for Dunca and inflicted upon him
a mortal wound with a bolo. In this case, the defendant is
criminally liable for the death of Mapudul. (People v. Gona, 54
Phil. 605)
b.

There is a mistake in the blow

aberratio ictus.

Example: People v. Umawid, G.R. No. 208719(2014), where
Maureen's death was a case ofaberratio ictus, given that the fatal
blow therefor was only delivered by mistake as it was actually
Vicente who was Umawid's intended target. Umawid was held
liable for murder for the death of Maureen.
c.

The injurious result is greater than that intended praeter
intentionem.

Example: People v. Cagoco, 58 Phil. 524, where the accused,
without intent to kill, struck the victim with his fist on the back
part of the head from behind, causing the victim to fall down
with his head hitting the asphalt pavement and resulting in the
fracture of his head, it was held that the accused was liable for
the death of the victim, although he had no intent to kill said
victim.
72

People v. Mabugat
(51 Phil. 967)
Facts: The accused and Juana Buralo were sweethearts. One day, the
accused mv,ted Juana to take a walk with him, but the latter refused him on
account of the accused having frequently visited the house ofanother woman.
Later on, the accused went to the house ofCirilo Bayan where Juana had gone
to take part in some devotion. There the accused, revolver in hand, waited
until Juana and her niece, Perfecta, came downstairs. When they went in
the direction of their house, the accused followed them. As the two girls were

going upstairs, the accused, while standing at the foot of the stairway, fired a
shot from his revolver at Juana but which wounded Perfecta, the slug passing
through a part of her neck, having entered the posterior region thereof and
commg out through the left eye. Perfecta did not die due to proper medical
attention.

Held: The accused is guilty of frustrated murder, qualified by treachery,
committed on the person of Perfecta Buralo.
In People v. Tomotorgo, No. L-47941, April 30, 1985, 136 SCRA
238, the conduct of the wife of the accused aroused his ire and incensed
with wrath and his anger beyond control, he picked up a piece of
wood and started hitting his wife with it until she fell to the ground
complaining of severe chest pains. Realizing what he had done he
picked her up in his arms and brought her home. Despite his efforts
to alleviate her pains, the wife died. Prosecuted for parricide, he
pleaded guilty and was allowed to establish mitigating circumstances.
Passing on his contentions, the Supreme Court held that the fact that
the appellant intended to maltreat his wife only or inflict physical
injuries does not exempt him from liability for the resulting and more
senous crime of parricide.
To the same effect is People v. Monleon, No. L-36282, December
10, 1976, 74 SCRA 263, where it was held that the case is covered by
Article 4 ofthe R.P.C. which provides that criminal liability is incurred
by any person committing a felony although the wrongful act done
be different from that which he intended, because the maltreatment
inflicted by the accused on his wife was the proximate cause of her
death. The accused in his inebriated state had no intent to kill her.
He was infuriated because his son did not feed his carabao. He was
provoked to castigate his wife because she prevented him from
whipping his negligent son. He could have easily killed his wife had
he really intended to take her life. He did not kill her outright.
73

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 4

Criminal Law

Requisites of paragraph 1 of Article 4.
In order that a person may he held criminally liable for a felony
different from that which he intended to commit, the following
requisites must be present:
a.

That an intentional felony has been committed; and

b.

That the wrong done to the aggrieved party be the direct,
natural and logical consequence of the felony committed
by the offender. (U.S. v. Brobst, 14 Phil. 310, 319; U.S. w.
Mallari, 29 Phil. 14, 19)

That a felony has been committed.
Thus, in the cases of U.S. v. Villanueva and People v. Bindoy,
supra, the accused were not held criminally liable, because they
were not committing a felony when they caused the injury to
another.
No felony is committed ( I) when the act or omission is not
punishable by the R.P.C., or (2) when the act is covered by any of the
justifying circumstances enumerated in Article 11.
An act which is not punishable by the R.P.C. is attempting to
commit suicide. (Art. 253)
Therefore, if A, in attempting a suicide, jumped out of the
window to kill himself, but when he dropped to the ground, he fell on
an old woman who died as a consequence, A is not criminally liable
for intentional homicide. A was not committing a felony when he
attempted a suicide.
One who shoots at another in self-defense, defense of relative,
defense of a stranger, or in the fulfillment of duty is not committing
a felony, the act being justified. (Art. 11, R.P.C.)
Hence, if B, who was being fired at with a gun by C to kill him,
fired his pistol at the latter in self-defense, but missed him and instead
hit and killed D, a bystander, Bis not criminally liable for the death
of D. One acting in self-defense is not committing a felony.
A policeman, who was pursuing to arrest an armed prisoner who
had just escaped from jail, fired his service pistol at the latter when he
refused to be captured. The slug fired from the pistol of the policeman,
74

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which
AfTect Criminal Liability

after hitting the prisoner on his right leg, hit and seriously injured a
passerby. The policeman is not criminally liable for the injury caused
to the passerby, because being in the fulfillment of a duty he was not
committing a felony.
Of course, the act of defense or fulfillment of duty must be
exercised with due care; otherwise, the accused will be liable for
culpable felony.
People v. Belbes
(G.R. No. 124670 {2000])
Facts: Appellant Pat. Belbes and Pat. Pabon were assigned to
maintain peace and order at the Junior and Senior Prom of Pili Barangay
High School. While the teacher-in-charge, appellant and Pat. Pabon were
watching the dance, two students reported to the teacher-in-charge that
there was somebody making trouble. Appellant and Pat. Pabon, armed with
an armalite rifle and a .38 caliber revolver, respectively, responded and
moments after the two police officers left, bursts of gunfire filled the air.
Bataller, a graduating student of the school, was hit on different parts of his
body and died. Moments before the gruesome incident, Ba taller, then drunk,
was vomiting and holding on to the bamboo wall of the school's temporary
building when the bamboo splits broke. At that instance, appellant and Pat.
Pabon appeared and without warning, appellant fired his gun. Appellant
contends that he was only performing his official functions when he responded
in the course of police duties to the information that somebody was making
trouble and disturbing the peace. Being in charge of maintaining peace and
order within the vicinity, he ascertained the veracity of the information
given by the students concerned. He asserts that in the absence of intent
and voluntariness, he cannot be faulted for the death of the deceased.
Held: Appellant acted in the performance of his duty. However, the
killing need not be a necessary consequence of the performance of his duty.
His duty was to maintain peace and order during the Junior and Senior
Prom but he exceeded such duty when he fired his armalite without warning.
Appellant is guilty of homicide.

Any person who creates In another's mind an immediate sense of
danger, which causes the latter to do something resulting in the
latter's injuries, is liable for the resulting injuries.
During a robbery in a passenger jeepney, one of the culprits told
the women passengers "to bring out their money and not to shout 'or
else there will be shots.'" One oftbe women jumped out of the jeepney.
Her head struck the pavement. She died as a consequence.
75

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 4

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
It was held that "if a man creates in another person's mind an
immediate sense of danger, which causes such person to try to escape,
and, in so doing, the latter injures himself, the man who creates such
a state of mind is responsible for the resulting injuries." (People v.
Page, 77 SCRA 348, 355, citing People v. Toling, L-27097, January
17, 1975, 62 SCRA 17, 33)

the accused produced extreme pain and restlessness which
made the victim remove it. (People v. Quianson, 62 Phil.
162)
c.

The reason for the ruling is that when the culprit demanded
money from the women, threatening to shoot if they would not
bring out their money, a felony was being committed (i.e., at that
stage of execution, attempted robbery with intimidation which is
punishable under Article 294, in relation to Article 6 and Article
51 of the Code).
The Toling case, supra, relying on U.S. v. Valdez, 41 Phil. 497,
quoted the syllabus, thus: "if a person against whom a criminal assault
is directed reasonably believes himself to be in danger of death or great
bodily harm and in order to escape jumps into the water, impelled
by the instinct of self-preservation, the assailant is responsible for
homicide in case death results by drowning."
Wrong done must be the direct, natural and logical consequence
of felonious act.
It is an established rule that a person is criminally responsible
for acts committed by him in violation of the law and for all the natural
and logical consequences resulting therefrom. (U.S. v. Sornito, 4 Phil.
357,360; U.S. v. Zamora, 32 Phil. 218,226; People v. Cornel, 78 Phil.
458,261)
In the following cases, the wrong done is considered the direct,
natural and logical consequence of the felony committed, although a.

b.

The victim who was threatened or chased by the accused
with a knife, jumped into the water and because of the
strong current or because he did not know how to swim he
sank down and died of drowning. (U.S. v. Valdez, 41 Phil.
497; People v. Buhay, 79 Phil. 372)
The victim removed the drainage from the wound which
resulted in the development of peritonitis which in turn
caused his death, it appearing that the wound caused by
76

Other causes cooperated in producing the fatal result, as
long as the wound inflicted is dangerous, that is, calculated
to destroy or endanger life. This is true even though the
immediate cause of the death was erroneous or unskillful
medical or surgical treatment. This rule surely seems
to have its foundation in a wise and practical policy. A
different doctrine would tend to give immunity to crime
and to take away from human life a salutary and essential
safeguard. Amid the conflicting theories of medical men,
and the uncertainties attendant upon the treatment of
bodily ailments and injuries, it would be easy in many cases
of homicide to raise a doubt as to the immediate cause of
death, and thereby to open wide the door by which persons
guilty of the highest crime might escape conviction and
punishment. (13 R.C.L., 751, 752; 22 L.R.A., New Series,
841, cited in People v. Moldes, 61 Phil. 4)

But where it clearly appears that the injury would not have
caused death, in the ordinary course of events, but would have healed
in so many days and where it is shown beyond ail doubt that the death
was due to the malicious or careless acts of the injured person or a
third person, the accused is not liable for homicide. One is accountable
only for his own acts and their natural or logical consequences, and
not for those which bear no relation to the initial cause and are due
for instance, to the mistakes committed by the doctor in the surgical
operation and the treatment of the victim's wound. (Decision of the
Supreme Court of Spain, April 2, 1903, cited by Viada)
d.

The victim was suffering from internal malady.

Blow was efficient cause of death.
The deceased had a delicate constitution and was
suffering from tuberculosis. The accused gave fist blows on
the deceased's right hypochondrium, bruising the liver and
producing internal hemorrhage, resulting in the death of the
victim. The accused was liable for homicide. (People v. Illustre,
54 Phil. 594)
77

Art. 4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Blow accelerated death.
The deceased was suffering from internal malady. The
accused gave fist blows in the back and abdomen, producing
inflammation of the spleen and peritonitis, and causing death.
The accused was liable for homicide, because by his fist blows,
he produced the cause for the acceleration of the death of the
deceased. (People v. Rodriquez, 23 Phil. 22)
Blow was proximate cause of death.
The deceased was suffering from heart disease. The
accused stabbed the deceased with a knife, but as the blade of
the knife hit a bone, it did not penetrate the thoracic cavity,
but it produced shock, resulting in the death of the victim. The
accused was liable for homicide, because the stabbing was the
proximate cause of the death of the deceased. (People v. Reyes,
61 Phil. 341)
e.

The offended party refused to submit to surgical operation.

The offended party is not obliged to submit to a surgical
operation to relieve the accused from the natural and ordinary
results of his crime. (U.S. v. Marasigan, 27 Phil. 504)

£.

inflicted could not have caused the death of the
deceased. A week later, the deceased died of tetanus
secondary to the infected wound. Held: The accused
is responsible for the death of the deceased. (People
v. Cornel, 78 Phil. 418)
People v. Quianson
(62 Phil. 162)

Facts: The accused took hold of a fireband and applied it to the neck of
the person who was pestering him. The victim also received from the hand

of the accused a wound in his abdomen below the navel. While undergoing
medical treatment, the victim took out the drainage from his wound and as

a result of the peritonitis that developed, he died. The accused claimed as a
defense that had not the deceased taken out the drainage, he would not have
died.
Held: Death was the natural consequence ofthe mortal wound inflicted.
The victim, in removing the drainage from his wound, did not do so voluntarily

and with knowledge that it was prejudicial to his health. The act ofthe victim
(removing the drainage from his wound) was attributed to his pathological
condition and state of nervousness and restlessness on account of physical

pain caused by the wound, aggravated by the contact of the drainage tube
with the inflamed peritoneum.
U.S. v. Marasigan
(27 Phil. 504, 506)

The resulting injury was aggravated by infection.
(1)

Without the stab wounds, the victim could not have
been afflicted with an infection which later on caused
multiple organ failure that caused h.is death. (Belbis
v. People, G.R. No. 181052, November 14, 2012)
The offender is criminally liable for the death
of the victim if h.is delictual act caused, accelerated
or contributed to the death of the victim. (People u.
Cutura, 4 SCRA 663)

(2)

(3)

The fact that the wounds might have been cured
sooner than 58 days had the offended party not
been addicted to tuba drink.ing does not mitigate the
liability of the accused. (U.S. u. Bayutas, 31 Phil. 584)
The accused attacked the deceased with a bolo. After
the deceased had fallen, the accused threw a stone
which hit him on the right clavicle. The wounds
78

Facts: The accused drew his knife and struck at Mendoza. In attempting
to ward off the blow, Mendoza was cut in the left hand. The extensor tendon

in one of the fingers was severed. As a result, the middle finger of the left.
hand was rendered useless.
Held: Nor do we attach any importance to the contention of the accused

that the original condition of the finger could be restored by a surgical
operation. Mendoza is not obliged to submit to a surgical operation to relieve
the accused from the natural and ordinary results of his crime. It was his

voluntary act which disabled Mendoza and he must abide by the consequences
resulting therefrom without aid from Mendoza.

People v. Reloj
(L-31335, February 29, 1972, 43 SCRA 526, 532)
Facts: The accused stabbed the victim with an ice pick. The victim was
brought to the hospital where a surgical operation was performed upon him.
Although the operation was successful and the victim seemed to be in the
process of recovery, he developed, five days later, a paralytic ileum
which
79

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

takes place, sometimes, in consequence ofthe exposure ofthe internal organs
during the operation - and then died.

sister al herido); or the conditions supervening the felonies act such
as tetanus, pulmonary infection or gangrene.

Art. 4

Held: It is contended that the immediate cause ofthe death ofthe victim
was a paralysis of the ileum that supervened five days after the stabbing,
when he appeared to be on the way to full recovery. It has been established,
however, that the exposure ofthe internal organs in consequence ofa surgical
operation in the abdomen sometimes results in a paralysis of the ileum
and that said operation had to be performed on account of the abdominal
injury inflicted by the accused. The accused is responsible for the natural
consequences of his own acts.
The felony committed must be the proximate cause of the resulting
injury.

Proximate cause is "that cause, which, in natural and continuous
sequence, unbroken by any efficient intervening cause, produces
the injury, and without which the result would not have occurred."
(Bataclan v. Medina, 102 Phil. 181, 186, quoting 38 Am. Jur. 695)
Moreover, a person committing a felony is criminally liable
for all the natural and logical consequences resulting therefrom
although the wrongful act done be different from that which he
intended. "Natural" refers to an occurrence in the ordinary course of
human life or events, while "logical" means that there is a rational
connection between the act of the accused and the resulting injury
or damage. The felony committed must be the proximate cause of
the resulting injury. Proximate cause is that cause which in natural
and continuous sequence, unbroken by an efficient intervening cause,
produces the injury, and without which the result would not have
occurred. The proximate legal cause is that acting first and producing
the injury, either immediately, or by setting other events in motion,
all constituting a natural and continuous chain of events, each having
a close causal connection with its immediate predecessor.
There must be a relation of "cause and effect," the cause being
the felonious act of the offended, the effect being the resultant injuries
and/or death of the victim. The "cause and effect" relationship is not
altered or changed because of the pre-existing conditions, such as the
pathological condition of the victim (las condiciones patologica del
lesionado); the predisposition of the offended party (la constitucion
fisica del herido); or the concomitant or concurrent conditions, such
as the negligence or fault of the doctors (la falta de medicos para

The felony committed is not the proximate cause ofthe resulting
injury when:
a)

there is an active force that intervened between the felony
committed and the resulting injury, and the active force is
a distinct act or fact absolutely foreign from the felonious
act of the accused; or

b)

the resulting injury is due to the intentional act of the
victim.

If a person inflicts a wound with a deadly weapon in such a
manner as to put life in jeopardy and death follows as a consequence
of their felonious act, it does not alter its nature or diminish its
criminality to prove that other causes cooperated in producing the
factual result. The offender is criminally liable for the death of the
victim if his delictual act caused, accelerated or contributed to the
death of the victim. A different doctrine would tend to give immunity
to crime and take away from human life a salutary and essential
safeguard. (Quinto v. Andres, G.R. No. 155791, March 16, 2005)
How to determine the proximate cause.

At about 2:00 in the morning, while the bus was running very
fast on a highway, one of the front tires burst and the vehicle began to
zigzag until it fell into a canal and turned turtle. Four of its passengers
could not get out of the overturned bus. It appeared that as the bus
overturned, gasoline began to leak from the tank on the side of the
chassis, spreading over and permeating the body of the bus and the
ground under and around it. About ten men, one of them carrying
a lighted torch, approached the overturned bus to help those left
therein, and almost immediately a fierce fire started, burning the
four passengers trapped inside it.
What is the proximate cause of the death of the four passengers,
the negligence of the driver resulting in the fall into the canal and
overturning of the bus, or the fire that burned the bus?
"xx It may be that ordinarily, when a passenger bus overturns,
and pins down a passenger, merely causing him physical injuries, if
through some event, unexpected and extraordinary, the overturned
81

80

Art. 4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

bus is set on fire, say, by lightning, or if some highwaymen after looting
the vehicle set it on fire, and the passenger is burned to death, one
might still contend that the proximate cause of his death was the fire
and not the overturning of the vehicle. But in the present case and
under the circumstances obtaining in the same, [the Court] doles]
not hesitate to hold that the proximate cause of the death ofx xx (the
four passengers) was the overturning of the bus, this for the reason
that when the vehicle turned not only on its side but completely on
its back, the leaking of the gasoline from the tank was not unnatural
or unexpected; that the coming of the men with a lighted torch was
in response to the call for help, made not only by the passengers, but
most probably, by the driver and the conductor themselves, and that
because it was very dark (about 2:30 in the morning), the rescuers had
to carry a light with them; and coming as they did from a rural area
where lanterns and flashlights were not available, they had to use a
torch, the most handy and available; and what was more natural than
that said rescuers should innocently approach the overturned vehicle
to extend the aid and effect the rescue requested from them. In other
words, the coming of the men with the torch was to be expected and
was a natural sequence of the overturning of the bus, the trapping
of some of its passengers and the call for outside help. What is more,
the burning of the bus can also in part be attributed to the negligence
of the carrier, through its driver and its conductor. According to the
witnesses, the driver and the conductor were on the road walking back
and forth. They, or at least, the driver should and must have known
that in the position in which the overturned bus was, gasoline could
and must have leaked from the gasoline tank and soaked the area
in and around the bus, this aside from the fact that gasoline when
spilled, specially over a large area, can be smelt and detected even
from a distance, and yet neither the driver nor the conductor would
appear to have cautioned or taken steps to warn the rescuers not to
bring the lighted torch too near the bus." That is negligence on the
part of the agents of the carrier. (Vda. de Bataclan, et al. v. Medina,
102 Phil. 181, 186, 187)

call the police. The victim told his wife about the mauling and complained

Art. 4

People v. Garcia
(G.R. No. 171951 (2009))
Pacts: Petitioner assaulted the victim who continued to parry
petitioner's blows. Petitioner then reached for a bottle of beer, and with it,

struck the lower back portion of the victim's head. When the victim found
an opportunity to escape, he ran towards his house and phoned his wife to
82

Art. 4

of difficulty in breathing. Upon reaching the victim's house, the policemen
knocked five times but nobody answered. The victim's wife arrived minutes

later, unlocked the door and found the victim lying unconscious on the kitchen
floor, salivating. He was pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital. The
autopsy confirmed that the victim died of myocardial infarction.

Held: Petitioner is guilty of homicide. He was committing a felony
when he boxed the victim and hit him with a bottle. Hence, the fact that the
victim was previously afflicted with a heart ailment does not alter petitioner's
liability for his death. Ingrained in our jurisprudence is the doctrine laid

down in the case of United States v. Brobst, 14 Phil. 310 (1909), that:
x x x where death results as a direct consequence of the use of illegal
violence, the mere fact that the diseased or weakened condition of the injured
person contributed to his death, does not relieve the illegal aggressor of
criminal responsibility.

In the same vein, United States v. Rodriguez, 23 Phil. 22 (1912),
enunciates that:
x x x although the assaulted party was previously affected by
some internal malady, if, because ofa blow given with the hand
or the foot, his death was hastened, beyond peradventure
he is responsible therefor who produced the cause for such
acceleration as the result ofa voluntary and unlawfully inflicted
injury.
In this jurisdiction, a person committing a felony is
responsible for all the natural and logical consequences resulting
from it although the unlawful act performed is different from
the one he intended; "el que es causa de la causa es causa del
mal causado" (he who is the cause of the cause is the cause of
the evil caused).
In the case of People v. Martin, 89 Phil. 18, the accused, who
strangled his wife then suffering from heart disease, was found guilty
of parricide even if the death of his wife was the result of heart failure,
because the heart failure was due to the fright or shock caused by the
strangling, which is a felony.
The following are not efficient intervening causes:

1.

The weak or diseased physical condition of the victim, as
when one is suffering from tuberculosis or heart disease.
(People v. Illustre and People v. Reyes, supra)
83

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 4

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

The nervousness or temperament of the victim, as when
a person dies in consequence of an internal hemorrhage
brought on by moving about against the doctor's orders,
because of his nervous condition due to the wound inflicted
by the accused. (People v. Almonte, 56 Phil. 54; see also
People v. Quianson, 62 Phil. 162)
Causes which are inherent in the victim, such as (a) the
victim not knowing how to swim, and (b) the victim being
addicted to tuba drinking. (People v. Buhay, and U.S. v.
Valdez, supra; U.S. v. Bayutas, supra)
Neglect of the victim or third person, such as the refusal
by the injured party of medical attendance or surgical
operation, or the failure of the doctor to give anti-tetanus
injection to the injured person. (U.S. v. Marasigan and
People v. Red, supra)
Erroneous or unskillful medical or surgical treatment, as
when the assault took place in an outlying barrio where
proper modern surgical service was not available. (People
v. Mo/des, 61 Phil. 1)
Delay in the medical treatment of the victim. (People v.
Acuram, G.R. No. 117954, April 27, 2000)

Those causes, not being efficient intervening causes, do not
break the relation of cause and effect - the felony committed and
the resulting injury.
People v. Piamonte, et al.
(94 Phil. 293)
Facts: One of the accused stabbed the injured party with a hunting
knife on October 28, 1951. The injured party was taken to the hospital and
was operated on. The operation did him well, but on December 19, 1951, he
contracted a sickness known as mucous colitis which developed because of
his weak condition. He died on December 28, 1951.
Is the accused who stabbed the injured party liable for the latter's
death?
Held: The doctors who attended the injured party agreed that his
weakened condition which caused disturbance in the functions of his
intestines made it possible for him to contract mucous colitis, which shows
that while the wounds inflicted were not the immediate cause, they were
84

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 4

however the proximate cause of death. This is enough to make the accused
responsible for the crime charged.
Note: The charge was robbery with homicide. The homicide was
committed with malice.
When death is presumed to be the natural consequence of physical
Injuries inflicted.

The death of the victim is presumed to be the natural
consequence of the physical injuries inflicted, when the following
facts are established:
1.

That the victim at the time the physical injuries were
inflicted was in normal health.

2.

That death may be expected from the physical injuries
inflicted.

3.

That death ensued within a reasonable time. (People v.
Datu Baginda, CA., 44 O.G. 2287)

It having been established that the boy Jundam was in good
health on the morning of the incident; that he was whipped, spanked
and thrown against the post by his teacher, his breast hitting it; that
he complained to his mother about the oppressive pain, crying, and
massaging his breast all the time; that he was found to have two
suspicious bluish spots- a big one on the breast and another one
on the upper left arm; and that he vomited blood until he died three
days afterwards; and there being no proof of any intervening cause,
the liability of the teacher for homicide necessarily follows from the
premises stated. (People v. Tammang, 5 C.A. Rep. 145)
Note:

Had it been proved, as claimed by the defense, that the
boy died of hydrophobia, that would have constituted
an intervening cause, and the accused would have been
acquitted.

Not direct, natural and logical consequence of the felony committed.

If the consequences produced have resulted from a distinct act
or fact absolutely foreign from the criminal act, the offender is not
responsible for such consequences. (People v. Rellin, 77 Phil. 1038)
85

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 4

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
A person is not liable criminally for all possible consequences
which may immediately follow his felonious act, but only for such as
are proximate.
Thus, where a person struck another with his fist and knocked
him down and a horse near them jumped upon him and killed him,
the assailant was not responsible for the death of that other person.
(People v. Rockwell, 39 Mich. 503)
This case should be distinguished from the case of People v.
Cagoco, 58 Phil. 524, supra.
In the Cagoco case, there was no active force that intervened
between the felonious act and the result. In the Rockwell case, there
was an active force (the jumping of the horse upon the deceased)
which produced the result.
In the following cases, the injury caused is not the direct, logical
and necessary consequence of the felony committed, because the felony
committed is not the proximate cause of the resulting injury:
a.

If slight physical injuries be inflicted by A upon B, and the
latter deliberately immerses his body in a contaminated
cesspool, thereby causing his injuries to become infected
and serious, A cannot be held liable for the crime of serious
physical injuries. (U.S. v. De Los Santos, G.R. No. 13309)
The act of B in deliberately immersing his body in
a contaminated cesspool, not the slight physical injuries
inflicted by A, is the proximate cause of the serious physical
injuries.

b.

c.

The accused struck a boy on the mouth with the back
of his hand. Later, the boy died. Death might have been
caused by fever prevalent in the locality, not by the blow
on the mouth. The accused who gave the blow was not
liable for the death of the deceased. (People v. Palalon,
49 Phil. 177)
The accused struck a child, who was seriously ill with
fever for three weeks, upon the thighs with a slipper,
pushed and dragged him, throwing him heavily on the
mat spread on the floor. The child died two days later.
As the true cause of the child's death was not proved, the
86

accused was convicted of physical injuries only. (U.S. v.
Embate, 3 Phil. 640)
d.

Where medical findings lead to a distinct possibility that
the infection of the wound by tetanus was an efficient
intervening cause later or between the time the deceased
was wounded to the time of his death, the accused must
be acquitted of the crime of homicide. (Urbano v. lAC, 157
SCRA 10)

The felony committed Is not the proximate cause of the resulting
Injury when
1.

There is an active force that intervened between the felony
committed and the resulting injury, and the active force is
a distinct act or fact absolutely foreign from the felonious
act of the accused; or

2.

The resulting injury is due to the intentional act of the
victim.

Is the accused responsible for the result, if there is a neglect of the
wound or there is an improper treatment of the wound?
In the case of People v. Moldes, G,R. No. L-42122 (1934), where
the accused was convicted of homicide, counsel for the accused claimed
that if the deceased had secured proper surgical treatment, the wound
would not have been fatal. The Court held that: The general rule is
"... that he who inflicts the injury is not relieved of responsibility
if the wound inflicted is dangerous, that is, calculated to destroy or
endanger life, even though the immediate cause of the death was
erroneous or unskillful medical or surgical treatment ..." (29 C.J.,
1081, and the numerous cases there cited)
Unskillful and improper treatment may be an active force, but
it is not a distinct act or fact absolutely foreign from the criminal
act.
Is the accused criminally liable for the consequences which originate
through the fault or carelessness of the injured person?
In the case of U.S. v. Monasterial, 14 Phil. 391, it was held
that "persons who are responsible for an act constituting a crime are
also liable for all the consequences arising therefrom and mherent
87

Art. 4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
therein, other than those due to incidents entirely foreign to the act
executed, or which originate through the fault or carelessness of the
injured person, which are exceptions to the rule not arising in the
present case."
In the case of People v. Quianson, 62 Phil. 162, it is stated that
one who inflicts injury on another is deemed guilty of homicide if the
injury contributes to the death of the latter, "even if the deceased
might have recovered if he had taken proper care of himself, or
submitted to surgical operation."
It would seem that the fault or carelessness of the injured
party, which would break the relation of the felony committed and
the resulting injury, must have its origin from his malicious act or
omission (U.S. v. Navarro, 7 Phil. 713), as when the injured party
had a desire to increase the criminal liability of his assailant.
A supervening event may be the subject of amendment of original
information or of a new charge without double jeopardy.
Where the charge contained in the original information was
for slight physical injuries because at that time the fiscal believed
that the wound suffered by the offended party would require medical
attendance for a period of only eight days, but when the preliminary
investigation was conducted, the justice of the peace found that the
wound would heal after a period of 30 days, the act which converted
the crime into a more serious one had supervened after the filing of
the original information and this supervening event can still be the
subject of amendment or of a new charge without necessarily placing
the accused in double jeopardy. (People v. Petilla, 92 Phil. 395)
Impossible crimes.
The commission of an impossible crime is indicative of criminal
propensity or criminal tendency on the part of the actor. Such
person is a potential criminal. According to positivist thinking, the
community must be protected from anti-social activities, whether
actual or potential, of the morbid type of man called "socially
dangerous person."
The penalty for impossible crime is provided in Article 59 of this
Code.

The 2nd paragraph of Article 4 defines the so-called impossible
crimes (impossible attempts).
Requisites of impossible crime:
1.

That the act performed would be an offense against persons
or property.

2.

That the act was done with evil intent.

3.

That its accomplishment is inherently impossible, or that
the means employed is either inadequate or ineffectual.

4.

That the act performed should not constitute a violation
of another provision of the R.P.C.

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES IN PARAGRAPH 2 OF
ARTICLE 4.
1.

"Performing an act which would be an offense against
persons or property."
In committing an impossible crime, the offender
intends to commit a felony against persons or a felony
against property, and the act performed would have been
an offense against persons or property. But a felony against
persons or property should not be actually committed, for,
otherwise, he would be liable for that felony. There would
be no impossible crime to speak of.

Felonies against persons are:
a.

Parricide (Art. 246)

b.

Murder (Art. 248)

c.

Homicide (Art. 249)

d.

Infanticide (Art. 255)

e.

Abortion (Arts. 256, 257, 258, and 259)

f.

Duel (Arts. 260 and 261)

g.

Physical injuries (Arts. 262, 263, 264, 265, and 266)

h.

Rape (Art. 266-A)
89

88

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 4

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which

Criminal Law

Art. 4

Affect Criminal Liability
Felonies against property are:
a.

Robbery (Arts. 294, 297, 298, 299, 300, 302, and 303)

b.

Brigandage (Arts. 306 and 307)

c.

Theft (Arts. 308, 310, and 311)

d.

Usurpation (Arts. 312 and 313)

e.

Culpable insolvency (Art. 314)

f.

Swindling and other deceits (Arts. 315, 316, 317, and
318)

g.

Chattel mortgage (Art. 319)

h.

Arson and other crimes involving destruction (Arts.
320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, and 326)

i.

Malicious mischief (Arts. 327, 328, 329, 330, and 331)

If the act performed would be an offense other than a felony
against persons or against property, there is no impossible crime.

persons or against property) is inherently impossible of
accomplishment; or (2) the means employed is either (a)
inadequate, or (b) ineffectual.
a.

"Inherent impossibility of its accomplishment."
This phrase means that the act intended
by the offender is by its nature one of impossible
accomplishment. (See Art. 59, R.P.C.)
There must be either (1) legal impossibility, or (2)
physical impossibility of accomplishing the intended
act.
Examples of impossible crimes which are
punishable under the R.P.C. are: (1) When one tries to
kill another by putting in his soup a substance which
he believes to be arsenic when in fact it is common
salt; and (2) when one tries to murder a corpse. (People
v. Balmores, 85 Phil. 493, 496)
(1)

Example: A fired at B, who was lying on
bed, not knowing that B was dead hours before.
In crime against persons, as would have been
in this case, it is necessary that the victim could
be injured or killed. A dead person cannot be
injured or killed. Had B been alive when he was
shot, and as a consequence he died, the crime
committed by A would have been murder, a
crime against persons.

That the act was done with evil intent.
Since the offender in impossible crime intended to commit an
offense against persons or against property, it must be shown that
the actor performed the act with evil intent, that is, he must have
the intent to do an injury to another.
A, who wanted to kill B, looked for him. When A saw B, he found
out that B was already dead. To satisfy his grudge, A stabbed B in
his breast three times with a knife. Is this an impossible crime?
No. A knew that B was already dead when he stabbed the lifeless
body. There was no evil intent on the part ofA, because he knew that
he could not cause an injury to B. Even subjectively, he was not a
criminal.
2.

"Were it not for the inherent impossibility ofits accomplishment or on account of the employment of inadequate or
ineffectual means."
In impossible crime, the act performed by the offender
cannot produce an offense against persons or property,
because: (1) the commission of the offense (against

"Would be an offense against persons."

There is physical and legal impossibility in
this example.
(2)

"Would be an offense against property."
A, with intent to gain, took a watch from
the pocket of B. When A had the watch in his
possession, he found out that it was the watch
which he had lost a week before. In other words,
the watch belonged to A. Is this an impossible
crime?
91

90

Art. 4

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 4

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
It is believed that it may be an impossible
crime. The act performed would have been
theft had the watch been the property of B. But
there is a legal impossibility of accomplishing
it, because in theft, the personal property taken
must belong to another.
An employee who, having known the safe
combination, opens the safe in the office for the
purpose of stealing money, but who finds the
safe empty, is guilty of an impossible crime. The
act performed would have been a crime of theft
were it not for the inherent impossibility of its
accomplishment. If there is no personal property
that could be taken, it is inherently impossible
to commit theft.

b.

"Employment of inadequate" means.
Example: A, determined to poison B, uses a
small quantity of arsenic by mixing it with the food
given to B, believing that the quantity employed by
him is sufficient. But since in fact it is not sufficient,
Bis not killed. The means employed (small quantity
of poison) is inadequate to kill a person.
Where the means employed is adequate.
But where the means employed is adequate
and the result expected is not produced, it is not an
impossible crime, but a frustrated felony.
Thus, if the quantity of poison used is sufficient
to kill an ordinary person, but the intended victim
has developed strong resistance to poison because he
has been working in a mine, the crime committed is
frustrated murder.

c.

Employment of "ineffectual means."

A tried to kill B by putting in his soup a substance which he thought was arsenic when in fact
it was sugar. B could not have been killed, because

the means employed was ineffectual. But A showed
criminal tendency and, hence, he should be punished
for it in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, in
relation to Article 59.
A, with intent to kill B, aimed his revolver at the
back of the latter, A, not knowing that it was empty.
When he pressed the trigger it did not fire. The means
used by A is ineffectual.
Inherent impossibility of accomplishment

A collector for a company did not remit the customer's check
payment to the company but instead, appropriated it for herself by
depositing it to the bank account of a relative. The check was, however,
dishonored.
In this case, petitioner performed all the acts to consummate
the crime of qualified theft, which is a crime against property.
Petitioner's evil intent cannot be denied, as the mere act of
unlawfully taking the check meant for the company showed her
intent to gain or be unjustly enriched. Were it not for the fact
that the check bounced, she would have received the face value
thereof, which was not rightfully hers. Therefore, it was only due
to the extraneous circumstance of the check being unfunded, a fact
unknown to petitioner at the time, that prevented the crime from
being produced. The thing unlawfully taken by petitioner turned
out to be absolutely worthless, because the check was eventually
dishonored, and the company had received the cash to replace the
value of said dishonored check.
There can be no question that as of the time that petitioner took
possession of the check meant for the company, she had performed all
the acts to consummate the crime of theft, had it not been impossible
of accomplishment in this case.
Petitioner is found guilty of an impossible crime as defined and
penalized in Articles 4, paragraph 2, and 59 of the R.P.C., respectively.
Petitioner is sentenced to suffer the penalty of six months of arresto
mayor, and to pay the costs. (Jacinto v. People, G.R. No. 162540, July
13, 2009)
93

92

Art. 5

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 5

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Offense against persons.
The accused, intending to kill a person, peppered the latter's
bedroom with bullets, but since the intended victim was not home
at the time, no harm came to him. He was adjudged guilty only of
an impossible crime as defined and penalized in paragraph 2,
Article 4, in relation to Article 59, both of the R.P.C., because of
the factual impossibility of producing the crime. (Intod v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 103119, October 21, 1992, 215 SCRA 52)

In impossible crime the act performed should not constitute a
violation of another provision of the Code.
A, who knew that B owned and always carried a watch, decided
to rob B of said watch. When A met B for that purpose, B did not
have the watch because he forgot to carry it with him. Thinking
that B had the watch with him, A pointed his gun at him and asked
for the watch. Finding that B did not have the watch, A allowed B
to go without further molestation. Is this an impossible crime? It is
believed that A committed attempted robbery, not impossible crime.
There was intent to gain on the part ofA when he decided to take the
watch of Bat the point of gun. The crime ofrobbery with intimidation
of person is not produced, not because of the inherent impossibility
of its accomplishment, but because of a cause or accident (that B
forgot to carry the watch with him) other than A's own spontaneous
desistance. (Art. 6, par. 3) Note also that A's pointing his gun at B
already constituted at least the crime of grave threats under Article
282, subdivision 2, of the R.P.C. This is another reason why it is not
an impossible crime.

decision and shall report to the Chief Executive, through the
Department of Justice, the reasons which induce the court
to believe that said act should be made the subject of penal
legislation.
In the same way, the court shall submit to the Chief
Executive, through the Departm ent of Justice, such statement
as may be deemed proper, without suspending the execution
of the sentence, when a strict enforcement of the provisions of
this Code would result in the imposition of a clearly excessive
penalty, taking into consideration the degree of malice and
the injury caused by the offense.

"In connection with acts which should be repressed but which are
not covered by the law."
The 1st paragraph of this article which contemplates a trial of
a criminal case requires the following:
1.

The act committed by the accused appears not punishable
by any law;

2.

But the court deems it proper to repress such act;

3.

In that case, the court must render the proper decision by
dismissing the case and acquitting the accused;

4.

The judge must then make a report to the Chief Executive,
through the Secretary of Justice, stating the reasons which
induce him to believe that the said act should be made the
subject of penal legislation.

Purpose of the law In punishing the impossible crime.
To suppress criminal propensity or criminal tendencies.
Objectively, the offender has not committed a felony, but subjectively,
he is a criminal.

Art. 5. Duty of the court in connection with acts which
should be repressed but which are not covered by the law,
and in cases of excessive penalties. Whenever a court has
knowledge of any act which it may deem proper to repress
and which is not punishable by law, it shall render the proper

Basis of paragraph 1, Article 5.
The provision contained in paragraph 1 of Article 5 is based on
the legal maxim "nullum crimen, nulla poena sine lege," that is, that
there is no crime if there is no law that punishes the act.
"In cases of excessive penalties."
The second paragraph of Article 5 requires that1.

The court after trial finds the accused guilty.
95

94

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 5

TITLE ONE

Art. 5

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
2.

The penalty provided by law and which the court imposes
for the crime committed appears to be clearly excessive,
because
a.

the accused acted with lesser degree of malice, and/
or;

b.

there is no injury or the injury caused is of lesser
gravity.

3.

The court should not suspend the execution of the
sentence.

4.

The judge should submit a statement to the Chief
Executive, through the Secretary of Justice, recommending
executive clemency.
Examples ofthe accused acting with lesser degree of malice:
In a case where the accused maltreated his wife
in his inebriated state, because she prevented him from
whipping their negligent son, and the maltreatment
inflicted by the accused was the proximate cause of her
death, the Supreme Court applied Article 5 of the R.P.C.,
"considering that the accused had no intent to kill his wife
and that her death might have been hastened by lack of
appropriate medical attendance or her weak constitution."
The penalty of reclusion perpetua, prescribed by law for
the crime committed, appears to be excessive. (People v.
Mon/eon, No. L-36282, December 10, 1976, 74 SCRA 263,
269)

taking into consideration the minimal injury caused by the
offense. We agree that the accused be recommended to the
Chief Executive for the possible exercise of his pardoning
power. Pursuant to Article 5 of the R.P.C., we recommend
to His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, through
the Secretary of Justice, the grant to accused of either a
commutation of sentence to an indeterminate penalty of
prision correccional to prision mayor or executive clemency.
(People v. Acbangin, G.R. No. 117216, August 9, 2000)
Example of total absence of injury:
The defendant chief of police altered and falsified the
municipal police blotter and the book of records of arrests
and the return of the warrant of arrest and the bail bond
of a person charged with qualified seduction so as to make
them show that the said person was arrested and gave bond
on the 13th day of September 1930, whereas, in truth and
in fact, as said records showed before said falsification, that
person was arrested and released on bond on the 6th day
of September 1930; and that defendant justice of the peace
conspired and cooperated with his co-defendant in making
said falsification in order to meet the administrative
charges then pending against him. In other words, those
falsifications were committed to make it appear that there
was no delay in the preliminary investigation conducted
by the justice of the peace for qualified seduction. In this
case, there is apparent lack of malice and total absence of
injury. (People v. Cabagsan and Montano, 57 Phil. 598)

Example of injury caused is of lesser gravity:
Facts: The victim, a four-year-old child, was brought
by the accused to the house of a certain Juanita Niu. The
accused initially denied knowing where the victim was
but the next day, told the victim's grandmother that the
victim was at Niu's house. The accused accompanied the
victim's father and police officers to Niu's house and found
the victim well-dressed and smiling. Accused was convicted
of kidnapping and serious illegal detention and sentenced
to reclusion perpetua.
Held: We agree with the trial court that a strict
application of Article 267 of the R.P.C. would be too harsh,
96

Executive clemency recommended for the wife who killed her cruel
husband.

Her deceased husband not content with squandering away the
family substance, and not satisfied with keeping a mistress upon
whom he must have spent some of the money that properly belonged
to his own family including his wife, got into the habit of drinking
until he became a habitual drunkard. xx x On the very day that she
killed her husband, according to her own confession on which her
conviction was based, he came home drunk, forthwith laid hands
on her, striking her on the stomach until she fainted, and when she
recovered consciousness and asked for the reason for the unprovoked
97

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 5

TITLE ONE

Art. 5

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
attack, he threatened to renew the beating. At the supper table instead
of eating the meal set before him, he threw the rice from his plate, thus
adding insult to injury. Then he left the house and when he returned,
he again boxed his wife, the herein appellant. The violence with which
appellant killed her husband reveals the pent-up righteous anger and
rebellion against years of abuse, insult, and tyranny seldom heard
of. Considering all these circumstances and provocations including
the fact as already stated that her conviction was based on her own
confession, the appellant is deserving of executive clemency, not offull
pardon but of a substantial if not a radical reduction or commutation
of her life sentence. (Montemayor, ., concurring in People v. Ganja,
86 Phil. 518, 522-523)
Executive clemency recommended because of the severity of the
penalty for rape.
The crime committed by the accused is simple rape. Before
Article 335 of the R.P.C. was amended, simple rape was penalized by
reclusion temporal or 12 years and one day to 20 years. Republic Act
No. 4111 raised the penalty for simple rape to reclusion perpetua and
made qualified rape a capital offense. Tak..ing notice of the rampancy
of sexual assaults, ensuing from the lawlessness and deterioration
of morals occasioned by the war, the lawmaking body sought to deter
rapists by increasing the penalty for rape. It is believed that in this
case, aft.er the accused shall have served a term of imprisonment
consistent with retributive justice, executive clemency may be
extended to him. (People v. Manlapaz, No. L-41819, February 28,
1979, 88 SCRA 704, 719)
The penalties are not excessive when intended to enforce a public
policy.
1.

The rampant lawlessness against property, person, and
even the very security of the Government, directly traceable
in large measure to promiscuous carrying and use of
powerful weapons, justify imprisonment which in normal
circumstances might appear excessive. (People v. Estoista,
93 Phil. 647, 654)

2.

With regard to the fine of P5,000.00 imposed by the court
for selling a can of powdered Klim milk for P2.20 when the
selling price for it was P1.80, it should be considered that

Congress thought it necessary to repress profiteering with
a heavy fine so that dealers would not take advantage of
the critical condition to make unusual profits. (People v.
Tiu Ua, 96 Phil. 738, 741)
Courts have the duty to apply the penalty provided by law.
A trial judge expressed in his decision his view against the
wisdom of the death penalty and refused to impose it.
Held: It is the duty ofjudicial officers to respect and apply the
law, regardless of their private opinions.
It is a well-settled rule that the courts are not concerned with the
wisdom, efficacy or morality of laws. That question falls exclusively
within the province of the Legislature which enacts them and the
Chief Executive who approves or vetoes them. The only function of
the judiciary is to interpret the laws and, if not in disharmony with
the Constitution, to apply them. (People v. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35)

A trial judge sentenced the accused to life imprisonment,
although the commission of the crime of robbery with homicide was
attended by the aggravating circumstances ofnocturnity and in band,
"in view of the attitude of the Chief Executive on death penalty."
Held: The courts should interpret and apply the laws as they find
them on the statute books, regardless of the manner their judgments
are executed and implemented by the executive department. (People
v. Olaes, 105 Phil. 502)
Judge has the duty to apply the law as interpreted by the Supreme
Court.
Ifa Judge of a lower court feels, in the fulfillment of his mission
of deciding cases, that the application of a doctrine promulgated by
the Supreme Court is against his way of reasoning, or against his
conscience, he may state his opinion on the matter, but rather than
disposing of the case in accordance with his personal view, he must
first think that it is his duty to apply the law as interpreted by the
Highest Court of the land, and that any deviation from a principle laid
down by the latter would unavoidably cause, as a sequel, unnecessary
inconveniences, delays and expenses to the litigants. (People v. Santos,
et al., 104 Phil. 560)
99

98

Art. 5

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Accused-appellant claims that the penalty of reclusion perpetua
is too cruel and harsh a penalty and pleads for sympathy. Courts are
not the forum to plead for sympathy. The duty of courts is to apply
the law, disregarding their feeling of sympathy or pity for an accused.
DURA LEX SED LEX. The remedy is elsewhere clemency from the
executive or an amendment of the law by the legislative, but surely,
at this point, this Court can but apply the law. (People v. Amigo, G.R.
No. 116719, January 18, 1996)
Paragraphs 1 and 2, Article 5, applied in relation to penalty that
the court believes should be the subject of amendment by the
legislature.
In a case of estafa under Article 315, paragraph 1(b), the
question of the continued validity of the penalties imposed on persons
convicted of crimes involving property came up since these penalties
were pegged to the value of the money and property in 1930 when
the R.P.C. was enacted. The members of the division deliberating
the case referred the matter to the Court en bane and several amici
curiae were invited to give their academic opinion.
The Supreme Court found that there seems to be a perceived
injustice brought about by the range of penalties that the courts
continue to impose on crimes against property committed today,
based on the amount of damage measured by the value of money 80
years ago in 1932. However, this Court cannot modify the said range
of penalties because that would constitute judicial legislation. The
legislature's perceived failure in amending the penalties provided
for in the said crimes cannot be remedied through this Court's
decisions, as that would be encroaching upon the power of another
branch of the government. This, however, docs not render the whole
situation without any remedy. It can be appropriately presumed that
the framers of the R.P.C. had anticipated this matter by including
Article 5.
Pursuant to Article 5 of the R.P.C., the Supreme Court ordered that a copy of the Decision be furnished the President of
the Republic of the Philippines, through the Department of Justice, as
well as the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives. (Corpuz v. People, G.R. No. 180016, April 29, 2014)

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
"When a strict enforcement of the provisions of this Code."
The wording of the second paragraph of Article 5 of the R.P.C.
clearly states that it applies only "when a strict enforcement of the
provisions" of the R.P.C. would result in the imposition of a clearly
excessive penalty, taking into consideration the degree of malice and
the injury caused by the offense. However, said paragraph has been
applied to violation of special laws.
Article 5, applied to violation of special law,
Facts: Accused was convicted of violation of R.A. No. 8282, the
Social Security Act of 1997, for failure to remit premium contributions
amounting to P421,151.09, inclusive of penalties, of which P239,756.80
was the actual amount ofunremitted premium contributions. During
the pendency of his appeal, accused voluntarily paid his delinquent
contribution in the amount of P239,756.80. Notwithstanding said
payment, accused was sentenced to imprisonment for four years
and two months of prision correccional, as minimum, to 20 years of
reclusion temporal, as maximum.
Held: Under Article 5 of the R.P.C., the courts are bound to apply
the law as it is and impose the proper penalty, no matter how harsh it
might be. The same provision, however, gives the Court the discretion
to recommend to the President actions it deems appropriate but are
beyond its power when it considers the penalty imposed as excessive.
Although the petitioner was convicted under a special penal law the
Court is not precluded from giving the R.P.C. suppletory application
in light of Article 10 of the same Code and our ruling in People v.
Simon, 234 SCRA 555, 574. Considering the circumstances of the
case, the Court transmits the case to the Chief Executive, through
the Department of Justice, and recommends the grant of executive
clemency to the petitioner. (Mendoza v. People, G.R. No. 183891,
October 19, 2011)

Art. 6. Consummated, frustrated, and attempted felonies.
- Consumm ated felonies, as well as those which are frustrated
and attempted, are punishable.
A felony is consumm ated when all the elements necessary
for its execution and accomplishment are present; and it
ts frustrated when the offender performs all the acts of
101

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art.6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability

execution which would produce the felony as a consequence
but which, nevertheless, do not produce it by reason of causes
independent of the will of the perpetrator.
There is an attempt when the offender comm ences the
commission of a felony directly by overt acts, and does not
perform all the acts of execution which should produce the
felony by reason of some cause or accident other than his own
spontaneous desistance.

Thus, if A intended to commit treason and joined a body of
armed men in the belief that they were Makapilis, when in fact
they were Guerrilleros, A was not liable for treason, despite his
intent. (Albert)
2.

External acts cover (a) preparatory acts· and (b) acts of
execution.
'
a.

Ordinarily, preparatory acts are not punishable.
Hence, proposal and conspiracy to commit a felony, which
are only preparatory acts, are not punishable, except when
the law provides for their punishment in certain felonies.

Consummated felony, defined.
A felony is consummated when all the elements necessary for
its execution and accomplishment are present.

(Art. 8)

But preparatory acts which are considered in
themselves, by law, as independent crimes are punishable.
Example: Possession of picklocks under Article 304.
The possession of picklocks is a preparatory act to the
commission ofrobbery. (Arts. 299 and 302)

Frustrated felony, defined.
It is frustrated when the offender performs all the acts of
execution which would produce the felony as a consequence but which,
nevertheless, do not produce it by reason of causes independent of
the will of the perpetrator.

The other examples of preparatory acts are: (1)buying
po1son or carrying a weapon with which to kill the intended
victim; (2) carrying inflammable materials to the place
where a house is to be burned, etc.

Attempted felony, defined.
There is an attempt when the offender commences the
commission of a felony directly by overt acts, and does not perform
all the acts of execution which should produce the felony by reason of
some cause or accident other than his own spontaneous desistance.
Development of crime.
From the moment the culprit conceives the idea of committing a
crime up to the realization of the same, his act passes through certain
stages.
These stages are: (1) internal acts; and (2) external acts.
1.

Internal acts, such as mere ideas in the mind of a person, are
not punishable even if, had they been carried out, they would
constitute a crime.
Intention and effect must concur.
Mere intention producing no effect is no more a crime than
a mere effect without the intention is a crime.
102

Preparatory acts - ordinarily they are not punishable.

.
For merely doing any of these acts, a person is not
liable for attempted homicide or attempted arson, because
they do not constitute even the first stage of the acts of
execution of those crimes.
b.

Acts of execution - they are punishable under the R.P.C.
The stages ofacts ofexecution attempted, frustrated,
and consummated
are punishable. (Art. 6)
The first stage of the acts of execution of a felony is
the attempted; the second stage, the frustrated; and the
last stage, the consummated.
In performing the acts of execution of a felony, the
offender may reach only the first stage or the second stage.
In either case, he does not produce the felony he intends to
commit. But he is liable for attempted felony or frustrated
felony, as the case may be.
103

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Attempted felony.
There is an attempt when the offender begins the commission
of a felony directly by overt acts. He has not performed all the acts
of execution which should produce the felony.
Elements of attempted felony:
1.

The offender commences the commission of the felony
directly by overt acts;

2.

He does not perform all the acts of execution which should
produce the felony;

3.

The offender's act is not stopped by his own spontaneous
desistance;

4.

The non-performance of all acts of execution was due to
cause or accident other than his spontaneous desistance.

IMP ORTANT WORDS AND PHRAS ES IN ARTICLE 6.
1.

"Commences the commission of a felony directly by overt acts."
When is the commission of a felony deemed commenced directly
by overt acts? When the following two requisites are present:

its natural course, without being frustrated by external obstacles
nor by the voluntary desistance of the perpetrator, will logically and
necessarily ripen into a concrete offense.
Preparatory acts and overt acts, distinguished.
IfA bought poison from a drugstore, in preparation for the killing
of B by means of poison, such act is only a preparatory act. It is not
an overt act, because it has no direct connection with the crime of
murder which A intended to commit. The poison purchased may be
used by A to kill rats or insects. Hence, the act of buying poison did
not disclose necessarily an intention to kill a person with it.
But if A mixed the poison with the food intended for B, and
the latter, not knowing that it contained poison, put into his mouth
a spoonful thereof, the act of A was more than a mere planning or
preparation for the commission of murder. The buying of poison and
mixing it with the food of B who later put into his mouth part thereof
to eat it, taken together, constituted the overt acts of murder. The
nature of the external act thus performed by A clearly indicated
that he intended to commit the crime of murder. If for some reason
or another, B threw away the food with poison from his mouth, A is
liable for attempted murder.
Note:

Killing a person by means of poison is murder. (Art. 248,
R.P.C.)

(1)

That there be external acts;

(2)

Such external acts have direct connection with the crime
intended to be committed.

Drawing or trying to draw a pistol is not an overt act of homicide.

The external acts must be related to the overt acts of the crime the
offender intended to commit.

In a case, the evidence of the prosecution established the
following facts:

The external acts referred to in the first requisite must be related
to the overt acts of the crime the offender intended to commit. They
should not be mere preparatory acts, for preparatory acts do not
have direct connection with the crime which the offender intends to
commit.

While Tabago was talking with the Chief of Police, he made a
motion to draw his pistol, but the latter embraced him and prevented
him from drawing his pistol. Tabago then told his two companions to
fire at the Chief of Police, but they could not do so, because the Chiefof
Police was embracingTabago. One of his companions, Avelino Valle,
fired a shot but the same was not aimed at anybody.

"Overt acts" defined.

Held: The accused cannot be convicted of the crime of attempted
homicide. The action of the accused in placing his hand on his
revolver, which was then on his waist, is indeed very equivocal and
susceptible of different interpretations. For example, it cannot be

An overt act is some physical activity or deed, indicating the
intention to commit a particular crime, more than a mere planning
or preparation, which if carried to its complete termination following

105
104

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art.6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
definitely concluded that the attempt of the accused to draw out his
revolver would have, if allowed to develop or be carried to its complete
termination following its natural course, logically and necessarily
ripened into a concrete offense, because it is entirely possible that at
any time during the subjective stage of the felony, the accused could
have voluntarily desisted from performing all the acts of execution
and which, had it happened, would completely exempt him from
criminal responsibility for the offense he intended to commit. (People
v. Tabago, et al., C.A., 48 0.G. 3419)
To constitute attempted homicide the person using a firearm
must fire the same, with intent to k.ill, at the offended party, without
however inflicting a mortal wound on the latter.
Raising a bolo as if to strike the offended party with It ls not an
overt act of homicide.
In the case of U.S. v. Simeon, 3 Phil. 688, it was held that the
crime committed was only that of threatening another with a weapon
(Art. 285, par. 1), because all that the accused did was to raise his bolo
as if to strike or stab the offended party with it. The latter shouted
for help and ran away. No blow was struck; nor was there proof of
threats to k.ill or to do bodily harm.
If a blow with the bolo was struck and there was intent to kill
on the part of the accused, the act of striking the offended party with
the bolo would be an overt act of the crime of homicide.

another Chinaman. A had only succeeded in breaking one board and
in unfastening another from the wall.
Is there an attempted robbery in this case?
.
No, because while it is true that the lst requisite is present, that
is, there were external acts of breaking one board and unfastening
another from the wall of the store to make an opening through which
A could enter the store, yet the 2nd requisite is not present for such
acts had no direct connection with the crime of robbery by the use of
force upon things.
In case of robbery by the use of force upon things, in order that
the simple act of entering by means of force another person's dwelling
may be considered an attempt to commit this offense, it must be shown
that the offender clearly intended to take possession, for the purpose
of gain, of some personal property belonging to another.
The crime committed was attempted trespass to dwelling,
because the intention of the accused was obviously disclosed by his
act ofmak.ing an opening through the wall, and that was to enter the
store against the will of its owner who was then living there. (People
v. Lamahang, 61 Phil. 703) It is only an attempt, because A was
not able to perform all the acts of execution which should produce
the felony of trespass to dwelling. Had A commenced entering the
dwelhng through the opening, he would have performed all the acts
of execution.
What Is an indeterminate offense?

Overt act may not be by physical activity.
There are felonies where, because of their nature or the
manner of committing them, the overt acts are not performed with
bodily movement or by physical activity. Thus, a proposal consisting
in making an offer of money to a public officer for the purpose of
corrupting him is the overt act in the crime of corruption of public
officer. (U.S. v. Gloria, 4 Phil. 341)
The external acts must have a direct connection with the crime
intended to be committed by the offender.
At early dawn, A was surprised by a policeman while in the act
of making an opening with an iron bar on the wall of a store of cheap
goods. At that time the owner of the store was sleeping inside with

It is one where the purpose of the offender in performing an act
is not certain. Its nature in relation to its objective is ambiguous.
In the case of People v. Lamahang, supra, the final objective of
the offender, once he succeeded in entering the store, may be to rob to
cause physical injury to the inmates, or to commit any other offense.
In such a case, there is no justification in finding the offender guilty
of attempted robbery by the use of force upon things.
The intention of the accused must be viewed from the nature of the
acts executed by him, and not from his admission.
The intention of the accused must be ascertained from the facts
and, therefore, it is necessary that the mind be able to directly infer
107

106

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
from them the intention of the perpetrator to cause a particular
injury.
In the case of People v. Lizada, G.R. Nos. 143468-71, January
24, 2003, the Supreme Court held that:
• ... The Supreme Court of Spain, in its decision of
March 21, 1892, declared that for overt acts to constitute an
attempted offense, it is necessary that their objective be known
and established or such that acts be of such nature that they
themselves should obviously disclose the criminal objective
necessarily intended, said objective and finality to serve as
ground for designation of the offense."

Thus, ifA induced B to kill C, but B refused to do it, A cannot be
held liable for attempted homicide, because, although there was an
attempt on the part ofA, such an attempt was not done directly with
physical activity. The inducement made by A to B is in the nature of
a proposal, not ordinarily punished by law.
But if B, pursuant to his agreement with A, commenced the
commission of the crime by shooting C, with intent to kill, but missed
and did not injure C, both A and B are guilty of attempted felony,
because of conspiracy. When there is conspiracy, the rule is
the
act of one is the act of all.
2.

"Does not perform all the acts of execution."

Acts susceptible of double interpretation, that is, in favor as
well as against the accused, and which show an innocent as well as a
punishable act, must not and cannot furnish grounds by themselves
for attempted crime. (People u. Lamahang, 61 Phil. 707)

If the offender has performed all the acts of execution - nothing
more is left to be done - the stage of execution is that of a frustrated
felony, if the felony is not produced; or consummated, if the felony is
produced.

In offenses not consummated, as the material damage is wanting,
the nature of the action intended cannot exactly be ascertained, but
the same must be inferred from the nature of the acts executed.
(I Groizard, p. 99) The overt acts leading to the commission of the
offense are not punishable except when they are aimed directly at its
execution, and therefore they must have an immediate and necessary
relation to the offense. (I Viada, p. 47)

If anything yet remained for him to do, he would be guilty of an
attempted crime. (U.S. v. Eduave, 36 Phil. 209)

Example: Colinares v. People, G.R. No. 182748 (2011), where
Amel struck Rufino on the head with a huge stone, and the blow was
so forceful that it knocked Rufino out. Considering the great size of
his weapon, the impact it produced, and the location of the wounds
that Amel inflicted on his victim, the Court is convinced that he
intended to kill him.
1.

"Directly by overt acts."

The law requires that "the offender commences the commission
of the felony directly by overt acts."
Only offenders who personally execute the commission of a crime
can be guilty of attempted felony. The word "directly" suggests that
the offender must commence the commission of the felony by taking
direct part in the execution of the act.

Thus, as in the case of People v. Lamahang, when the accused,
for the purpose ofentering the dwelling of another broke one board and
unfastened another from the wall but before he could start entering
through the opening thus created he was arrested by a policeman, the
crime committed was only attempted trespass to dwelling, because
there was something yet for him to do, that is, to commence entering
the dwelling through that opening in order to perform all the acts of
execution.
3.

"By reason of some cause or accident."

In attempted felony, the offender fails to perform all the acts of
execution which should produce the felony because of some cause or
accident.
Examples:
Cause.
A picked the pocket ofB, inside of which there was a wallet
containing P50.00. Before A could remove it from the pocket of
B, the latter grabbed A's hand and prevented him from taking
it. In this case, A failed to perform all the acts of execution,
109

108

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which

Art. 6

Affect Criminal Liability
that is, taking the wallet, because of a cause, that is, the timely
discovery by B of the overt act of A.
Accident.
A aimed his pistol atB to kill the latter, but when he pressed
the trigger it jammed and no bullet was fired from the pistol.
4.

"Other than his own spontaneous desistance."

If the actor does not perform all the acts of execution by reason
of his own spontaneous desistance, there is no attempted felony. The
law does not punish him.
Reason:

It is a sort of reward granted by law to those who, having
one foot on the verge of crime, heed the call of their conscience
and return to the path of righteousness. (Viada, Cod. Pen., 35-36)
One who takes part in planning a criminal act but desists
in its actual commission is exempt from criminal liability. For
after taking part in the planning, he could have desisted from
taking part in the actual commission of the crime by listening
to the call of his conscience. (People v. Villacorte, No. L-21860,
February 28, 1974, 55 SCRA 640,654)
The desistance may be through fear or remorse. (People v.
Pambaya, 60 Phil. 1022) It is not necessary that it be actuated by a
good motive. The Code requires only that the discontinuance of the
crime comes from the person who has begun it, and that he stops of
his own free will. (Albert)
The desistance should be made before all the acts of execution
are performed.

A stole a chicken under the house of B one evening. Realizing
that what he did was wrong,A returned the chicken to the place under
the house of B. Since the crime of theft was already consummated,
the return of the stolen property does not relieve A of criminal
responsibility. A had already performed all the acts of execution which
produced the crime of theft before he returned the chicken.
A attacked and wounded B in the abdomen with a sharp-edged
weapon, causing a wound serious enough to have produced death. A

was about to assault B again; but this time, A desisted and left B. B
was taken to the hospital by another person. Because of the timely
and skillful medical treatment by a physician, B did not die. It will be
noted that when A desisted, he had already inflicted a mortal wound
on B, which could have produced his death were it not for the timely
intervention of a physician. A is liable for frustrated homicide.
The desistance which exempts from criminal liability has
reference to the crime Intended to be committed, and has no
reference to the crime actually committed by the offender before
his desistance.
A, with intent to kill, fired his pistol at B, but did not hit the
latter. B cried and asked A not to shoot him. A desisted from firing
his pistol again at B. Is A criminally liable?
Yes, not for attempted homicide because he desisted before he
could perform all the acts of execution, but for grave threats which
was already committed by him when he desisted.
It must be borne in mind that the spontaneous desistance of a
malefactor exempts him from criminal liability for the intended crime
but it does not exempt him from the crime committed by him before
his desistance. (People v. Lizada, G.R. Nos. 143468-72, January 24
2003)
"
Illustration of a case where the accused inflicted injury.
The issue before the court was: Should an accused who
admittedly shot the victim but is shown to have inflicted only a slight
wound be held accountable for the death of the victim due to a fatal
wound caused by his co-accused?
Held: The slight wound did not cause the death of the victim nor
materially contribute to it. His liability should therefore be limited
to the slight injury he caused. However, the fact that he inflicted a
gunshot wound on the victim shows the intent to kill. The use of a
gun fired at another certainly leads to no other conclusion than that
there is intent to kill. He is therefore liable for the crime of attempted
homicide and not merely for slight physical injury. (Araneta, Jr. v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 43527, July 3, 1990, 187 SCRA 123, 126,
133-134)
111

110

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Subjective phase of the offense.
In attempted felony, the offender never passes the subjective
phase of the offense.

The requisites of a frustrated felony are: (1) that the offender has
performed all the acts of execution which would produce the felony;
and (2) that the felony is not produced due to causes independent of
the perpetrator's will. (People v. Orta, G.R. No. 88724, April 3, 1990,

Definition of subjective phase of the offense.

184 SCRA 105, 113)

It is that portion ofthe acts constituting the crime, starting from
the point where the offender begins the commission of the crime to
that point where he has still control over his acts, including their
(acts') natural course.
If between these two points the offender is stopped by any cause
outside of his own voluntary desistance, the subjective phase has not
been passed and it is an attempt. If he is not so stopped but continues
until he performs the last act, it is frustrated, provided the crime is
not produced. The acts then of the offender reached the objective phase
of the crime.
Thus, if A, with intent to kill, mixes poison in the soup intended
for B, and B begins to take into his mouth a spoonful ofit, until this
point, A can still prevent the poisoning of B by voluntarily desisting
and telling B to throw away the substance from his mouth as it
contains poison. But from the moment B swallows it, A has no more
control over his acts. The poison is now in B's stomach and it will
require the intervention of a physician to prevent the poisoning
of B.
If because of the intervention of the physician, B did not die, A
will be liable for frustrated murder. The acts performed by A, following
their natural course, passed from the subjective phase to the objective
phase of the crime.

1.

"Performs all the acts ofexecution."

In frustrated felony, the offender must perform all the acts of
execution. Nothing more is left to be done by the offender, because
he has performed the last act necessary to produce the crime. This
element distinguishes frustrated felony from attempted felony.
In attempted felony, the offender does not perform all the acts of
execution. He does not perform the last act necessary to produce the
crime. He merely commences the commission of a felony directly by
overt acts.
Thus, if A, with intent to kill, fires his gun at B, the discharge
of the gun is only an overt act. If the slug fired from the gun misses
B or the wound inflicted on B is not mortal, the last act necessary to
produce the crime of homicide is not yet performed by A. But if the
wound inflicted is mortal, that is, sufficient to cause death, A performs
the last act. If no medical attendance is given, B would surely die. In
homicide or murder, the crime is consummated if the victim dies. If
the victim survives, the crime is frustrated. (See U.S. v. Eduave, 36

Phil. 209)
The Supreme Court in certain cases has emphasized the belief of
the accused.
People v. Sy Pio
(94 Phil. 885)

Frustrated felony.

Elements:
1. The offender performs all the acts ofexecution;
2.

All the acts performed would produce the felony as a
consequence;

3.

But the felony is not produced;

4.

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES.

By reason of causes independent of the will of the

perpetrator.

Facts: The accused entered a store and once inside, he fired his .45

caliber pistol at the Chinaman Sy who was hit fatally. Kiap who was in
the store asked him why he fired the shot and without answering him, the
accused fired at Kiap, hitting him on the right shoulder. Upon being hit, Kiap
immediately ran behind the store to hide and he heard the accused fire at
several other directions before he ran away. The wound of Kiap healed in 20
days and was inflicted on the part of his body which could not have produced
his death. For shooting Kiap, the accused was prosecuted for and declared
guilty of frustrated murder in the Court of First Instance.
113

112

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Held: The fact that Kiap was able to escape, which the accused must
have seen, must have produced in the mind of the accused the belief that he
was not able to hit his victim at a vital part of the body. In other words, the
accused knew that he had not actually performed all the acts of execution
necessary to kill his victim.

TITLE ONE
Art.6
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability
In the following cases, the stage of execution was held to be
frustrated, because the wound inflicted was mortal:
a.

De Guzman, Jr. v. People, G.R. No. 178512 (2014), where
the accused wielded and used a knife in his assault on the
offended party who sustained two stab wounds, specifically,
one on his upper left chest and the other on the left side of
his face, with the chest wound sufficient to result into his
death were it not for the timely medical intervention.

b.

People v. Bacalto, 227 SCRA 252, where the accused shot
the victim in the left post-auricular area and the slug
remained in the body, just behind the spinal column. The
victim pretended to be dead and would not have survived
the gunshot wound without timely medical treatment.

c.

People v. Honrada, 62 Phil. 112, where the accused stabbed
the offended party in the abdomen, penetrating the liver,
and in the chest. It was only the prompt and skillful medical
treatment which the offended party received that saved his
life.

d.

People v. Mercado, 51 Phil. 99, where the accused wounded
the victim in the left abdomen with a sharp-edged weapon,
causing a wound in the peritoneal cavity, serious enough
to have produced death.

The accused is guilty of attempted murder, because he did not perform
all the acts of execution, actual and subjective, in order that the purpose and
intention that he had to kill his victim might be carried out.
In other cases, the Supreme Court stated Deadly weapons were used, blows were directed at the vital
parts of the body, the aggressors stated their purpose to k.ill and
thought they had killed. The subjective phase of the crime was entirely
passed, and subjectively speaking, the crime was complete. The
felony is not produced by reason of causes independent of the will of
the perpetrators; in this instance, the playing possum by the victim,
that is, he escaped death from the aggressors by the ruse of feigning
death. (People v. Dagman, 47 Phil. 770)
The defendant believed that he had performed all of the acts
• necessary to consummate the crime of murder, and, therefore, of his
own will, desisted from striking further blows. He believed that he
had killed Keng Kin. Death did not result for reasons entirely apart
from the will of the defendant. This surely stamps the crime as
frustrated murder. If, after the first blow, someone had rushed to the
assistance of Keng Kin and by his efforts had prevented the accused
from proceeding further in the commission of the crime, the defendant
not believing that he had performed all of the acts necessary lo cause
death, he would have been guilty of attempted murder. (U.S. v. Lim
San, cited in People v. Dagman, 47 Phil. 771)

In the following cases, the stage of execution was held to be
attempted, because there was no wound inflicted or the wound
Inflicted was not mortal.
a.

Colinares v. People, 678 Phil. 482,494, where the accused
struck the victim on the head with a huge stone with such
force that the victim was knocked out. While the victim had
two lacerations on his forehead, there was no indication
that his skull incurred fracture or that he bled internally as
a result of the pounding of his head. The wounds were not
so deep, they merely required suturing, and were estimated
to heal in seven or eight days.

b.

Serrano v People, 637 Phil. 319,337, where the stab wound
sustained by the victim was considerably superficial,
hence, not life-threatening. This is clear from the medical

The aggressor stated his purpose to kill, thought he had killed,
and threw the body into the bushes. When he gave himself up, he
declared that he had killed the complainant. But as death did not
result, the aggressor was guilty of frustrated murder. (U.S. v. Eduave,
36 Phil. 210)
The belief of the accused need not be considered. What should
be considered is whether all the acts of execution performed by the
offender "would produce the felony as a consequence."

114

115

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which

Art. 6

Affect Criminal Liability
certificate stating that the stab wound was only 2
centimeters long and 5 centimeters deep and the testimony
of the doctor that no vital organ of the victim was hit.
C.

d.

2.

U.S. v. Bien, 20 Phil. 354, where the accused threw a
Chinaman into the deep water, and as the Chinaman did
not know how to swim, he made efforts to keep himself
afloat and seized the gunwale of the boat, but the accused
tried to loosen the hold of the victim with the oar. The
accused was prevented from striking the latter by other
persons. Since the accused had the intent to kill the
offended party, the former actually committed attempted
homicide against the latter.
People v. Kalalo, et al., 59 Phil. 715, where the accused
fired four successive shots at the offended party while the
latter was fleeing to escape from his assailants and save his
own life. Not having hit the offended party, either because
of his poor aim or because his intended victim succeeded
in dodging the shots, the accused failed to perform all
the acts of execution by reason of a cause other than his
spontaneous desistance.

"Would produce the felony as a consequence."

3.

"Do not produce it."

In frustrated felony, the acts performed by the offender do not
produce the felony, because if the felony is produced it would be
consummated.
4.

"Independent of the will of the perpetrator."

Even if all the acts of execution have been performed, the crime
may not be consummated, because certain causes may prevent its
consummation. These certain causes may be the intervention of third
persons who prevented the consummation of the offense or may be
due to the perpetrator's own will.
If the crime is not produced because of the timely intervention
of a third person, it is frustrated.
If the crime is not produced because the offender himself
prevented its consummation, there is no frustrated felony, for the 4th
element is not present.
Note that the fourth element says that the felony is not produced
"by reason ofcauses independent ofthe will ofthe perpetrator." Hence,
if the cause which prevented the consummation of the offense was
the perpetrator's own and exclusive will, the 4th element does not
exist.

All the acts of execution performed by the offender could have
produced the felony as a consequence.

Problem:

Thus, when A approached B stealthily from behind and made
a movement with his right hand to strike B on the back with a
deadly knife, but the blow, instead of reaching the spot intended,
landed on the frame of the back of the chair on which B was sitting
at the time and did not cause the slightest physical injury on B, the
stage of execution should have been that of attempted murder only,
because without inflicting a deadly wound upon a vital spot of which
B should have died, the crime of murder would not be produced as a
consequence.

A doctor conceived the idea of killing his wife, and to carry out
his plan, he mixed arsenic with the soup of his victim. Immediately
after the victim took the poisonous food, the offender suddenly felt
such a twinge of conscience that he himself washed out the stomach
of the victim and administered to her the adequate antidote. Would
this be a frustrated parricide'! Certainly not, for even though the
subjective phase of the crime had already been passed, the most
important requisite of a frustrated crime, i.e., that the cause which
prevented the consummation of the offense be independent of the will
of the perpetrator, was lacking. (Guevara)

The case of People v. Kalalo, 59 Phil. 715, sustains the above
opinion. In crimes against persons, such as murder, which require
that the victim should die to consummate the felony, it is necessary
for the frustration of the same that a mortal wound is inflicted.

The crime cannot be considered attempted parricide, because
the doctor already performed all the acts of execution. At most, the
crime committed would be physical injuries, as the poison thus
administered, being an injurious substance, could cause the same.
117

116

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

The intent to kill which the doctor entertained in the beginning
disappeared when he prevented the poison from producing the death
of his wife.
Is there frustration due to Inadequate or ineffectual means?
Such a frustration is placed on the same footing as an impossible

attempt. (Albert)
Frustrated felony distinguished from attempted felony.
1.

In both, the offender has not accomplished his criminal
purpose.

2.

While in frustrated felony, the offender has performed all
the acts of execution which would produce the felony as
a consequence; in attempted felony, the offender merely
commences the commission of a felony directly by overt
acts and does not perform all the acts of execution.
In other words, in frustrated felony, the offender
has reached the objective phase; in attempted felony, the
offender has not passed the subjective phase.

The essential element which distinguishes attempted from
frustrated felony is that, in the latter, there is no intervention of a
foreign or extraneous cause or agency between the beginning of the
consummation of the crime and the moment when all of the acts have
been performed which should result in the consummated crime; while
in the former, there is such intervention and the offender does not
arrive at the point of performing all of the acts which should produce
the crime. He is stopped short of that point by some cause apart from
his own voluntary desistance. (People v. Orita, G.R. No. 88724, April
3, 1990, 184 SCRA 105, 113, quoting U.S. v. Eduave, 36 Phil. 209,

212)
Attempted or frustrated felony distinguished from Impossible crime.

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
(3)

In impossible crime, the evil intent of the offender cannot
be accomplished because it is inherently impossible of
accomplishment or because the means employed by the
offender is inadequate or ineffectual; in attempted or
frustrated felony, what prevented its accomplishment is
the intervention of certain cause or accident in which the
offender had no part.

Consummated felony.
A felony is consummated when all the elements necessary for
its execution and accomplishment are present.
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES.

"All the elements" necessary for its execution and accomplishment
are present."
In consummated felony, all the elements necessary for its
execution and accomplishment must be present. Every crime has
its own elements which must all be present to constitute a culpable
violation of a precept of law.
When not all the elements of a felony are proved.
When a felony has two or more elements and one of them is not
proved by the prosecution during the trial, either (1) the felony is
not shown to have been consummated, or (2) the felony is not shown
to have been committed, or (3) another felony is shown to have been
committed.
Thus, in the prosecution for homicide where the death of the
victim is an element of the offense, if that element is absent, because
the victim did not die, the crime is not consummated. It is either
attempted or frustrated.

(1)

In attempted or frustrated felony and impossible crime,
the evil intent of the offender is not accomplished.

In taking personal property from another, when the element of
intent to gain is lacking on the part of the person taking it, the crime
of theft is not committed.

(2)

But while in impossible crime, the evil intent of the
offender cannot be accomplished, in attempted or
frustrated felony the evil intent of the offender is possible

In the prosecution for estafa (Art. 315), if the element of deceit
or abuse of confidence is not proved, there is no crime. There is only
civil liability.

ofaccomplishment.
119

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

But if the element of damage only is not proved, the accused
may be found guilty of attempted or frustrated estafa.
In the prosecution for robbery with violence against persons
(Art. 294), if the element of intent to gain is not proved, the accused
can be found guilty of grave coercion (Art. 286), another felony.

Affect Criminal Liability
If there was blaze, but no part of the house is burned the crime
of arson is frustrated. If any part of the house, no matter how small
is burned, the crime of arson is consummated.
'
Elements constituting the felony.

In the prosecution for forcible abduction (Art. 342), if the
element of lewd designs is not proved, the accused may be held
liable for kidnapping and serious illegal detention (Art. 267), another
felony.

In theft, the crime is consummated when the thief is able to
take or get hold of the thing belonging to another, even if he is not
able to carry it away. In estafa, the crime is consummated when the
offended party is actually damaged or prejudiced.

Hence, all the elements of the felony for which the accused is
prosecuted must be present in order to hold him liable therefor in its
consummated stage.

Theft. - A Customs inspector abstracted a leather belt from the
baggage of a Japanese and secreted it in the drawer of his desk in the
Customs House, where it was found by other Customs employees. The
Court of First Instance convicted him of frustrated theft. The Supreme
Court considered it consummated theft, because all the elements
necessary for its execution and accomplishment were present. (U.S.
v. Adiao, 38 Phil. 754)

How to determine whether the crime is only attempted, or frustrated,
or it is consummated.

In determinin g whether the felony is only attempted or frustrated
or it is consummated, (1) the nature of the offense, (2) the elements
constituting the felony, as well as (3) the manner of committing the
same, must be considered.
Nature of crime.

Arson (Arts. 320-326).- In arson, it is not necessary that the
property is totally destroyed by fire. The crime of arson is therefore,
consummated even if only a portion of the wall or any other part of
the house is burned. The consummation of the crime of arson does not
depend upon the extent of the damage caused. (People v. Hernandez,
54 Phil. 122) The fact of having set fire to some rags and jute sacks,
soaked in kerosene oil, and placing them near the wooden partition of
the house, should not be qualified as consummated arson, inasmuch
as no part of the house began to burn. It is only frustrated arson.(U.S.
v. Valdes, 39 Phil. 240)
When a person had poured gasoline under the house of another
and was about to strike a match to set the house on fire when he
was apprehended, he was guilty of attempted arson. The acts
performed by him are directly connected with the crime of arson,
the offense he intended to commit. The pouring of the gasoline
under the house and the striking of the match could not be for any
other purpose.

Actual taking with intent to gain of personal property, belonging
to another, without the latter's consent, is sufficient to constitute
consummated theft. It is not necessary that the offender carries away
or appropriates the property taken.
Estafa. - Defendant was a salesman of the Philippine Education
Company. Afte r he had received P7.50 for the sale of books, which he
should have given to the cashier, he put it in his pocket with intent
to misappropriate the amount. Held: This is frustrated estafa. (U.S.
v. Dominguez, 41 Phil. 408)
The accused performed all the acts of execution. However the
crime was not consummated as there was no damage caused in view
of the timely discovery of the felonious act. In this k.ind of estafa the
elements of (1) abuse of confidence, and (2) damage to the offended
party must concur.
Is there a conflict in the rulings of the Adiao case and Dominguez
case?

In the Adiao case, the theft was consummated although the
belt was only secreted in defendant's desk. In the Dominguez case,
the estafa was only frustrated even if the sales money was already
in defendant's pocket. Apparently, they should both be either
consummated or frustrated. The difference lies in the elements of the
121

120

Art. 6

THE REVTSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which

Art. 6

Affect Criminal Liability
two crimes. In estafa, the offended party must be actually prejudiced
or damaged. This element is lacking in the Dominguez case. In theft,
the mere removal of the personal property belonging to another with
intent to gain is sufficient. The act of removing the personal property
constitutes the element of taking in theft. In the Adiao case, only
the element of taking is in question. And that element is considered
present because he abstracted (removed) the leather belt from the
baggage where it was kept and secreted it in the drawer of his desk.
The taking was complete.
Consummated theft.
In the Supply Depot at Quezon City, the accused removed from
the pile nine pieces of hospital linen and took them to their truck
where they were found by a corporal of the MP guards when they
tried to pass through the checkpoint. It was held that the crime
committed was consummated theft. (People v. Espiritu, et al., CAG.R. No. 2107-R, May 31, 1949)
Rulings on frustrated theft.

A truck loaded with stolen boxes of rifles was on the way out
of the checkpoint in South Harbor surrounded by a tall fence when
an MP guard discovered the boxes on the truck. It was held that the
crime committed was frustrated theft, because of the timely discovery
of the boxes on the truck before it could pass out of the checkpoint.
(People v. Dino, C.A., 45 0.G. 3446)
[The Court] cannot bring ourselves to agree in the appellee's
contention that the crime was consummated. The "traditional ruling"
cited by the appellee is qualified by the phrase "is placed in a situation
where he could dispose of its contents at once." Obviously, while the
truck and the van were still within the compound, the appellant could
not have disposed ofthe goods "at once." This is entirely different from
the case where a much less bulky and more common thing as money
was the object of the crime, where freedom to dispose or make use of
it is palpably less restricted. (People v. Flores, C.A., 62 O.G. 2644)
The Espiritu and Dino cases, distinguished.
In the Espiritu case, it was held that the crime of theft was
consummated because the thieves were able to take or get hold of
the hospital linen and that the only thing that was frustrated, which

does not constitute any element of theft, is the use or benefit that the
thieves expected to derive from the commission of the offense.
In the Dino case, it was held that the crime committed is that of
frustrated theft, because the fact determinative of consummation of
the crime of theft is the ability of the offender to dispose freely of the
articles stolen, even if it were more or less momentarily. The Court
of Appeals followed the opinion of Viada in this case. (See 5 Viada,
103)
When the meaning of an element of a felony is controversial,
there is bound to arise different rulings as to the stage of execution
of that felony.
THERE IS NO CRIME OF FRUSTRATED THEFT.
The Supreme Court has held that there is no crime offrustrated
theft, thereby declining to adopt the Dino and Flores ruling in this
jurisdiction.
The accused were sighted by a security guard outside a
supermarket hauling a pushcart with cases of detergents and
thereafter loading said cases of detergents in a taxi. When the taxi
was stopped by a security guard who asked the accused for a receipt
for the merchandise, the accused fled on foot but were apprehended
and the stolen merchandise were recovered. The Supreme Court held
that the crime committed was consummated theft.
It was held that the ability of the offender to freely dispose of the
property stolen is not a constitutive element of the crime of theft. It
finds no support or extension in Article 308, whether as a descriptive
or operative element of theft or as the mens rea or act us reus of the
felony.
For the purpose of ascertaining whether theft is susceptible of
commission in the frustrated stage, the question is again, when is the
crime of theft produced? There would be all but certain unanimity
in the position that theft is produced when there is deprivation of
personal property due to its taking by one with intent to gain. Viewed
from that perspective, it is immaterial to the product of the felony
that the offender, once having committed all the acts of execution for
theft, is able or unable to freely dispose of the property stolen since
the deprivation from the owner alone has already ensued from such
acts of execution.
123

122

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

It might be argued, that the ability of the offender to freely
dispose of the property stolen delves into the concept of "taking"
itself, in that, there could be no true taking until the actor obtains
such degree of control over the stolen item. But even if this were
correct, the effect would be to downgrade the crime to its attempted,
and not frustrated stage, for it would mean that not all the acts of
execution have not been completed, the "taking not having been
accomplished."
[The Court is] satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
taking by the petitioner was completed in this case. With intent
to gain, he acquired physical possession of the stolen cases of
detergent for a considerable period of time that he was able to
drop these off at a spot in the parking lot, and long enough to load
these onto a taxicab.
Indeed, [the Court has] after all, held that unlawful taking, or
apoderamiento, is deemed complete from the moment the offender
gains possession of the thing, even ifhe has no opportunity to dispose
of the same. (People v. Obillo, 411 Phil. 139, 150 [2001]; People v.
Bernabe, 448 Phil. 269, 280 [2003]; People v. Bustinera, G.R. No.
148233, June 8, 2004)
Insofar as [the Court] consider[s] the present question, "unlawful
taking" is most material in this respect. Unlawful taking, which is
the deprivation of one's personal property, is the element which
produces the felony in its consummated stage. At the same time,
without unlawful taking as an act of execution, the offense could only
be attempted theft, if at all.
With these considerations, [the Court] can only conclude that
under Article 308 of the R.P.., theft cannot have a frustrated stage.
Theft can only be attempted or consummated. (Valenzuela v. People,
et al., G.R. No. 160188, June 21, 2007)
In Canceran v. People, G.R. No. 206442, July 1, 2015, the
accused approached one of the counters in Ororama Grocery, pushing
a cart which contained two boxes of Magic Flakes for which he paid
Pl ,423.00. Upon inspection of the boxes by the security guard and the
packer, they found out that the contents of the two boxes were not
Magic Flakes biscuits, but 14 smaller boxes of Ponds White Beauty
Cream worth P28,627.20. The accused hurriedly left and a chase
ensued. It was held that the crime committed was consummated theft

TITLE ONE
Affect Criminal Liability

but since the accused was charged with frustrated theft and there
is no crime of frustrated theft and an accused cannot be convicted of
a higher offense than that in which he is charged, the accused may
only be convicted of the lesser crime of attempted theft.
Example of attempted theft:
The accused was found inside a parked jeep of Captain Parker by
an American MP. The jeep's padlock had been forced open and lying
between the front seats and the gearshift was an iron bar. Captain
Parker was then inside a theater. It was held that the accused already
commenced to carry out his felonious intention, and that if he did
not perform all the acts of execution which should have produced the
crime of theft, it was because of the timely arrival of the MP. The
overt acts of the accused consisted in forcing open the padlock locking
the gearshift to a ring attached to the dashboard which was placed
there to avoid the jeep from being stolen. (People v. De la Cruz, CA.,
43 0.G. 3202)
Example of attempted estafa by means of deceit:
The accused fraudulently assumed authority to demand fees
for the Bureau of Forestry, when he noticed that a timber was cut in
the forest by the complainant without permit and used it in bu.ilding
his house. The accused tried to collect P6.00 from the complainant
ostensibly to save him from paying a fine and to prepare for him a petition
to obtain a pennit to cut timber. The complainant refused or was unable
to give P6.00 to the accused. (U.S. v. Villanueva, 1 Phil. 370)
The fraudulent and false representations of the accused that
he was authorized to collect P56.00 are the overt acts. The refusal or
inability of the complainant to give P56.00 to the accused is a cause
which prevented the latter from performing all the acts of execution.
Examples offrustrated estafa by means of deceit:
The accused offered to give complainant a job as office boy in
Ft. McKinley with a salary of P25.00, but he asked P3.80 for X-ray
examination. The representation of the accused that the amount of
P3.80 was for X-ray examination was false. Complainant handed
to him P3.75 and while taking the remaining five centavos from
his pocket, a policeman placed the accused under arrest. (People v.
Guterrez, C.A., 40 0.G., Supp. 4, 125)
125

124

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Where the accused, who made false pretenses, is apprehended
immediately after receiving the money from the complainant inside
the compound of the latter's employer, pursuant to a pre-arranged
plan with the authorities, the crime committed is frustrated, and not
consummated, estafa. (People v. Castillo, C.A., 65 O.G. 1065)
Mere removal ofpersonal property, not sufficient to consummate the
crime of robbery by the use offorce upon things.
The culprits, after breaking the floor of the bodega through
which they entered the same, removed a sack of sugar from the pile;
but were caught in the act of taking it out through the opening on
the floor. Held: Frustrated robbery. (People v. Del Rosario, C.A., 46
0.G. 4332)
In robbery by the use of force upon things (Arts. 299 and 302),
since the offender must enter the building to commit the crime,
he must be able to carry out of the building the thing taken to
consummate the crime.
In robbery with violence against or intimidation of persons (Art .
294), the crime is consummated the moment the offender gets hold
of the thing taken and I or is in a position to dispose of it freely.
Element of intent to kill, when present in inflicting physical
injuries.
If any of the physical injuries described in Articles 263, 264, 265,
and 266 is inflicted with intent to kill on any of the persons mentioned
in Article 246, or with the attendance of any of the circumstances
enumerated in Article 248, the crime would be either attempted or
frustrated parricide or murder as the case may be.
(a) Defendant with a pocket knife inflicted several wounds
on the victim. The words "until I can kill you" were uttered by the
assailant.
Held: Attempted homicide, not physical injuries, because the
intention to kill is evident. (U.S. v. doven, 44 Phil. 796)
(b) The accused inflicted bolo wounds on the shoulder and
across the lips of the victim and then withdrew.
Held: Not frustrated homicide, but serious physical injuries as
the accused probably knew that the injuries were not such as should

produce death. Intent to kill was not present. (U.S. v. Maghirang, 28
Phil. 655)
(c) The facts indicate that the petitioner had no intention to
kill the offended party. Thus, petitioner started the assault on the
offended party by just giving him fist blows; the wounds inflicted on
the offended party were of slight nature; the petitioner retreated
and went away when the offended party started hitting him with a
bolo, thereby indicating that if the petitioner had intended to kill the
offended party, he would have held his ground and kept on hitting the
offended party with his bolo to kill him. The element of intent to kill
not having been fully established, and considering that the injuries
suffered by the offended party were not necessarily fatal and could be
healed in less than 30 days, the offense committed by the petitioner
is only that of less serious physical injuries. (Mondragon v. People,
17 SCRA476)
(d) Intent to kill the victim could not be inferred from the
surrounding circumstances. Petitioner only shot the victim once and
did not hit any vital part of the latter's body. If he intended to kill
him, petitioner could have shot the victim multiple times or even
ran him over with the car. When such intent is lacking but wounds
are inflicted upon the victim, the crime is not attempted murder but
physical injuries only. (Pentecostes, Jr. v. People, 617 SCRA 504)
Manner of committing the crime.
1.

Formal crimes - consummated in one instant, no attempt.
There are crimes, like slander and false testimony, which
are consummated in one instant, by a single act. These are formal
crimes.
As a rule, there can be no attempt at a formal crime,
because between the thought and the deed there is no chain of
acts that can be severed in any link. Thus, in slander, there is
either a crime or no crime at all, depending upon whether or
not defamatory words were spoken publicly. (Albert)
In the sale of marijuana and other prohibited drugs, the
mere act of selling or even acting as broker consummates the
crime. (People v. Marcos, G.R. No. 83325, May 8, 1990, 185 SCRA
154, 166)
127

126

Art. 6

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 6

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
2.

Crimes consummated by mere attempt or proposal or by overt
act.
Flight to enemy's country (Art. 121).- In this crime, the
mere attempt to flee to an enemy country is a consummated
felony.
Corruption of minors (Art. 340).- A mere proposal to the
minor to satisfy the lust of another will consummate the offense.

a public officer), it was held that the accused who delivered the
money was guilty of attempted bribery.
5.

Material crimes

(a)

Consummated rape.- The accused lay on top of a girl nine
years ofage for over 15 minutes. The girl testified that there
was partial penetration of the male organ in her private
parts and that she felt intense pain. Held: Entry of the labia
or lips of the female organ without rupture of the hymen
or laceration of the vagina is generally held sufficient to
warrant conviction of the accused for consummated crime
ofrape. (People v. Hernandez, 49 Phil. 980, 982)

(b)

Frustrated rape. - There is no crime of frustrated rape.

There is no attempted crime of treason, because the overt
act in itself consummates the crime. (63 C.J., Sec. 5, p. 814)
3.

Felony by omission.
There can be no attempted stage when the felony is by
omission, because in this kind of felony the offender does not
execute acts. He omits to perform an act which the law requires
him to do.
But killing a child by starving him, although apparently
by omission, is in fact by commission. (Albert)

4.

Crimes requiring the intervention of two persons to commit them
are consummated by mere agreement.
In those crimes, like betting in sport contests and corruption
of public officer (Art. 197 and Art. 212), which require the
intervention of two persons to commit them, the same are
consummated by mere agreement. The offer made by one of the
parties to the other constitutes attempted felony, if the offer is
rejected. (U.S. v. Basa, 8 Phil. 89)
In view of the rule stated, it would seem that there is no
frustrated bribery (corruption of public officer). But in the case
of People v. Diego Quin, G.R. No. L-42653, it was held by the
Supreme Court that where the defendant fails to corrupt a
public officer, because the latter returned the money given by the
defendant, the crime committed is frustrated bribery (corruption
of public officer) under Article 212 in relation to Article 6.
In the case of U.S. v. Te Tong, 26 Phil. 453, where the roll
of bills amounting to P500.00 was accepted by the police officer
for the purpose of using the same as evidence in the prosecution
of the accused for attempted bribery (attempted corruption of

'There are three stages of execution.

Thus, homicide, rape, etc., are not consummated in one
instant or by a single act. These are the material crimes.

In People v. Erina, 50 Phil. 998, 1000, where accused
endeavored to have sexual intercourse with a girl three
years and 11 months old and there was doubt whether
he succeeded in penetrating the vagina, the Supreme
Court held that: "There being no conclusive evidence of
penetration of the genital organ of the child, the accused
is entitled to the benefit of the doubt and can only be found
guilty offrustrated rape."
However, in the case of People v. Orita, 184 SCRA
114, 115, the Supreme Court held that "x x x for the
consummation of rape, perfect penetration is not essential.
Any penetration of the female organ by the male organ is
sufficient. Entry of the labia or lips of the female organ,
without rupture of the hymen or laceration of the vagina,
is sufficient to warrant conviction. x x x Taking into
account the nature, elements and manner of execution
of the crime of rape and jurisprudence on the matter, it
is hardly conceivable how the frustrated stage in rape
can be committed." The Supreme Court further held that
the Eriiia case appears to be a "stray" decision inasmuch
as it has not been reiterated in the Court's subsequent
decisions.
129

128

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 6

TITLE ONE

Ar.7

Felonies and Circumstances Which

(c)

(d)

(e)

(D

Attempted rape. - The woman was awakened when she felt
that accused, who was wearing only briefs and crouching
over her, was pulling down her pajamas and panties.
She resisted and pulled up her pajamas and panties, but
appellant pulled them down to her knees and mashed her
breasts. When accused went towards the CD player which
was in front of the door of her room to insert/play a CD,
the woman found an opportunity to escape and the accused
failed to restrain her. Held: Attempted rape. (Tibong v.
People, G.R. No. 191000, September 15, 2010)
Consummated homicide. - Accused-appellant shot the
victim in the left forearm. While he and the victim were
grappling for the gun, his co-accused who has remained at
large, stabbed the victim in the chest. The victim died and
it was established that the cause of death was hemorrhage,
secondary to stab wound. Held: Accused-appellant
was found guilty of homicide there being no qualifying
circumstance to make the killing murder. The fact that
he did not inflict the mortal wound is of no moment, since
the existence of conspiracy was satisfactorily shown by the
evidence. (People v. Sazon, G.R. No. 89684, September 18,
1990, 189 SCRA 700, 703, 711, 713)
Frustrated murder. -- The accused stabbed his two victims
as they were about to close their store in the evening. One
of the victims died while the other recovered. Held: The
assault upon the surviving victim constituted frustrated
murder, her relatively quick recovery being the result of
prompt medical attention which prevented the infection
in the wound from reaching fatal proportions which
would otherwise have ensued. The attack was qualified
by treachery (alevosia). (People • Mision, G.R. No. 63480,
February 26, 1991, 194 SCRA 432, 445-446)
Attempted homicide. - The accused intended to kill
his victim but he was not able to perform all the acts
of execution necessary to consummate the killing. The
wounds inflicted did not affect vital organs. They were
not mortal. He first warned his victim before shooting
him. Held: Attempted homicide. (People v. Ramolete, No.
L-28108, March 27, 1974, 56 SCRA 66, 82-83)
130

Affect Criminal Lability
There is no attempted or frustrated impossible crime.

In impossible crime, the person intending to commit an offense
has already performed the acts for the execution of the same, but
nevertheless the crime is not produced by reason of the fact that
the act intended is by its nature one of impossible accomplishment
or because the means employed by such person are essentially
inadequate or ineffectual to produce the result desired by him.
(See Art. 59, R.P.C.)

I
5

Therefore, since the offender in impossible crime has already
performed the acts for the execution of the same, there could be no
attempted impossible crime. In attempted felony, the offender has not
performed all the acts of execution which would produce the felony
as a consequence.
There is no frustrated impossible crime, because the acts
performed by the offender are considered as constituting a
consummated offense.

Art. 7. When light felonies are punishable. Light felonies
are punishable only when they have been consummated, with
the exception of those committed against persons or property.

What are light felonies?

Light felonies are those infractions of law for the commission of
which the penalty ofarresto menor or a fine not exceeding P40,000.00,
or both, is provided. (Art. 9, par. 3)
The light felonies punished by the R.P.C.:
1.

Slight physical injuries. (Art. 266, pars. 2 and 3)

2.

Theft. (Art. 309, pars. 7 and 8)

3.

Alteration of boundary marks. (Art. 313)

4.

Malicious mischief. (Art. 328, par. 3; Art. 329, par. 3)

5.

Intriguing against honor. (Art. 364)

6.

Disobedience to an agent of a person in authority. (Art.
151, par. 2)
131

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 7

TITLE ONE

Art. 8

Felonies and Circumstances Which

7.

Alarms and scandals. (Art. 165)

8.

Concealing true name. (Art. 178)

9.

Prostitution. (Art. 202)

Affect Criminal Liability
Examples of light felonies against property:
1.

10. Other forms of trespass. (Art. 281)
11. Other light threats. (Art. 285)

2.

12. Light coercion. (Art. 287)
13. Destroying and damaging paintings. (Art. 331)
14. Slander by deed, not serious. (Art. 359)

3.
4.

IMP ORTANT WORDS AND PHRAS ES.
1.

"With the exception of those committed against persons or
property."

General rule.
Light felonies are punishable only when they have been
consummated.
Exception: Light felonies committed against persons or property,
are punishable even if attempted or frustrated.
Reason for the general rule.
Light felonies produce such light, such insignificant moral and
material injuries that public conscience is satisfied with providing a
light penalty for their consummation. If they are not consummated,
the wrong done is so slight that there is no need of providing a penalty
at all. (Albert)

Article 309, No. 7 - Thef by hunting or fishing or gathering
fruits, cereals or other forest or farm products upon an
inclosed estate or field where trespass is forbidden and the
value of the thing stolen does not exceed P500.00.
Article 309, No. 8 - Theft, where the value of the stolen
property does not exceed P500.00 and the offender was
prompted by hunger, poverty, or the difficulty of earnin g a
livelihood.
Article 313 -- Alteration of boundary marks.
Article 328, No. 3; Article 329, No. 3 - Malicious mischief
where the damage is not more than P40,000.00 or if it
cannot be estimated.

Art. 8. Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony. Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony are punishable
only in the cases in which the law specially provides a penalty
therefor.
A conspiracy exists when two or more persons come to an
agreement concerning the commission of a felony and decide
to commit it.
There is proposal when the person who has decided to
commit a felony proposes its execution to some other person
or persons.

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRAS ES.
1.

Reason for the exception.

"Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony."
Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony are two different

The commission of felonies against persons or property
presupposes in the offender moral depravity. For that reason, even
attempted or frustrated light felonies against persons or property are
punishable.
Example of light felonies against person:
Article 266 - Slight physical injuries and maltreatment.

2.

acts or felonies: (1) conspiracy to commit a felony; and (2)
proposal to commit a felony.
"Only in the cases in which the law specially provides a penalty
therefor."
Unless there is a specific provision in the R.P.C. providing
a penalty for conspiracy or proposal to commit a felony, mere
conspiracy or proposal is not a felony.
133

132

Art. 8

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Conspiracy is not a crime except when the law specifically provides
a penalty therefor.
A conspiracy exists when two or more persons come to an
agreement concerning the commission of a felony and decide to
commit it (Art. 8). Generally, conspiracy is not a crime except when
the law specifically provides a penalty therefor as in treason (Art.
115), rebellion (Art. 136), and sedition (Art. 141). The crime of
conspiracy known to the common law is not an indictable offense in
the Philippines. (U.S. v. Lim Buanco, 14 Phil. 472; U.S. v. Remigio, 37
Phil. 599, 614; People v. Asaad, 55 Phil. 697) An agreement to commit
a crime is a reprehensible act from the viewpoint of morality, but as
long as the conspirators do not perform overt acts in furtherance of
their malevolent design, the sovereignty of the State is not outraged
and the tranquility of the public remains undisturbed. However, when
in resolute execution of a common scheme, a felony is committed by
two or more malefactors, the existence of a conspiracy assumes pivotal
importance in the determination of the liability of the perpetrators.
(People v. Peralta, 25 SCRA 759)
General rule.
Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony are not punishable.
Exception: They are punishable only in the cases in which the
law specially provides a penalty therefor.
Reason for the rule.
Conspiracy and proposal to commit a crime are only preparatory
acts, and the law regards them as innocent or at least permissible
except in rare and exceptional cases.
The Revised Penal Code specially provides a penalty for mere
conspiracy in Articles 115, 136, and 141.
(1) Conspiracy to commit treason (Art. 115) shall be punished
by prision mayor and a fine not exceeding P2,000,000.00;

(2) Conspiracy to commit coup d'etat (Art. 136) shall be
punished by prision mayor in its minimum period and a fine which
shall not exceed P1,000,000.00;

134

Art. 8

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
(3) Conspiracy to commit rebellion or insurrection (Art. 136)
shall be punished by prision correccional in its maximum period and
a fine which shall not exceed P1,000,000.00;
(4) Conspiracy to commit sedition (Art. 141) shall be punished
by prision mayor in its medium period and a fine not exceeding
P400,000.00.

Treason, coup d'etat, rebellion or sedition should not be actually
committed.
The conspirators should not actually commit treason, coup d'etat,
rebellion or sedition. It is sufficient that two or more persons agree
and decide to commit treason, rebellion or sedition.
If they commit, say, treason, they will be held liable for treason,
and the conspiracy which they had before committing treason is only
a manner of incurring criminal liability. It is not a separate offense.
Conspiracy as a felony, distinguished from conspiracy as a manner
of incurring criminal liability.
When the conspiracy relates to a crime actually committed it
is not a felony but only a manner of incurring criminal liability, that
is, when there is conspiracy, the act of one is the act of all.
Even if the conspiracy relates to any of the crimes of treason,
rebellion and sedition, but any of them is actually committed, the
conspiracy is not a separate offense; it is only a manner of incurring
criminal liability, that is, all the conspirators who carried out their
plan and personally took part in its execution are equally liable. The
offenders are liable for treason, rebellion, or sedition, as the case may
be, and the conspiracy is absorbed.
When conspiracy is only a manner of incurring criminal liability,
it is not punishable as a separate offense.
Illustrations of conspiracy as felony and as a manner of incurring
criminal liability.
1.

A and B agreed and decided to rise publicly and take arms
against the government with the help of their followers. Even if
they did not carry out their plan to overthrow the government, A
135

Art. 8

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 8

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability

2.

and Bare liable for conspiracy to commit rebellion under Article
136 of the R.P.C.

the date and approximate time of the assault. (People v. Cantuba,
G.R. No. 79811, March 19, 1990, 183 SCRA 289, 298)

But if A and B and their followers did rise publicly and
take arms against the government to overthrow it, thereby
committing rebellion, their conspiracy is not a felony. They are
liable for rebellion and their conspiracy is only a manner of
incurring criminal liability for rebellion.

For a collective responsibility among the accused to be
established, it is sufficient that at the time of the aggression, all of
them acted in concert, each doing his part to fulfill their common
design to kill their victim, and although only one of them may have
actually stabbed the victim, the act of that one is deemed to be the
act of all. (People u. Hernandez, G.R. No. 90641, February 27, 1990,
182 SCRA 794, 798)

A,B, and C, after having conceived a criminal plan, got together,
agreed and decided to kill D. IfA, B, and C failed to carry out the
plan for some reason or another, they are not liable for having
conspired against D, because the crime they conspired to commit,
which is murder, is not treason, rebellion or sedition.
But if they carried out the plan and personally took part
in its execution which resulted in the killing of D, they are all
liable for murder, even if A merely acted as guard outside the
house where D was killed and B merely held the arms of D when
C stabbed him to death. Their conspiracy is only a manner of
incurring criminal liability for murder. It is not an offense, not
only because a crime was committed after the conspiracy, but
also because conspiracy to comm.it murder is not punished in
the R.P.C.

Indications of conspiracy.
When the defendants by their acts aimed at the same object,
one performing one part and the other performing another part so as
to complete it, with a view to the attainment of the same object, and
their acts, though apparently independent, were in fact concerted
and cooperative, indicating closeness of personal association,
concerted action and concurrence of sentiments, the court will
be justified in concluding that said defendants were engaged in a
conspiracy. (People u. Geronimo, No. L-35700, October 15, 1973, 53
SCRA 246, 254)
Thus, an accused has been held as a co-conspirator as the
circumstances of his participation indubitably showed unity of
purpose and unity in the execution of the unlawful acts, gleaned from
that fact that he knew of the plot to assassinate the victim as he too
had been ordered to scout for a man who could do the job; he also
knew exactly the place where the killing was to take place and also
136

The acts of the defendants must show a common design.
It is fundamental for conspiracy to exist that there must be unity
of purpose and unity in the execution of the unlawful objective. Here,
appellants did not act with a unity of purpose. Even assuming that
appellants have joined together in the killing, such circumstances
alone do not satisfy the requirement of a conspiracy because the rule
is that neither joint nor simultaneous action is per se sufficient proof
of conspiracy. It must be shown to exist as clearly and convincingly
as the commission of the offense itself. Obedience to a command does
not necessarily show concert of design, for at any rate it is the acts of
the conspirators that show their common design.
Although the defendants are relatives and had acted with some
degree of simultaneity in attacking their victim, nevertheless, this
fact alone does not prove conspiracy. (People v. Dorico, No. L-31568,
November 29, 1973, 54 SCRA 172, 186-188)
People v. Pugay
(167 SCRA 439)
Facts: The deceased Miranda, a 25-year-old retardate, and the accused

Pugay were friends. On the evening ofMay 19, 1982, while a town fiesta was
being held in the public plaza, the group of accused Pugay and Samson saw
the deceased walking nearby, and started making fun of him. Not content
with what they were doing, accused Pugay suddenly took a can of gasoline
from under the engine of a ferris wheel and poured its contents on the body
of Miranda. Then, the accused Samson set Miranda on fire making a human

torch out of him.
Held: Where there is nothing in the records showing that there was
previous conspiracy or unity of criminal purpose between the two accused
immediately before the commission of the crime, where there was no
animosity between the deceased and the accused and it is clear that the
137

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 8

Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 8

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
accused merely wanted to make fun of the deceased, the respective criminal
responsibility of the accused arising from different acts directed against the
deceased is individual and not collective, and each of them is liable only for

the act committed by him.
Period of time to afford opportunity for meditation and reflection, not
required in conspiracy.
Unlike in evident premeditation, where a sufficient period
of time must elapse to afford full opportunity for meditation and
reflection and for the perpetrator to deliberate on the consequences
of his intended deed (U.S. w. Gil, 13 Phil. 330), conspiracy arises on
the very instant the plotters agree, expressly or impliedly, to commit
the felony and forthwith decide to pursue it. Once this assent is
established, each and everyone of the conspirators is made criminally
liable for the crime, committed by anyone of them. (People v. Monroy,
et al., 104 Phil. 759)
Requisites of conspiracy:

1.

That two or more persons came to an agreement;

2.

That the agreement concerned the commission of a felony;
and

3.

That the execution of the felony be decided upon.

1st element

agreement presupposes meeting of the minds of
two or more persons.

Thus, the fact that a document is discovered purporting to be
a commission appointing the defendant an officer of armed forces
against the Government does not prove conspiracy, because it was
not shown that defendant received or accepted that commission. (U.S.
v. Vil/arino, 5 Phil. 697)

3rd element - the conspirators have made up their minds to
commit the crime. There must be a determination
to commit the crime of treason, rebellion or
sedition.
Direct proof is not essential to establish conspiracy.

Article 8 of the R.P.C. provides that there is conspiracy when
two or more persons agree to commit a crime and decide to commit
it. Direct proof is not essential to establish conspiracy, and may be
inferred from the collective acts of the accused before, during and
after the commission of the crime. Conspiracy can be presumed
from and proven by acts of the accused themselves when the said
acts point to a joint purpose and design, concerted action and
community of interests. It is not necessary to show that all the
conspirators actually hit and killed the victim. Conspiracy renders
all the conspirators as co-principals regardless of the extent and
character of their participation because in contemplation of law,
the act of one conspirator is the act of all. (People v. Buntag, G.R.
No. 123070, April 14, 2004)
Quantum of proof required to establish conspiracy.

Similar to the physical act constituting the crime itself, the
elements of conspiracy must be proven beyond reasonable doubt.
Settled is the rule that to establish conspiracy, evidence of actual
cooperation rather than mere cognizance or approval of an illegal act
is required.
A conspiracy must be established by positive and conclusive
evidence. It must be shown to exist as clearly and convincingly as
the commission of the crime itself. Mere presence of a person at the
scene of the crime does not make him a conspirator for conspiracy
transcends companionship.

2nd element - the agreement must refer to the commission of
a crime. It must be an agreement to act, to effect,
to bring about what has already been conceived
and determined.

The evidence shows that George Comadre and Danilo Lozano
did not have any participation in the commission of the crime and
must therefore be set free. Their mere presence at the scene of the
crime as well as their close relationship with Antonio are insufficient
to establish conspiracy considering that they performed no positive
act in furtherance of the crime.

Thus, the mere fact that the defendant met and aired some
complaints, showing discontent with the Government over some real
or fancied evils, is not sufficient. (U.S. v. Figueras, 2 Phil. 491)

Neither was it proven that their act of running away with
Antonio was an act of giving moral assistance to his criminal act.

138

139

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 8

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

Criminal Law
The ratiocination of the trial court that "their presence provided
encouragement and sense of security to Antonio," is devoid of any
factual basis. Such finding is not supported by the evidence on record
and cannot therefore be a valid basis ofa finding ofconspiracy. (People
v. Comadre, G.R. No. 153559, June 8, 2004)
The Revised Penal Code specially provides a penalty for mere
proposal in Articles 115 and 136.
(1) Proposal to commit treason (Art. 115) shall be punished
by prision correccional and a fine not exceeding P1,000,000.00;
(2) Proposal to commit coup d'etat (Art. 136) - The xx x
proposal to commit coup d'etat shall be punished by prision mayor in
its minimum period and a fine which shall not exceed P1,000,000.00;
and
(3) Proposal to commit rebellion or insurrection(Art. 136) shall
be punished by prision correccional in its medium period and a fine
not exceeding P400,000.00.

Art. 8

people who will do it at the slightest provocation. In this case,
A is not liable for proposal to commit rebellion, because A has
not decided to commit it.
2.

There is no decided, concrete and formal proposal.
In the above example, note that there was merely a
suggestion - not a decided, concrete and formal proposal.

3.

It is not the execution of a felony that is proposed.
Example: A conceived the idea of overthrowing the
present government. A called several of his trusted followers
and instructed them to go around the country and secretly to
organize groups and to convince them of the necessity of having
a new government. Note that what A proposed in this case is
not the execution of the crime of rebellion, but the performance
of preparatory acts for the commission of rebellion. Therefore,
there is no criminal proposal.

Problem:

In proposal to commit treason or rebellion, the crime of treason
or rebellion should not be actually committed by reason ofthe proposal.

If the proponents of rebellion desist before any rebellious act is
actually performed by the would-be material executors, inform the
authorities and aid in the arrest of their fellow plotters, should the
proponents be exempt?

If the crime of treason or rebellion was actually committed after
and because of the proposal, then the proponent would be liable for
treason or rebellion as a principal by inducement (Art. 17, par. 2),
and in such case the proposal is not a felony.

According to Albert, the proponents should be exempt from the
penalties provided for criminal proposals and conspiracies, for the
law would rather prevent than punish crimes and encouragement
should be given to those who hearken to the voice of conscience.

Requisites of proposal:

But once a proposal to commit rebellion is made by the proponent
to another person, the crime of proposal to commit rebellion is
consummated and the desistance of the proponent cannot legally
exempt him from criminal liability.

Treason or rebellion should not be actually committed.

1.

That a person has decided to commit a felony; and

2.

That he proposes its execution to some other person or
persons.

There is no criminal proposal when 1.

The person who proposes is not determined to commit the
felony.
Example: A desires that the present government be
overthrown. But A is afraid to do it himself with others. A then
suggests the overthrowing of the government to some desperate
140

It is not necessary that the person to whom the proposal is made
agrees to commit treason or rebellion.
Note that what constitutes the felony ofproposal to commit treason
or rebellion is the making of proposal. The law does not require that
the proposal be accepted by the person to whom the proposal is made.
If it is accepted, it may be conspiracy to commit treason or rebellion,
because there would be an agreement and a decision to commit it.
141

Art. 9

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Proposal as an overt act of corruption of public officer.
One who offers money to a public officer to induce him not to
perform his duties, but the offer is rejected by the public officer, is
liable for attempted bribery. (U.S. v. Gloria, 4 Phil. 341) Note that
while it is true that the act performed by the offender is in the nature
of a proposal, and is not punishable because it does not involve treason
or rebellion, nevertheless, the proposal in this case is an overt act of
the crime of corruption of public officer. (See Art. 212)
The crimes In which conspiracy and proposal are punishable are
against the security of the State or economic security.
Treason is against the external security of the State. Coup d'etat,
rebellion and sedition are against internal security. Monopolies and
combinations in restraint of trade are against economic security.
Reason why conspiracy and proposal to commit a crime Is
punishable In crimes against external and internal security of the
State.
In ordinary crimes, the State survives the victim, and the culprit
cannot find in the success of his work any impunity. Whereas, in
crimes against the external and internal security of the State, if the
culprit succeeds in his criminal enterprise, he would obtain the power
and therefore impunity for the crime committed. (Albert)

Art. 9. Grave felonies, less grave felonies, and light
felonies. - Grave felonies are those to which the law attaches
the capital punishment or penalties which in any of their
periods are afflictive, in accordance with Article 25 of this
Code.
Less grave felonies are those which the law punishes with
penalties which in their maximum period arc correctional, in
accordance with the above-mentioned article.
Light felonies are those infractions of law for the
com.mission of which the penalty ofarresto me nor or a fine not
exceeding Forty thousand pesos (P40,000), or both, is provided.
(As amended by RA. No. 10951)

142

TITLE ONE

Art, 9

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Classification of felonies according to their gravity.
Article 9 classifies felonies according to their gravity. The gravity
of the felonies is determined by the penalties attached to them by
law.
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES.
1.

"To which the law attaches the capital punishment."

2.

"Or penalties which in any of their periods are afflictive."

Capital punishment is death penalty.

Although the word "any" is used in the phrase, when
the penalty prescribed for the offense is composed of two
or more distinct penalties, the higher or highest of the
penalties must be an afflictive penalty.
Example: A felony punishable by prision correccional
to prision mayor is a grave felony, because the higher of
the two penalties prescribed, which is prision mayor (Art.
71), is an afflictive penalty.
If the penalty prescribed is composed of two or more
periods corresponding to different divisible penalties, the
higher or maximum period must be that of an afflictive
penalty.
Example: A felony punishable by prision correccional
in its maximum period to prision mayor in its minimum
period is a grave felony, because the higher period, which
is the minimum ofprision mayor, is a period ofan afflictive
penalty.
Ifthe penalty is composed oftwo periods ofan afflictive
penalty or of two periods corresponding to different
afflictive penalties, the offense for which it is prescribed
is a grave felony.
Example: A felony punishable by the medium and
maximum periods of prision mayor or by prision mayor in
its maximum period to reclusion temporal in its minimum
period is a grave felony, because both prision mayor and
reclusion temporal are affiictive penalties.
143

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 9

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

The afflictive penalties in accordance with Article 25
of this Code are:
Reclusion perpetua,
Reclusion temporal,
Perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification,
Perpetual or temporary special disqualification,
Prision mayor.

3.

"Penalties which in their maximum period are correctional."
When the penalty prescribed for the offense is
composed of two or more distinct penalties, the higher or
highest of the penalties must be a correctional penalty.
Example: A felony punishable by arresto menor to
destierro is a less grave felony, because the higher of the two
penalties prescribed, which is destierro, is a correctional
penalty. Arresto menor is a light penalty.
If the penalty prescribed is composed of two or more
periods corresponding to different divisible penalties, the
higher or maximum period must be that of correctional
penalty.
Example: A felony punishable by arresto menor in
its maximum period to destierro in its minimum period
is a less grave felony, because the higher is a period of a
correctional penalty.
If the penalty is composed of two periods of a
correctional penalty or of two periods corresponding to
different correctional penalties, like destierro and arresto
mayor, the offense for which it is prescribed is a less grave
felony.
The following are correctional penalties:
Prision correccional,
Arresto mayor,
Suspension,
Destierro.
144

Art. 10

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
4.

"The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding
P40,000, or both, is provided."
When the Code provides a fine of exactly P40,000.00
for the commission of a felony, it is a light felony. If
the amount of the fine provided by the Code is more
than P40,000.00, then it is a less grave felony, because
according to Article 26, a fine not less than P40,000.00 is
a correctional penalty. If the amount of the fine provided
by the Code is more than P1,200,000.00, it is a grave
felony, because according to Article 26, a fine exceeding
P1,200,000.00 is an affiictive penalty.
Although Article 26 provides that a fine not less
than P40,000.00 is a correctional penalty, Article 9
which defines light felonies should prevail, because the
latter classifies felonies according to their gravity, while
the former classifies the fine according to the amount
thereof.
Gambling punished with arresto menor or a fine
not exceeding P200.00 (now P40,000.00) is a light felony.
(People v. Canson, Jr., et al., 101 Phil. 537)

A felony punishable by a fine not exceeding M40,000.00
and censure (Art. 365, par. 4) is a light felony, because
public censure, like arresto menor, is a light penalty.
Art. 10. Offenses not subject to the provisions ofthis Code.
Offenses which are or in the future may be punishable
under special laws are not subject to the provisions of this
Code. This Code shall be supplementary to such laws, unless
the latter should specially provide the contrary.

Are offenses punishable under special laws subject to the provisions
of the Revised Penal Code?
Article 10 is composed of two clauses. In the first, it is provided
that offenses under special laws are not subject to the provisions
of the Code. The second makes the Code supplementary to such
laws.
145

Art. 10

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 10

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
The two clauses of Article 10, reconciled.
The first clause should be understood to mean only that the
special penal laws are controlling with regard to offenses therein
specifically punished. Said clause only restates the elemental rule
of statutory construction that special legal provisions prevail over
general ones. Lex specials derogant generali.
The second clause contains the soul of the article. The main
idea and purpose of the article is embodied in the provision that the
"code shall be supplementary" to special laws, unless the latter should
specifically provide the contrary. (Ladonga v. People, G.R. No. 141066,
February 17, 2005)
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES.
1.

"Special laws."
A "special law" is defined in U.S. v. Serapio, 23 Phil.
584, as a penal law which punishes acts not defined and
penalized by the Penal Code.
Special law is a statute enacted by the Legislative
branch, penal in character, which is not an amendment to
the R.P.C. Special laws usually follow the form of American
penal law. The penal clause, for example, provides a
penalty of from five to ten years or a fine not exceeding
P5,000.00, or both, in the discretion of the court.

Revised Penal Code, not suppletory when the penalties under the
special law are different from those under the Revised Penal Code.

While the information alleges that the crime was attended with
grave abuse of confidence, the same cannot be appreciated as the
suppletory effect of the R.P.C. to special laws, as provided in Article
10of said Code, cannot be invoked when there is a legal impossibility
of application, either by express provision or by necessary implication.
(People v. Simon, 234 SCRA 555, 574/1994))
Moreover, when the penalties under the special law arc different
from and are without reference or relation to those under the R.P.C.,
there can be no suppletory effect of the rules, for the application of
penalties under the said Code or by other relevant statutory provisions
are based on or applicable only to said rules for felonies under the
Code. (People v. Simon, 234 SCRA 576 [1994))
146

Thus, in People v. Panida, 310 SCRA 66 (1999), which
involved the crime of carnapping and the penalty imposed was the
indeterminate sentence of 14 years and eight months, as minimum,
to 17 years and four months, as maximum, this Court did not apply
the provisions of the R.P.C. suppletorily as the anti-carapping law
provides for its own penalties which are distinct and without reference
to the said Code.
"The charge being simple carnapping, the imposable
penalty is imprisonment for not less than 14 years and 8
months and not more than ll years and 4 months. There
can be no suppletory effect of the rules for the
application of penalties under the R.P.C. or by other
relevant statutory provisions based on, or applicable
only to, the rules for felonies under the Code. While
it is true that the penalty of 14 years and 8 months to
17 years and 4 months is virtually equivalent to the
duration of the medium period of reclusion temporal,
such technical term under the R.P.C. is not given
to that penalty for carnapping. Besides, the other
penalties for carnapping attended by the qualifying
circumstances stated in the law do not correspond
to those in the Code. The rules on penalties in the Code,
therefore, cannot suppletorily apply to Republic Act No.
6539 and special laws of the same formulation. For this
reason, we hold that the proper penalty to be imposed on
each of accused-appellants is an indeterminate sentence
of 14 years and 8 months, as minimum, to l7years and 4
months, as maximum."
Offenses under special laws, not subject to the provisions of this
Code relating to attempted and frustrated crimes.

The subjective phase in the commission of a felony is that portion
of its execution starting from the point where the offender begins
by overt acts to pursue the crime until he is prevented, against his
will, by some outside cause from performing all of the acts which
would produce the offense. If the subjective phase has not yet passed,
then the crime is only attempted. If that phase has been done but
the felony is not produced, the crime is frustrated. (U.S. v. Eduave,
36 Phil. 209) The crime is consummated if, following the subjective
147

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability

phase, the last of the elements of the felony meets to concur. These
rules are inapplicable to offenses governed by special laws. (People
v. Enriquez, G.R. No. 99838, October 23, 1997)

mere accomplice. The combined provisions of both the R.P.C. and the
National Internal Revenue Code do not provide any such penalty or at
least lay down the basis or the manner ofits determination. The rule is
and has always been nullum crimen nulla poena sine lege. Hence, even
if appellant is conceded to have performed acts which would make of
him an accomplice, it would nevertheless be impossible to impose any
penalty upon him because of the demonstrated inapplicability of the
principles of the R.P.C. on accomplices to the case at bar. (Dissenting
opinion, People v. Padaong, 10 C.A. Rep. 979)

Art. 10

In U.S. v. Basa, 8 Phil. 89, the Supreme Court held that Section
28 of the Municipal Code (Act No. 82) "does not punish an attempt to
commit this crime. In offenses created by acts of the Commission, the
last paragraph of Article 3 of the Penal Code relating to attempts to
commit crimes is not applicable." It further held that by virtue of the
provision of the first part of this article, the attempted or the frustrated
stage of the execution of an offense penalized by a special law is not
punishable, unless the special law provides a penalty therefor.
In People v. Ngan Te, 62 Phil. 588, the Court found "no merit
in the prosecuting officer's contention that the appellant can be
sentenced for a frustrated violation of the Act of Congress by applying
the R.P.C. The Philippine Legislature cannot alter this Act of Congress
by extending its scope beyond that which Congress intended, and
this not only on grounds of principle, but because in its Section 16,
Congress expressly reserved its right to alter, amend, or repeal the
same."
Article 10 is not applicable to punish an accomplice under a special
law which does not punish a mere accomplice.
The offense involved is punished by C.A. No. 466, Section 174.
The penalty imposed is clearly intended only for the "person who
is found in possession" of the prohibited article. No punishment
for a mere accomplice is provided. Although by Article 10 of the
R.P.C., its provisions may be applied to offenses punished by special
laws in a supplementary manner, the pertinent provisions thereof
on accomplices simply cannot be given effect in the case at bar.
To be able to do so, the rules on graduation of penalties must be
resorted to. Thus, Article 52 thereof prescribes for the accomplice
m a consummated offense a penalty one degree lower than that
prescribed for the principal therein. But, the penalty provided in
Section 174 of the National Internal Revenue Code here involved is
a single penalty standing by itself without any provision therein as
to degrees of penalties imposable. No room for the application of the
rule of graduation of penalties therefore exists. It would be a legal
impossibility to determine what penalty is to be imposed upon a
148

Art. 10

The special law has to fix penalties for attempted and frustrated
crime.
The penalty for the consummated crime cannot be imposed when
the stage of the acts of execution is either attempted or frustrated,
because the penalty for the attempted and frustrated crime is two
degrees or one degree lower, respectively. The special law does not
provide for a penalty one or two degrees lower than that provided
for the consummated stage. The special law has to fix a penalty for
the attempt and a penalty for the frustration of the crime defined by
it, in order that the crime may be punished in case its commission
reached only the attempted or frustrated stage of execution.
When a special law covers the mere attempt to commit the crime
defined by it, the attempted stage is punishable by the penalty
provided by that law.
When the accused was about to board a plane of the Pan
American World Airways, four pieces of gold bullion were found tied
to his body. He was charged with a violation of R.A. No. 265.
Held: Section 4 of Circular No. 21, issued in accordance with
the provisions ofR.A. No. 265, provides that "any person desiring to
export gold in any form xx x must obtain a license from the Central
Bank x xx."This section explicitly applies to "any person desiring to
export gold" and hence, it contemplates the situation existing prior
to the consummation of the exportation. Indeed, its purpose would
be defeated if the penal sanction were deferred until after the article
in question had left the Philippines, for jurisdiction over it and over
the guilty party would be lost thereby. (People v. Jolliffe, 105 Phil.
677)
149

Art. 10

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 10

Felonies and Circumstances Which

Affect Criminal Liability
Mitigating or aggravating circumstances, not applied to offenses
punishable under special laws.
The plea of guilty as mitigating circumstance under the R.P.C.
(Art. 13, par. 7) is not available to offenses punishable under special
laws. (People v. Noble, 77 Phil. 1086)
Offenses which are punishable under the special laws are not
subject to the provisions of Article 64 of the R.P.C., and it has been
held that the provisions of the R.P.C., relative to the application of
the circumstances modifying the criminal liability of the accused are
not applicable to special laws. (People v. Respecia, 107 Phil. 995)
Article 64 of the R.P.C. prescribing the rules for the graduation
of penalties containing three periods when mitigating and/or
aggravating circumstances attended the commission of the crime, was
held inapplicable to offenses penalized by special laws, because the
penalty prescribed by special law is usually indeterminate and does
not contain three periods. For this reason, the mitigating circumstance
of voluntary plea of guilty is not considered to mitigate the liability
of one accused of illegal possession of firearms. (People v. Ramos, 44
O.G. 3288; People v. Gonzales, 82 Phil. 307)
Appellant being then culpable for carnapping under the first
clause of Section 14 of R.A. No. 6539, as amended, the imposable
penalty is imprisonment for not less than 14 years and 8 months, not
more than 17 years and four months, for the provisions of the R.P.C.
cannot be applied suppletorily and, therefore, the alleged aggravating
circumstance of grave abuse of confidence cannot be appreciated.
(People v. Bustinera, G.R. No. 148233, June 8, 2004)
No accessory penalty, unless the special law provides therefor.
In the case ofPeople v. Santos, 44O.G. 1289, the Court of Appeals
refused to impose accessory penalty upon the accused found guilty of
a violation of Act 3992, because that law does not provide for any.
Where the special law adopted penalties from the Revised Penal
Code, the rules for graduating penalties by degrees or determining
the proper period should be applied.
Although R.A. No. 7610 is a special law, the rules in the R.P.C.
for graduating penalties by degrees or determining the proper period
should be applied. Thus, where the special law adopted penalties
150

from the R.P.C., the Indeterminate Sentence Law will apply just as it
would in felonies. In People v. Simon, G.R. No. 93028, July 29, 1994,
234 SCRA 555, the Court applied the first clause of Section 1 of the
Indeterminate Sentence Law to cases of illegal drugs. In Cadua v.
Court of Appeals, 371 Phil. 627 (1999), the Court applied the same
principle to cases involving illegal possession of firearms. In those
instances, the offenses were also penalized under special laws. Finally,
in Dulla v. Court of Appeals, 382 Phil. 791 (2000), a case involving
sexual abuse of a child as penalized under Section 5b), Article III
of R.A. No. 7610, the Court likewise applied the same first clause of
the Indeterminate Sentence Law. This case should be no exception.
(Sanchez v. People and CA, G.R. No. 179090, June 5, 2009)
This Code considered supplementary to special laws.
2.

"Supplementary"
The word "supplementary" means supplying what is
lacking; additional.

Some provisions of the Penal Code (especially with the addition
of the second sentence of Art. 10), are perfectly applicable to special
laws. In fact, the Supreme Court has extended some provisions of the
Penal Code to special penal laws, such as, the provisions of Article
22 with reference to the retroactive effect of penal laws if they favor
the accused (People v. Parel, 44 Phil. 437); those of Article 17 with
reference to participation of principals in the commission of the crime
(U.S. w. Ponte, 20 Phil. 379); those of Article 39 with reference to
subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency to pay the fine (People
v. Abedes, 268 SCRA 619); and those of Article 45 with reference to the
confiscation of the instruments used in the commission of the crime.
(U.S. v. Bruhez, 28 Phil. 305)
Indemnity and subsidiary imprisonment In the Revised Penal Code
applied to violation of Motor Vehicle Law.
People u. Moreno
!60 Phil. 712)
Facts: The accused drove a car in a reckless manner I and in going
around a curve leading to a concrete bridge, he violently struck the railing
of the bridge and crushed the left side of the car. The person who was
seated on the left side of the car received injuries from which he died
161

Art. 10

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

the same day. The accused was convicted of homicide [through) reckless
imprudence and violation of the Motor Vehicle Law (Act No. 3992). That
special law has no provision regarding indemnity to heirs of the deceased
and subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency. In Articles 39 and
100 of the R.P.C., indemnity to heirs and subsidiary imprisonment are,
respectively, provided.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances Which
Affect Criminal Liability
(3)

Rules on Service of Sentence The Court applied
suppletorily the rules on the service of sentences provided
in Article 70 of the R.P.C. in favor of the accused who
was found guilty of multiple violations of R.A. No. 6425,
otherwise known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972,
considering the lack of similar rules under the special law.
(People v. Li Wai Cheung, G.R. Nos. 90440-42, October 13,
1992, 214 SCRA 504)

(4)

Definition on Principals, Accomplices, and Accessories
- The Court applied suppletorily Articles 17, 18, and 19
of the R.P.C. to define the words principal, accomplices,
and accessories under RA. No. 8042, otherwise known as
the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995,
because said words were not defined therein, although the
special law referred to the same terms in enumerating the
persons liable for the crime of illegal recruitment. (People
v. Chowdury, G.R. Nos. 129577-80, February 15, 2000, 325
SCRA572)

(5)

Principle of Conspiracy-The Court applied suppletorily
the principle of conspiracy under Article 8 of the R.P.C. to
B.P. Blg. 22 in the absence of a contrary provision therein.
(Ladonga v. People, G.R. No. 141066, February 17, 2005,
451 SCRA 673)

Held: Articles 39 and 100 of the R.P.C. are supplementary to the Motor
Vehicle Law.
Subsidiary Imprisonment for violation of Batas Pambansa Big. 22

SC Administrative Circular No. 13-2001 issued on February
14, 2001 states that if the accused is unable to pay the fine imposed
by the trial court for violation of B.P. Big. 22, "there is no legal
obstacle to the application of the R.P.C. provisions on subsidiary
imprisonment."
In the case of Abarquez v. Court of Appeals and People, G.R.
No. 148557, August 7, 2003, the Supreme Court imposed subsidiary
imprisonment in case of insolvency in accordance with Article 39 of
the R.P.C. for violation of B.P. BIg. 22.
Suppletory Application of the Revised Penal Code.

The suppletory application ofthe R.P.C. to special laws, by virtue
of Article 10 thereof, finds relevance only when the provisions of the
special law are silent on a particular matter. Thus, in the following
cases, the Supreme Court applied suppletorily the provisions of the
R.P.C. to offenses under special laws:
(1)

(2)

Subsidiary Penalty - The Court applied suppletorily
the provision on subsidiary penalty under Article 39 of
the R.P.C. to cases of violations of Act No. 3992, otherwise
known as the Revised Motor Vehicle Law, noting that the
special law did not contain any provision that the defendant
could be sentenced with subsidiary imprisonment in case
of insolvency. (People v. Moreno, 6o Phil. 712 {1934])
Civil Liability - The Court applied suppletorily the
provision on Article 100 (civil liability) of the R.P.C. to
a case for violation of the Revised Motor Vehicle Law.
(Copiaco v. Luzon Brokerage, G.R. No. 46135, September
19, 1938, 66 Phil. 184)
162

Art. 10

With more reason, therefore, the principle of conspiracy under
Article 8 of the R.P.C. may be applied suppletorily to R.A. No. 9262
because of the express provision of Section 4 7 that the R.P.C. shall
be supplementary to said law. Thus, general provisions of the R.P.C.,
which by their nature, are necessarily applicable, may be applied
suppletorily. (Tan v. Spouses Tan, G.R. No. 168852, September 30,
2008)
Article 12, paragraph 3, of the Revised Penal Code, applied to minor
over nine but less than 15 years old who violated a special law.

Jose v. People
(G.R. No. 162052 (2005))
Facts: Petitioner was charged with violation of RA No. 6425 for selling
shabu to a poseur-buyer. He was 13 years old when the crime charged was
committed.
153

Art. 10

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Held: Under Article 123) of the Revised Penal Code, a minor over
nine years of age and under l5 is exempt from criminal liability if charged
with a felony. The law applies even if such minor is charged with a crime
defined and penalized by a special penal law. In such case, it is the burden
of the minor to prove his age in order for him to be exempt from criminal
liability. The reason for the exemption is that a minor of such age is presumed
lacking the mental element of a crime - the capacity to know what is wrong
as distinguished from what is right or to determine the morality of human
acts; wrong in the sense in which the term is used in moral wrong. However,
such presumption is rebuttable. For a minor at such an age to be criminally

liable, the prosecution is burdened to prove beyond reasonable doubt, by
direct or circumstantial evidence, that he acted with discernment, meaning

that he knew what he was doing and that it was wrong.

TITLE ONE
Affect Criminal Liability

the R.P.C. which, by their nature, are necessarily applicable, may be
applied suppletorily. (Ladonga v. People, G.R. No. 141066, February
17, 2005)
The fact that C.A. No. 465 punishes the falsification ofresidence
certificates in the cases mentioned therein does not prevent the
application of the general provisions of the R.P.C. on other acts of
falsification not covered by the special law, since under Article 10
of the R.P.C. it has supplementary application to all special laws,
unless the latter should specially provide the contrary, and C.A. No.
465 makes no provision that it exclusively applies to all falsifications
ofresidence certificates. (People • Po Giok To, 96 Phil. 913, 919-920)

Note: Under Section 6 ofR.A. No. 9344, a child 15 years or under
at the time of the commission of the offense shall be exempt from
criminal liability.
Special laws amending the Revised Penal Code are subject to its
provisions.
Presidential Decree No. 533 is not a special Jaw, entirely
distinct from and unrelated to the R.P.C. From the nature of the
penalty imposed which is in terms of the classification and duration
of penalties as prescribed in the R.P.C., which is not for penalties as
are ordinarily imposed in special laws, the intent seems clear that
P.D. No. 533 shall be deemed as an amendment of the R.P.C., with
respect to the offense of theft oflarge cattle (Art. 310), or otherwise to
be subject to applicable provisions thereof such as Article 104 of the
R.P.C. on civil liability of the offender, a provision which is not found
in the decree, but which could not have been intended to be discarded
or eliminated by the decree. Article 64 of the same Code should,
likewise, be applicable, under which the presence of two mitigating
circumstances, that of plea of guilty and extreme poverty, without
any aggravating circumstances to offset them, entitles the accused
to a lowering by one degree of the penalty for the offense. (People v.
Macatanda, No. L-51368, November 6, 1981, 109 SCRA 35, 40-41)

3.

"Unless the latter should specially provide the contrary."

Batas Pambansa Blg. 22 docs not expressly proscribe the
suppletory application of the provisions of the R.P.C. Thus, in the
absence of contrary provision in B.P. Blg. 22, the general provisions of
154

Art. 10

Felonies and Circumstances Which

155

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

I.

Justifying circumstances.
1.

Chapter Two

There is no civil liability, except in paragraph 4 of
Article ll, where the civil liability is borne by the persons
benefited by the act.

The circumstances affecting criminal liability are:
Justifying circumstances (Art. 11)

II.

Exempting circumstances (Art. 12), and other absolutory
causes (Arts. 20; 124, last par.; 280, last par.; 332; 344; etc.)

III. Mitigating circumstances (Art. 13)

Definition.
Justifying circumstances are those where the act of
a person is said to be in accordance with law, so that such
person is deemed not to have transgressed the law and is
free from both criminal and civil liability.

JUSTIFYING CIRCUMSTANCES
AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH EXEMPT FROM
CRIMINAL LIABILITY

I.

Art. 11

2.

Basis ofjustifying circumstances.
The law recognizes the non-existence of a crime by
expressly stating in the opening sentence of Article 11 that
the persons therein mentioned "do not incur any criminal
liability."

IV. Aggravating circumstances (Art. 14)
V.

Alternative circumstances (Art. 15)

Art. 11.Justifying circumstances. - The following do not
incur any criminal liability:

fmputablllty, defined.
lmputability is the quality by which an act may be ascribed to a
person as its author or owner. It implies that the act committed has
been freely and consciously done and may, therefore, be put down to
the doer as his very own. (Albert)

l. Anyone who acts in defense of his person or rights,
provided that the following circumstances concur:
First. Unlawful aggression;

Responsibility, defined.

Second. Reasonable necessity of the means employed to
prevent or repel it;

Responsibility is the obligation of suffering the consequences of
crime. It is the obligation oftak.ing the penal and civil consequences
of the crime. (Albert)

Third. Lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the
person defending himself.

fmputability, distinguished from responsibility.
While imputability implies that a deed may be imputed to
a person, responsibility implies that the person must take the
consequence of such a deed. (Albert)
Meaning of "guilt."
Guilt is an element of responsibility, for a man cannot be made
to answer for the consequences of a crime unless he is guilty. (Albert)
156

2. Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights of
his spouse, ascendants, descendants, or legitimate, natural, or
adopted brothers or sisters, or of his relatives by affinity in the
same degrees, and those by consanguinity within the fourth
civil degree, provided that the first and second requisites
prescribed in the next preceding circumstance are present,
and the further requisite, in case the provocation was given
by the person attacked, that the one making defense had no
part therein.
157

Art.11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
3.
Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights
of a stranger, provided that the first and second requisites
mentioned in the first circumstance of this article are present
and that the person defending be not induced by revenge,
resentment or other evil motive.

may justify the existence of an offense were it not for the exculpating
facts. Conviction follows if the evidence for the accused fails to prove
the existence ofjustifying circumstances. (Velasquez u. People, G.R.
No. 195021, March 15, 2017)

4.
Any person who, in order to avoid an evil or injury,
does an act which causes damage to another, provided that
the following requisites are present:

Self-defense.

First. That the evil sought to be avoided actually exists;
Second. That the injury feared be greater than that done
to avoid it.
Third. That there be no other practical and less harmful
means of preventing it.
5.
Any person who acts in the fulfillment of a duty or
in the lawful exercise of a right or office.
6.
Any person who acts in obedience to an order issued
by a superior for some lawful purpose.

There Is no crime committed, the act being justified.
In stating that the persons mentioned therein "do not incur
any criminal liability," Article 11 recognizes the acts of such persons
as justified. Such persons are not criminals, as there is no crime
committed.

Well-entrenched is the rule that where the accused invokes selfdefense, it is incumbent upon him to prove by clear and convincing
evidence that he indeed acted in defense of himself. He must rely
on the strength of his own evidence and not on the weakness of the
prosecution. For, even if the prosecution evidence is weak, it could
not be disbelieved after the accused himself had admitted the killing.
(People u. Sazon, G.R. No. 89684, September 18, 1990, 189 SCRA 700,
704; People u. Rey, G.R. No. 80089, April 13, 1989, 172 SCRA 149,
156)
Self-defense, must be proved with certainty by sufficient,
satisfactory and convincing evidence that excludes any vestige of
criminal aggression on the part of the person invoking it and it cannot
be justifiably entertained where it is not only uncorroborated by any
separate competent evidence but, in itself, is extremely doubtful.
(People v. Mercado, No. L-33492, March 30, 1988, 159 SCRA 453,
458; People v. Lebumfacil, Jr., No. L-32910, March 28, 1980, 96 SCRA
573, 584)
Par. 1.-- Self-defense.
Anyone who acts in defense ofhis person or rights, provided
that the following circumstances concur:
First. Unlawful aggression;

Burden of proof.
The circumstances mentioned in Article 11 are matters of defense
and it is incumbent upon the accused, in order to avoid criminal
liability, to prove the justifying circumstance claimed by him to the
satisfaction of the court.
An accused who pleads a justifying circumstance under Article
11 of the R.P.C. admits to the commission of acts, which would
otherwise engender criminal liability. However, he asserts that he is
justified in committing the acts. In the process of proving a justifying
circumstance, the accused risks admitting the imputed acts, which

Second. Reasonable necessity of the means employed to
prevent or repel it;
Third. Lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the
person defending himself
Rights included in self-defense.
Self-defense includes not only the defense of the person or body
of the one assaulted but also that of his rights, that is, those rights
the enjoyment of which is protected by law.
169

158

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

"Aside from the right to life on which rests the legitimate defense
of our person, we have the right to property acquired by us, and the
right to honor which is not the least prized of man's patrimony." (1
Viada, 172, 173, 5th Ed.)
Reason why penal law makes self-defense lawful.
Because it would be quite impossible for the State in all cases to
prevent aggression upon its citizens (and even foreigners, of course)
and offer protection to the person unjustly attacked. On the other
hand, it cannot be conceived that a person should succumb to an
unlawful aggression without offering any resistance. (Guevara)
The law on self-defense embodied in any penal system in the
civilized world finds justification in man's natural instinct to protect,
repel, and save his person or rights from impending danger or peril; it
is based on that impulse of self-preservation born to man and part of
his nature as a human being. To the Classicists in penal law, lawful
defense is grounded on the impossibility on the part of the State to
avoid a present unjust aggression and protect a person unlawfully
attacked, and therefore it is inconceivable for the State to require that
the innocent succumb to an unlawful aggression without resistance,
while to the Positivists, lawful defense is an exercise of a right, an act
of social justice done to repel the attack of an aggression. (Castanares
v. Court ofAppeals, Nos. L-41269-70, August 6, 1979, 92 SCRA 567,
571-572; People v. Boholst-Caballero, No. L-23249, November 25,
1974, 61 SCRA 180, 185)

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Unlawful aggression Is an indispensable requisite.
It is a statutory and doctrinal requirement that for the justifying
circumstance of self-defense, the presence of unlawful aggression is
a condition sine qua non. There can be no self-defense, complete or
incomplete, unless the victim has committed an unlawful aggression
against the person defending himself. (People v. Sazon, G.R. No.
89684, September 18, 1990, 189 SCRA 700, 704; People v. Bayocot,
G.R. No. 55285, June 28, 1989, 174 SCRA 285, 291, citing Ortega v.
Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 57664, February 8, 1989, 170 SCRA 38)
For the right of defense to exist, it is necessary that we be
assaulted or that we be attacked, or at least that we be threatened
with an attack in an immediate and imminent manner, as, for
example, brandishing a knife with which to stab us or pointing a gun
to discharge against us. (1 Viada, 5 edicion, 173, p. 3275)
If there is no unlawful aggression, there is nothing to prevent
or repel. The second requisite of defense will have no basis.
In the case of People v. Yuman, 61 Phil. 786, this rule was
explained, as follows:
"The act of mortally wounding the victim has not been
preceded by aggression on the part of the latter. There is no
occasion to speak of 'reasonable necessity of the means employed'
or of'sufficient provocation' on the part of one invoking legitimate
self-defense, because both circumstances presuppose unlawful
aggression which was not present in the instant case."

Requisites of self-defense.

Aggression must be unlawful.

There are three requisites to prove the claim of self-defense as
stated in paragraph 1 of Article 11 of the R.P.C., namely: (1) unlawful
aggression; (2) reasonable necessity ofthe means employed to prevent or
repel it; and (3) lack ofsufficient provocation on the part of the person
defending himself.(People v. Uribe, G.R. Nos. 76493-94, February 26,
1990, 182 SCRA 624, 630-631; People v. Batas, G.R. Nos. 84277-78,
August 2, 1989, 176 SCRA 46, 53)

The first requisite of defense says that the aggression must be
unlawful.

First requisite of self-defense.
The first requisite of self-defense is that there be unlawful
aggression on the part of the person injured or killed by the accused.

There are two kinds of aggression: (1) lawful; and (2) unlawful.
The fulfillment of a duty or the exercise of a right in a more or
less violent manner is an aggression, but it is lawful.
(1)

The act of a chief of police who used violence by throwing
stones at the accused when the latter was running away
from him to elude arrest for a crime committed in his
presence, is not unlawful aggression, it appearing that the
161

160

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which

purpose of the peace officer was to capture the accused and
place him under arrest. (People v. Gayrama, 60 Phil. 796,
805)
(2)

(3)

The act ofa policeman who, after firing five cautionary shots
into the air, aimed directly at the escaping detainee when
he had already reasons to fear that the latter would be able
to elude him and h..is pursuing companions. (Va/corza u.
People, 30 SCRA 143, 149; see also Masipequina v. Court
ofAppeals, 176 SCRA 699, 708)
Article 249 of the New Civil Code provides that "(t)he owner
or lawful possessor of a thing has the right to exclude any
person from the enjoyment and disposal thereof. For this
purpose, he may use such force as may be reasonably
necessary to repel or prevent an actual or threatened
unlawful physical invasion or usurpation of his property."
Thus, under the New Civil Code, a person may use force
or violence to protect his property; and if in protecting his
property such person uses force to prevent its being taken
by another, the owner of the property is not an unlawful
aggressor, because he is merely exercising a right.

Paramour surprised in the act of adultery cannot Invoke self-defense
if he killed the offended husband who was assaulting him.

In denying the paramour's plea of self-defense, the Supreme
Court held: "Even though it were true and even if the deceased did
succeed in entering the room in which the accused (the paramour and
the wife of the deceased) were lying, and did immediately thereupon
assault (the paramour), giving him several blows with the bolo
which (the deceased) carried, that assault was natural and lawful,
for the reason that it was made by a deceived and offended husband
in order to defend his honor and rights by punishing the offender of
his honor, and ifhe had k..illed his wife and (the paramour), he would
have exercised a lawful right and such acts would have fallen within
the sanction of Article 423 (now Art. 247) of the Penal Code ... The
(paramour) knew well that by maintaining unlawful relations with
(the deceased's wife), he was performing an unlawful and criminal act
and exposed himself to the vengeance of the offended husband, and
that, by their meeting each other in the said house, he was running

the danger of the latter's surprising them there, as in fact it did occur."
(U.S. u. Merced, 39 Phil. 198, 202-203)
Meaning of unlawful aggression.

Unlawful aggression is equivalent to assault or at least
threatened assault of an immediate and imminent kind. (People u.
Alconga, 78 Phil. 366) 'There is unlawful aggression when the peril
to one's life, limb (People v. Sumicad, 56 Phil. 643, 647), or right is
either actual or imminent.
There must be actual physical force or actual use of weapon.
(People v. Crisostomo, No. L-38180, October 23, 1981, 108 SCRA 288,
298)
There must be an actual physical assault upon a person, or at
least a threat to inflict real injury.
Unlawful aggression presupposes an actual, sudden, and
unexpected attack, or imminent danger thereof, and not merely
a threatening or intimidating attitude. (People v. Pasco, Jr., No.
L-45715, June 24, 1985, 137 SCRA 137; People v. Bayocot, G.R. No.
55285, June 28, 1989, 174 SCRA 285, 292; People vu. Rey, G.R. No.
80089, April 13, 1989, 172 SCRA 149, 156) It cannot consist in oral
threats or a merely threatening stance or posture. (People v. Lachica,
132 SCRA 230[1984); People v. Tac-an, G.R. Nos. 76338-39, February
26, 1990, 182 SCRA 601, 613)
In case of threat, the same must be offensive and positively
strong, showing the wrongful intent to cause an injury. (U.S. u.
Guysayco, 13 Phil. 292, 295) There must be a real danger to life or
personal safety. (People v. Cagalingan, G.R. No. 79168, August 3,
1990, 188 CRA 313, 318)
When there is no peril to one's life, limb or right, there is no unlawful
aggression.
Where the deceased, after kidding the accused, another
Constabulary soldier acting as sentry and singing, told the latter
that he had no voice for singing and, after words were exchanged
and while still in a spirit of fun, the deceased seized the accused by
the throat, whereupon the latter killed the deceased with his rifle,
it was held that the fact that the deceased seized the accused by the
163

162

Art. 11

Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
throat and exerted pressure thereon in one of his frolics which he
had persistently kept up with notorious imprudence, and in spite
of the opposition of the accused, cannot be considered as an illegal
aggression in the case of two companions in arms quartered in the
same barracks. (U.S. v. Padilla, 5 Phil. 396)

2.

Example:
People v. Cabungcal

Peril to one's life.
1.

Imminent
that the danger is on the point of happening. It is
not required that the attack already begins, for it may be too
late.

(51 Phil. 803)

Actual - that the danger must be present, that is, actually in
existence.
Example:

Facts: On March 21, 1926, the accused invited several persons to a picnic
in a fishery on his property in Infanta, 'Tayabas. They spent the day at said
j

I
U.S. v. Jose Laurel
(22 Phil. 252)

Facts: On the night of December 26, 1909, Concepcion Lat was walking
on her way from the house of Exequiel Castillo, situated in Tanauan,
Batangas, accompanied by several young people, when she was approached
by Jose Laurel who suddenly kissed her and thereafter ran offin the direction
of his house. Concepcion's companions, including Castillo, pursued Laurel
but failed to overtake him.
Two nights after, while Laurel was at an entertainment held on the
second floor of the parochial building, he was invited to come out into the
yard. Exequiel then asked Laurel why he kissed Concepcion, Exequiel's
sweetheart. Laurel replied that he had done so because she was very fickle
and prodigal of her use of the word "yes" on all occasions. Exequiel told him
that he should not act that way and immediately struck him a blow on the
head with a cane or club, which assault made Laurel dizzy and caused him
to fall to the ground in a sitting posture. As Laurel feared that his aggressor
would continue to assault rum, he took hold of the pocket knife which he was
carrying in his pocket and stabbed Exequiel. Among the wounds inflicted on
Exequiel, the wound in the left side of his breast was the most serious on
account ofits having fully penetrated the lungs and caused him to spit blood.
He would have died, had it not been for the timely medical aid rendered him.
Held: The defensive act executed by Jose Laurel was attended by the
three requisites of illegal aggression on the part of Excquiel Castillo, there
being lack of sufficient provocation on the part of Laurel, who did not provoke
the occurrence complained of, nor did he direct that Exequiel Castillo be
invited to come down from the parochial building and arrange the interview in
which Castillo alone was interested, and, finally, because Laurel, in defending
himself with a pocket knife against the assault made upon him with a cane,
which may also be a deadly weapon, employed reasonable means to prevent
or repel the same.
164

£
%

#
Ii

l

I

I

I
I
I

fishery and in the afternoon returned in two boats, one steered by the accused
and the other by an old woman. Nine persons were in the boat steered by the
accused, the great majority of whom were women. The accused's wife and son
and a nursing child were passengers in the boat, together with the deceased
Juan Loquenario. Upon reaching a place of great depth, the deceased rocked

the boat which started to take water. The accused, fearing the boat might
capsize, asked the deceased not to do it. As the deceased paid no attention to
this warning and continued rocking the boat, the accused struck him on the

forehead with an oar. The deceased fell into the water and was submerged,
but a little while after appeared on the surface, having grasped the side of
the boat. The deceased then stated that be was going to capsize the boat
and started to move it. The women began to cry, and the accused struck him

on the neck with the same oar, which submerged the deceased again. The
deceased died as a consequence.

Held: Due to the condition of the river at the point where the deceased
started to rock the boat, if it had capsized, the passengers would have run
the risk of losing their lives, the majority of whom were women, especially

the nursing child. The conduct of the deceased in rocking the boat until the
point of it having taken water and his insistence on this action in spite of

the accused's warning, gave rise to the belief on the part of the accused that
it would capsize if he did not separate the deceased from the boat in such a
manner as to give him no time to accomplish his purpose. It was necessary

to disable rum momentarily. For this purpose, the blow given rum by the
accused on the forehead with an oar was the least that could reasonably
have been done. And this consideration militates with greater weight with
respect to the second blow given in his neck with the same oar, because then

the danger was greater than the boat might upset, especially as the deceased
had expressed his intention to upset it.

Although the case involves defense of relatives and at the same
time defense ofstrangers, it is cited here because unlawful aggression
is also a requisite in defense of relatives and in defense of strangers
and has the same meaning.
165

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

Criminal Law

Peril to one's limb.
When a person is attacked, he is in imminent danger of death
or bodily harm.
The blow with a deadly weapon may be aimed at the vital parts
of his body, in which case there is danger to his life; or with a less
deadly weapon or any other weapon that can cause minor physical
injuries only, aimed at other parts of the body, in which case, there
is danger only to his limb.
The peril to one's limb may also be actual or only imminent.
Peril to one's limb includes peril to the safety of one's person
from physical injuries.
An attack with fist blows may imperil one's safety from physical
injuries. Such an attack is unlawful aggression. (People v. Montalbo,
56 Phil. 443)
There must be actual physical force or actual use of weapon.
The person defending himself must have been attacked with
actual physical force or with actual use of weapon.
(1)

Insulting words addressed to the accused, no matter how
objectionable they may have been, without physical assault,
could not constitute unlawful aggression. (U.S. v. Carrero,
9 Phil. 544)

(2)

A light push on the head with the hand does not constitute
unlawful aggression. (People v. Yuman, 61 Phil. 786)

(3)

A mere push or a shove, not followed by other acts, does
not constitute unlawful aggression. (People v. Sabio, G.R.
No. L-23734, April 27, 1967)

"Foot-kick greeting" is not unlawful aggression.
Teodoro Sabio was squatting with a friend, Irving Jurilla, in a
plaza. Romeo Bacobo and two others Ruben Miosa and Leonardo
Garcia - approached them. All of them were close and old friends.
Romeo Bacobo then asked Sabio where he spent the holy week. At
the same time, he gave Sabio a "foot-kick greeting," touching Sabio's
foot with his own left foot. Sabio thereupon stood up and dealt Romeo

TITLE ONE

Bacobo a fist blow, inflicting upon him a lacerated wound, 3/4 inch
long, at the upper lid of the left eye. It took from 11 to 12 days to
heal and prevented Romeo Bacobo from working during said period
as employee ofVictorias Milling Co., Inc.
Held: A playful kick at the foot by way of greeting between
friends may be a practical joke, and may even hurt; but it is not a
serious or real attack on a person's safety. It may be a mere slight
provocation. (People v. Sabio, 19 SCRA 901)
A slap on the face constitutes unlawful aggression.
A slap on the face is an unlawful aggression. Two persons met
in the street. One slapped the face of the other and the latter repelled
it by clubbing him and inflicting upon him less serious physical
injury. Held: The act of slapping another constituted the use of force
qualifying an unlawful aggression. (Decision of the Supreme Court
of Spain of January 20, 1904; People v. Roxas, 58 Phil. 733)
Reason: Since the face represents a person and his dignity,
slapping it is a serious personal attack. It is a physical assault coupled
with a willful disregard, nay, a defiance, of an individual's personality.
It may, therefore, be frequently regarded as placing in real danger a
person's dignity, rights and safety. (People v. Sabio, G.R. No. L-23734,
April 27, 1967)
'·
No unlawful aggression, because there was no imminent and real
danger to the life or limb of the accused.
(1) Unlawful aggression presupposes actual, sudden, unexpected or imminent danger - not merely threatening and intimidating action. Uncertain, premature and speculative was the assertion
of appellant that the victim was about to stab him, when the latter
had merely drawn out his knife. There is aggression, only when the
one attacked faces real and immediate threat to one's life. The peril
sought to be avoided must be imminent and actual, not just speculative. (People v. Raytos, G.R. No. 225623, June 7, 2017)

(2) If, indeed, Rillamas did take hold of the barrel of appellant's
rifle or even tried to grab it, [the Court] doles] not believe it was
justified for appellant "to remove the safety lock and fire" his weapon.
In their relative positions, appellant had more freedom of action than
the deceased who was sandwiched among the three other passengers
167

166

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

r---------Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

within the small area of the calesa in which they were. In other words,
between the two of them, appellant had the better chance to win in
the struggle for the rifle. (People v. Riduca, No. L-26729, January 21,
1974, 55 SCRA 190, 199)
(3) True, the deceased acted rather belligerently, arrogantly,
and menacingly at the accused-appellant, but such behavior did
not give rise to a situation that actually posed a real threat to the
life or safety of accused-appellant. The peril to the latter's life was
not imminent and actual. To constitute unlawful aggression, it is
necessary that an attack or material aggression, an offensive act
positively determining the intent of the aggressor to cause an injury
shall have been made. (People v. Macaso, No. L-30489, June 30, 1975,
64 SCRA 659, 665-666)
The act of pulling "something" out cannot constitute unlawful
aggression.

The act of the victim in pulling "something" out from his jacket
while he was three to four meters away from accused cannot amount
to unlawful aggression or to physical force or actual use of weapon,
or even threat or intimidating attitude. There is no showing that
accused's life was in peril by the act of pulling "something" out.
Accused never said that the victim aimed or pointed the "sumpak" at
him or at least made an attempt to shoot him. The threat on accused's
life is more imagined than real. (People v. de Leon, G.R. No. 197546,
March 23, 2015)
A strong retaliation for an injury or threat may amount to an unlawful
aggression.

When a person who was insulted, slightly injured or threatened,
made a strong retaliation by attacking the one who gave the insult,
caused the slight injury or made the threat, the former became the
offender, and the insult, injury or threat should be considered only
as a provocation mitigating his liability. (U.S. v. Carrero, 9 Phil. 544)
In th.is case, there is no self-defense.

Affect Criminal Liability
was still existing when the aggressor was injured or disabled by the
person malting a defense.
Thus, when a person had inflicted slight physical injuries on
another, without intention to inflict other injuries, and the latter
attacked the former, the one malting the attack was an unlawful
aggressor. The attack made was a retaliation. But where a person
is about to strike another with fist blows and the latter, to prevent
or repel the blows, stabs the former with a knife, the act of striking
with fist blows is an unlawful aggression which may justify the use
of the knife. If the knife is a reasonable means, there is self-defense.
Retaliation is not a justifying circumstance.

The settled rule in jurisprudence is that when unlawful
aggression ceases, the defender no longer has the right to kill or
even wound the former aggressor. Retaliation is not a justifying
circumstance. Upon the cessation of the unlawful aggression and the
danger or risk to life and limb, the necessity for the person invoking
self-defense to attack his adversary ceases. If he persists in attacking
his adversary, he can no longer invoke the justifying circumstance
of self-defense. Self-defense does not justify the unnecessary killing
of an aggressor who is retreating from the fray. (People v. Cajurao
G.R. No. 122767, January 20, 2004, 420 SCRA 207, 214-215)
'
The attack made by the deceased and the killing of the deceased by
defendant should succeed each other without appreciable interval
of time.

In order to justify homicide on the ground of self-defense it
is essential that the killing of the deceased by the defendant be
simultaneous with the attack made by the deceased, or at least both
acts succeeded each other without appreciable interval of time. (U.S.
v. Ferrer, 1 Phil. 56)

Retaliation is not self-defense.

When the killing of the deceased by the accused was after the
attack made by the deceased, the accused must have no time
nor occasion for deliberation and cool thinking.

Retaliation is different from an act of self-defense. In retaliation,
the aggression that was begun by the injured party already ceased to
exist when the accused attacked him. In self-defense, the aggression

The deceased drew his revolver and levelled it at the accused
who, sensing the danger to his life, sidestepped and caught the hand
of the deceased with his left, thus causing the gun to drop to the floor.

168

169

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Immediately, the accused drew his knife, opened it and stabbed the
deceased in the abdomen.
The fact that when the accused held the right hand of the
deceased, which carried the gun, the weapon fell to the floor could
not be taken to mean that the unlawful aggression on the part of the
deceased had ceased. The incident took place at nighttime in the house
of a relative of the deceased; among those present were a brother
and a cousin of the deceased, said cousin having a criminal record;
and the deceased himself had been indicted for illegal possession of
firearm and for discharge of firearm. Under such circumstances, the
accused could not be expected to have acted with all the coolness of
a person under normal condition. Uppermost in his mind at the time
must have been the fact that his life was in danger and that to save
himself he had to do something to stop the aggression. He had no
time nor occasion for deliberation and cool thinking because it was
imperative for him to act on the spot. (People v. Arellano, C.A., 54
O.G. 7252)
The unlawful aggression must come from the person who was
attacked by the accused.
Although the accused was unlawfully attacked, nevertheless, the
aggressor was not the deceased but another person. Consequently, this
unlawful aggression cannot be considered in this case as an element of
self-defense, because, in order to constitute an element of self-defense,
the unlawful aggression must come, directly or indirectly, from the
person who was subsequently attacked by the accused. It has been
so held by the Supreme Court of Spain in its decision of May 6, 1907;
nor can such element of unlawful aggression be considered present
when the author thereof is unknown, as was held in the decision of
February 27, 1895, of said Supreme Court. (People v. Gutierrez, 53
Phil. 609, 611)
The alleged act of the victim in placing his hand in his pocket,
as if he was going to draw out something, cannot be characterized
as unlawful aggression. On the other hand, the accused was the
aggressor. His act of arming himself with a bolo and following
and overtaking the group of the victim shows that he had formed
the resolution of liquidating the victim. There being no unlawful
aggression, there could be no self-defense. (People v. Calantoc, No.
L-27892, January 31, 1974, 55 SCRA 458, 461, 463-464)
170

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Nature, character, location, and extent of wound of the accused
allegedly inflicted by the injured party may belie claim of selfdefense.
1.

The accused, claiming self-defense, exhibited a small scar
(1 1/2 inches long) caused by an instrument on his head.
Held: The exhibition of a small wound shortly after
the occurrence does not meet the requirement for paraphrasing the Supreme Court - "if in order to be
exempt from military service there are those who mutilate
themselves or cause others to mutilate them, who would
not wound himself slightly in order to escape" the penalty
ofreclusion temporal prescribed for the crime of homicide?
(People u. Mediavilla, 52 Phil. 94, 96)

2.

The location, number and seriousness of the stab wounds
inflicted on the victims belie the claim of self-defense. One
of the victims alone sustained 21 wounds. (People v. Batas,
G.R. Nos. 84277-78, August 2, 1989, 176 SCRA 46, 53, 54)

3.

Appellant's theory of self-defense is negatived by the nature
and location of the victim's wounds which, having a rightto-left direction, could not have possibly been inflicted by a
right-handed person in front of the victim with a two-feet
long bolo. (People v. Labis, No. L-22087, November 15, 1967,
21 SCRA 875, 882)

4.

In view of the number of wounds of the deceased, 19
in number, the plea of self-defense cannot be seriously
entertained. So it has been constantly and uninterruptedly
held by the Supreme Court from U.S. v. Gonzales, 8 Phil.
443 (1907) to People v. Constantino, L-23558, August
10, 1967, 20 SCRA 940, a span of 60 years. (People v.
Panganiban, No. L-22476, February 27, 1968, 22 SCRA
817,823)

5.

The accused was the only eyewitness to the crime. He
admitted that he killed the deceased, but advanced the
claim that he acted in self-defense.
Held: The actual, undisputed, physical facts flatly
contradict the whole theory of self-defense. The nature,
character, location and extent of the wound, as testified
171

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
to by the doctor who had examined the wound, clearly
show that the deceased was struck either from behind or
while his body was in a reclining position, from which it
follows that the accused did not act in self-defense. (People
v. Tolentino, 54 Phil. 77, 80)

Improbability of the deceased being the aggressor belies the claim
of self-defense.
1.
It was unlikely that a sexagenarian would have gone to
the extent of assaulting the 24-year-old accused who was armed with
a gun and a bolo, just because the latter refused to give him a pig.
(People v. Diaz, No. L-24002, January 21, 1974, 55 SCRA 178, 184)
2.
It is hard to believe that the deceased, an old man of 55
years sick with ulcer, would still press his attack and continue hacking
the accused after having been seriously injured and losing his right
hand. (People v. Ardisa, No. L-29351, January 23, 1974, 55 SCRA
245, 253-254)
The fact that the accused declined to give any statement when he
surrendered to a policeman is inconsistent with the plea of selfdefense.
When the accused surrendered to the policemen, he declined to
give any statement, which is the natural course of things he would
have done if he had acted merely to defend himself. A protestation
of innocence or justification is the logical and spontaneous reaction
of a man who finds himself in such an inculpatory predicament as
that in which the policemen came upon him still clutching the death
weapon and his victim dying before him. (People v. Manansala, No.
L-23514, February 17, 1970, 31 SCRA 401, 404)
The accused did not act in self-defense because, if he had done
so, that circumstance would have been included in his confession. He
never declared in his confession that he acted in self-defense. Had
he acted in self-defense, he should have reported the incident to the
police of the three towns, the poblacion of which he passed when he
fled from the scene of the incident. (People u. De la Cruz, No. L-45485,
September 19, 1978, 85 SCRA 285, 291; see also People v. Delgado,
G.R. No. 79672, February 15, 1990, 182 SCRA 343, 350)

Art. 11
TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability
Physical fact may determine whether the accused acted in selfdefense.

In People v. Dorico, No. L-31568, November 29, 1973, 54 SCRA
172, 184, where the accused claimed self-defense by alleging that
he stabbed the victim twice when the latter lunged at the accused
to grab the latter's bolo, it was observed that if this were true, the
victim would have been hit in front. The evidence showed, however,
that the wounds were inflicted from behind.
The physical fact belies the claim of self-defense. The revolver
of the deceased was still tucked inside the waistband of his pants
which is indicative of his unpreparedness when he was fired upon
simultaneously by the accused with their high-calibered weapons.
The fact that the deceased received a total of 13 gunshot wounds is
inconsistent with the claim that the deceased was fired upon in selfdefense. (People v. Perez, No. L-28583, April 24, 1974, 56 SCRA 603,
610)
In People v. Aquino, No. L-32390, December 28, 1973, 54 SCRA
409, the plea of self-defense was sustained. There were conflicting
versions as to how the victim was shot but the Supreme Court
sustained the version of the accused as being in accord with the
physical evidence. The prosecution tried to prove that the victim
was standing about two or three meters away from the truck where
the accused was seated as driver and that the accused, without any
exchange of words, shot the victim. The accused, on the other hand,
claimed that the victim went up the running board of the truck, after
pulling out a "balisong," and held on to the windshield frame. When
the victim lunged with his knife, the accused leaned far right, at the
same time parrying the hand of the victim who switched to a stabbing
position and, at that moment, the accused, who was already leaning
almost prone on the driver's seat, got his gun from the tool box and
shot the victim. The Court considered the physical objective facts as
not only consistent with, but confirming strongly, the plea of selfdefense. The direction and trajectory of the bullets would have been
different had the victim been standing upright two or three meters
to the left of the truck.
Presence of unlawful aggression even if aggressor was disarmed.
Unlawful aggression is still present even if the aggressor was
disarmed if the aggressor still posed a threat to the lives of the
accused.
173

172

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

In People v. Samson, G.R. No. 214883, September 2, 2015, when
the accused was able to take hold of the knife from her husband, he
did not stand down but continued to move towards her despite her
plea that he should not come nearer. He grabbed her by the arm
which could have precipitated her well-grounded belief that her life
was still in danger if he would be able to wrest the weapon from her.
It was not farfetched to presume that, being stronger, he could have
easily overpowered her and eventually killed her. Thus, there was
unlawful aggression on the party of the husband even after he was
disarmed.
In People v. Rabandaban, L-2228, February 28, 1950, the
victim, instead of running away from the accused-husband after
the bolo was wrested from her, continued to struggle with him to
regain possession of the bolo. This fact, together with her husband's
compromised condition, being already badly wounded, justified him
in finally neutralizing his wife who was then determined in putting
an end to his life.
When the aggressor flees, unlawful aggression no longer exists.
When unlawful aggression which has begun no longer exists,
because the aggressor runs away, the one making a defense has no
more right to kill or even to wound the former aggressor.
People v. Alconga, et al.
(78 Phil. 366)

Affect Criminal Liability
who had attacked the accused with repeated blows, was the unlawful
aggressor. But when the deceased after receiving several wounds, ran away,
from that moment there was no longer any danger to the life of the accused
who, being virtually unscathed, could hove chosen to remain where he was
and when he pursued the deceased, fatally wounding him upon overtaking
him, Alconga was no longer acting in self-defense, because the aggression

begun by the deceased ceased from the moment he took to his heels.
In a case where the deceased, who appeared to be the first
aggressor, ran out of bullets and fled, and the accused pursued him
and, after overtaking him, inflicted several wounds on the posterior
side of his body, it was held that in such a situation the accused
should have stayed his hand, and not having done so he was guilty of
homicide. (People v. Del Rosario, C.A., 58 0.G. 7879, citing decisions
of the Supreme Court)
Retreat to take more advantageous position.
If it is clear that the purpose of the aggressor in retreating is to
take a more advantageous position to insure the success of the attack
already begun by him, the unlawful aggression is considered still
continuing, and the one making a defense has a right to pursue him
in his retreat and to disable him.
No unlawful aggression when there Is agreement to fight.
1.

No unlawful aggression in concerted fight, as when the
accused and the deceased, after an altercation in a bar,
agreed to fight, went to a store and purchased two knives;
and thereafter, the accused repeatedly expressed his
desire and wish to the deceased not to fight, and begged
the deceased that there be no fight between them, but the
deceased paid no heed to such request and attacked the
accused who, however, succeeded in killing the deceased. It
was held that the aggression was reciprocal and legitimate
as between two contending parties. (U.S. v. Navarro, 7 Phil.
713; see also People v. Marasigan, 51 Phil. 701 and People
v. Gondaya0, 30 SCRA 226)

2.

There is agreement to fight in this case.

Facts: The deceased was the banker in a game of blackjack. The accused
posted himself behind the deceased acting as a spotter of the latter's cards
and communicating by signs to his partner. Upon discovering the trick, the

deceased and the accused almost came to blows. Subsequently, while the
accused was seated on a bench the deceased came and forthwith gave a blow

with a "pingahan," but the accused avoided the blow by crawling under the
bench. The deceased continued with second and third blows, and the accused
in a crawling position fired with his revolver. A hand-to-hand fight ensued, the
deceased with his dagger and the accused using his bolo. Having sustained
several wounds, the deceased ran away, but was followed by the accused and

another fight took place, during which a mortal blow was delivered by the
accused, slashing the cranium of the deceased.

Held: There were two stages in the fight between the accused and the
deceased. During the first stage of the fight, the accused in inflicting several
wounds upon the deceased acted in self-defense, because then the deceased,
174

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

When the accused, pursued by the deceased, reached
his house, he picked up a pestle and, turning towards the
175

T
Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
deceased, faced him, saying:. "Come on ifyou are brave," and
then attacked and killed him. It was held that the accused
did not act in self-defense, for what he did after believing
himself to be duly armed, was to agree to the fight. (People
v. Monteroso, 51 Phil. 815)

3.

The challenge to a fight must be accepted.
Where the deceased prepared himself to fight by
drawing out his dagger, and the accused accepted the
challenge resulting from this act, by "rushing" to his
encounter and grappling with him, the accused cannot
be given the benefit of self-defense. (People v Gondayao,
L-26240, October 31, 1969)
If the deceased challenged the accused to a fight and
forthwith rushed towards the latter with a bolo in his hand,
so that the accused had to defend himself by stabbing the
deceased with a knife, the accused, not having accepted the
challenge, acted in self-defense. (People v. Del Pilar, CA.,
44 O.G. 596)

Reason for the rule.
Where the fight is agreed upon, each of the protagonists is at
once assailant and assaulted, and neither can invoke the right of selfdefense, because aggression which is an incident in the fight is bound
to arise from one or the other of the combatants. (People v. Quinto,
55 Phil. 116)

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
reaching the appointed time and place for the agreed encounter, and
any such aggression was patently illegal. (Severino Justo v. Court of
Appeals, 53 O.G. 4083)
Illustration:
A and B were in the office of a division superintendent of
schools. A and B had an altercation. A grabbed a lead paper
weight from a table and challenged B to go out, to fight outside
the building. A left the office, followed by B. When they were in
front of the table of a clerk, B asked A to put down the paper
weight but instead A grabbed the neck and collar of the polo
shirt of B which was torn. B boxed A several times.
In this case, the aggression made by A which took place
before he and B could go out of the building is unlawful,
notwithstanding their agreement to fight.
One who voluntarily joined a fight cannot claim self-defense.
The defense claimed that the victim shouted while in the street
"Get out those who are brave." Accused got out and asked "Why are
you like that?" and then a fistfight ensued. The Court held that the
accused voluntarily and practically faced a fight. The rule is when
one agrees to engage in a fight, he cannot plead self-defense because
there is no unlawful aggression to speak of. (Rugas v. People, G.R.
No. 147789, January 14, 2004)
The rule now Is "stand ground when in the right."

When parties mutually agree to fight, it is immaterial who
attacks or receives the wound first, for the first act of force is an
incident of the fight itself and in no wise is it an unwarranted and
unexpected aggression which alone can legalize self-defense. (U.S. v.
Cortez, et al., 36 Phil. 837; People v. Marasigan, 51 Phil. 701; People
v. Luma.sag, 56 Phil. 19; People v. Neri, 77 Phil. 1091)

The ancient common law rule in homicide denominated "retreat
to the wall," has now given way to the new rule "stand ground when
in the right."

Aggression which is ahead of the stipulated time and place Is
unlawful.

The reason for the rule is that if one flees from an aggressor, he
runs the risk of being attacked in the back by the aggressor.

Where there was a mutual agreement to fight, an aggression
ahead of the stipulated time and place would be unlawful. The
acceptance of the challenge did not place on the offended party the
burden of preparing to meet an assault at any time even before

How to determine the unlawful aggressor.

176

So, where the accused is where he has the right to be, the law does
not require him to retreat when his assailant is rapidly advancing
upon him with a deadly weapon. (U.S. v. Domen, 37 Phil. 57)

In the absence of direct evidence to determine who provoked the
conflict, it has been held that it shall be presumed that, in the nature
177

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

of the order of things, the person who was deeply offended by the insult
was the one who believed he had a right to demand explanation of
the perpetrator of that insult, and the one who also struck the first
blow when he was not satisfied with the explanation offered. (U.S.
v. Laurel, 22 Phil. 252)

In People v. Apolinar, C.A., 38 O.G. 2870, a Court of
Appeals case, it was held that defense of property can be
invoked as ajustifyingcircumstanceon1y when it is coupled
with an attack on the person of one entrusted with said
property.

The circumstance that it was the accused, not the deceased, who
had a greater motive for committing the crime on the ground that the
deceased had already sufliciently punished the accused on account
of his misbehavior and because he was publicly humiliated, having
gotten the worst of the fight between the two inside the theater, leads
the court to the conclusion that the claim of self-defense is really
untenable. (People v. Berio, 59 Phil. 533)

However, in People v. Narvaez, G.R. Nos. L-33466-67,
April 20, 1983, an assault on appellant's property was found
to amount to unlawful aggression. The Supreme Court
held that (1) the deceased had no right to destroy or cause
damage to appellant's house, nor to close his accessibility
to the highway while he was pleading with them to stop
and talk things over with him and (2) there was an actual
physical invasion of appellant's property which he had the
right to resist, pursuant to Article 429 of the Civil Code.
(People v. Narvaez, G.R. Nos. L-33466-67, April 20, 1983)

Unlawful aggression in defense of other rights.
Note that in the three classes of defense mentioned in paragraphs
1,2, and 3 of Article 11, the defense ofrights requires also the first and
second requisites, namely, (1) unlawful aggression, and (2) reasonable
necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it.
1.

2.

Defense of woman's honor
a.

Embracing a woman, touching her private parts and
her breasts, and throwing her to the ground for the
purpose of raping her in an uninhabited place when
it was twilight, constitute an attack upon her honor
and, therefore, an unlawful aggression. (People v. De
la Cruz, 61 Phil. 344)

b.

Placing of hand by a man on the woman's upper thigh
is unlawful aggression. (People v. Jaurigue, 76 Phil.
174)

Defense ofproperty.
Article 429 of the Civil Code of the Philippines
provides:
Art. 429. The owner or lawful possessor of a thing has
the right to exclude any person from the enjoyment and
disposal thereof. For this purpose, he may use such force as
may be reasonably necessary to repel or prevent an actual
or threatened unlawful physical invasion or usurpation of
his property. (Emphasis supplied)
178

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

3.

Defense of home.
Violent entry to another's house at nighttime, by
a person who is armed with a bolo, and who forced his
way into the house, shows he was ready and looking for
trouble, and the manner of his entry constitutes an act
of aggression. The owner of the house need not wait for
a blow before repelling the aggression, as that blow may
prove fatal. (People v. Mirabiles, 45 O.G., 5th Supp., 277)
A man's house is his castle. When a person is attacked
in his own house, he has a right to protect it, and those
within it, from the intrusion or attack. He may repel force by
force in defense of person, habitation, or property, against
one who manifestly intends or endeavors by violence or
surprise to commit a felony, such as arson, upon either.
In such case one is not obliged to retreat, but may pursue
his adversary until he has secured himself from danger.
(People v. Lewis [1897], 117 Cal., 186, citing East's Please
of the Crown, p. 271, and Foster's Crown Cases, Chapter
3, p. 273, where the rule is well stated.)
In this instance, the accused acted in defense of her
person, her home, and her children. The crime ofarson was
about to be committed, and there was a present element of
179

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

danger to the occupants of the habitation. But there was
not any reasonable necessity for killing the assailant. (U.S.
v. Rivera, G.R. No. L-16443, March 21, 1921)
In this day and times when bold robberies and
thieveries are committed even under the very noses of the
members of the household and usually at night, courts
must not hesitate to sustain the theory of self-defense of
the victim of thievery or robbery when such thief or robber
by overt acts shows aggression instead of fear or desire to
escape upon apprehension for certainly such an intruder
must be prepared not only to steal but to kill under the
circumstances. In the case at bar, even if the accused did
not actually see the victim assault him with the balisong,
the mere fact that the victim assaulted the accused under
cover of darkness is such unlawful aggression as would
justify the accused to defend himself. (People v. Salatan,
[CA] 69 0.G. 10134)
Defense of honor.

People v. De la Cruz
(61 Phil. 344)
Facts: The accused, a woman, was walking home with a party including
the deceased, Francisco Rivera. It was already dark and they were passing a

narrow path. When the other people were far ahead, the deceased who was
following the accused suddenly threw his arms around her from behind,
caught hold of her breasts, kissed her, and touched her private parts. He
started to throw her down. When the accused felt she could not do anything
more against the strength of her aggressor, she got a knife from her pocket
and stabbed him.
Held: She was justified in making use of the knife in repelling what
she believed to be an attack upon her honor since she had no other means of

defending herself.
An attempt to rape a woman constitutes an aggression sufficient
to put her in a state of legitimate defense inasmuch as a woman's
honor cannot but be esteemed as a right as precious, if not more than
her very existence. The woman thus imperilled may kill her offender
if that is the only means left for her to protect her honor from so grave
an outrage. (People v. Luague, et al., 62 Phil. 504)
180

Art. 11

People v. Jaurigue
(76 Phil. 174)
Facts: The deceased was courting the accused in vain. One day, the
deceased approached her, spoke to her of his love which she flatly refused,
and he thereupon suddenly embraced and kissed her on account of which the
accused gave him fist blows and kicked him. Thereafter, she armed herself
with a fan knife, whenever she went out. One week after the incident, the
deceased entered a chapel, went to sit by the side of the accused, and placed

his hand on the upper part of her right thigh. Accused pulled out her fan
knife and with it stabbed the deceased at the base of the left side of the neck,
inflicting a mortal wound.

Held: The means employed by the accused in the defense of her honor
was evidently excessive. The chapel was lighted with electric lights, and there
were already several people, including her father and the barrio lieutenant,
inside the chapel. Under the circumstances, there was and there could be no

possibility of her being raped.
The Supreme Court apparently considered in this case the
existence of unlawful aggression consisting in the deceased's placing
his hand on the upper portion of her right thigh. The accused was
not given the benefit of complete self-defense, because the means
employed was not reasonable. If the accused only gave the deceased
fist blows or kicked him, to prevent him from going further in his
attempt to commit an outrage upon her honor, she would have been
completely justified in doing so.
Defense of property.

People v. Apolinar
(C.A., 38 0.G. 2870)
Facts: The accused, armed with a shotgun, was looking over his land.
He noticed a man carrying a bundle on his shoulder. Believing that the man
had stolen his palay, the accused shouted for him to stop, and as he did not,
the accused fired in the air and then at him, causing his death.
Held: Defense of property is not of such importance as right to life, and
defense of property can be invoked as a justifying circumstance only when it
is coupled with an attack on the person of one entrusted with said property.

Had the accused, who wanted to stop the thief then approaching
him, been attacked, say with a bolo, by that thief, he would have
181

r
I

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

been justified in shooting him, if the shotgun was the only available
weapon for his defense.
In such case, there would be unlawful aggression on the part of
the deceased, which is required even in defense of one's property. It
will be noted that in paragraph 1 of Article 11, the opening clause,
which is followed by the enumeration of the three requisites, states:
"anyone who acts in defense of his person or rights." The word
"rights" includes right to property. Hence, all the three requisites of
self-defense, particularly unlawful aggression, must also concur in
defense of property.
In the case of People v. Ignacio, G.R. No. 134568, February
10, 2000, appellant, who was the caretaker of a fishpond, admitted
shooting the victim because he believed that the victim and a
companion had stolen crabs. Allegedly, he saw them carrying a basket
and coming out of his house. When he approached, the two ran away.
After they failed to heed his call for them to stop, he shot the victim
with a homemade shotgun. Appellant claimed that he acted in lawful
defense of the landowner's property.

Held: Appellant's conduct cannot be justified as a lawful defense
of property rights. For this justifying circumstance to be appreciated,
the accused has the burden of proving unlawful aggression on the
part of the victim and reasonable necessity of the means employed
to prevent or repel it. In this case, the first requisite was not proven,
because he was not attacked by the victim. In fact, he did not even
see the victim steal the crabs; he merely suspected him of doing so.
People v. Narvaez
(L-33466-67, April 20, 1983)
Facts: Five persons, consisting of the deceased and their three laborers,
started fencing and chiselling off the walls of appellant's house. Appellant
woke up to the sound of the chiselling on his walls and upon looking out the
window, saw the damage being done to his house, compounded by the fact
that his house and rice mill will be shut off from the highway by the fence
once it is finished. He therefore appealed to hiscompadre, the deceased Rubia,

to stop what they were doing and to talk things over with him, but deceased
Fleischer answered angrily with 'gademit' and directed his men to proceed

with what they were doing. The accused got his gun and shot Fleischer and
Rubia, causing their death. Accused claimed defense of his person and rights,
and therefore, exemption from criminal liability.
182

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Held: The deceased had no right to destroy or cause damage to
appellant's house, nor to close his accessibility to the highway while he

was pleading with them to stop and talk things over with him. The assault
on appellant's property, therefore, amounts to unlawful aggression as
contemplated by law. There was an actual physical invasion of appellant's

property which he had the right to resist, pursuant to Article 429 of the Civil
Code of the Philippines. However, when the appellant fired his shotgun from
his window, killing his two victims, his resistance was disproportionate to
the attack. While the third element of defense of property is present, i.e.,
lack of sufficient provocation on the part of appellant who was defending his
property, appellant's act in killing the deceased was not justifiable, since not

all the elements for justification are present. He should therefore be held
responsible for the death of his victims, but he could be credited with the
special mitigating circumstance of incomplete defense.
The circumstances as the accused perceived them at the time of
the Incident should be considered in determining the existence of
unlawful aggression.

In self-defense and defense of stranger, the circumstances as
the accused perceived them at the time of the incident, not as others
perceived them, should be the bases for determining the merits of
the plea.
In judging pleas of self-defense and defense of stranger, the
courts should not demand that the accused conduct himself with
the poise of a person not under imminent threat of fatal harm. He
had no time to reflect and to reason out his responses. He had to be
quick, and his responses should be commensurate to the imminent
harm. This is the only way to judge him, for the law of nature - the
foundation of the privilege to use all reasonable means to repel an
aggression that endangers one's own life and the lives of others - did
not require him to use unerring judgment when he had the reasonable
grounds to believe himself in apparent danger of losing his life or
suffering great bodily injury. The test is whether his subjective belief
as to the imminence and seriousness of the danger was reasonable
or not, and the reasonableness of his belief must be viewed from his
standpoint at the time he acted. The right of a person to take life in
self-defense arises from his belief in the necessity for doing so; and
his belief and the reasonableness thereof are to be judged in the light
of the circumstances as they then appeared to him, not in the light of
circumstances as they would appear to others or based on the belief
183

r

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Crimin al Law

that others may or might entertain as to the nature and imminence
of the danger and the necessity to kill. (People v. Olarbe, G.R. No.
227421, July 23, 2018)

"A, in the peaceable pursuit of his affairs, sees B rushing rapidly
toward him, with an outstretched arm and a pistol in his hand,
and using violent menaces against his life as he advances. Having
approached near enough in the same attitude, A, who has a club in
his hand, strikes B over the head before or at the instant the pistol is
discharged; and of the wound B dies. It turns out the pistol was loaded
with powder only, and that the real design of B is only to terrify A.
Will any reasonable man say that A is more criminal than he would
have been if there had been a bullet in the pistol? Those who hold
such doctrine must require that a man so attacked must, before he
strikes the assailant, stop and ascertain how the pistol is loaded a
doctrine which would entirely take away the essential right of selfdefense." (Lloyd's Report, p. 160, cited in U.S. v. Ah Chong, 15 Phil.
502-503)
There is self-defense even if the aggressor used a toy pistol,
provided the accused believed it was a real gun.
That Crispin Oscimina's gun turned out to be a toy pistol is
inconsequential, considering its strikingly similar resemblance to a
real one and defendant-appellant's belief that a real gun was being
aimed at him. (People v. Boral, 11 CA. Rep. 914)
Forcibly pushing picketers to let company trucks enter the compound
is not unlawful aggression against the rights of the picketers.
The act of the security officer of a strike-bound company in
forcibly pushing the picketers after he had ordered them to give
way and let the company trucks to enter the compound, but the
picketers refused, does not constitute unlawful aggression against
the legitimate rights of the picketers as would justify its repulsion
with equal and reasonable force such as inflicting physical injuries
upon the officer, for what was under attack by said security officer
was not the right of picketing, but the picketers' act of remaining in
the passageway when the trucks wanted to get inside, which is not a
part of the picketing protected by law. (People v. Calip, et al., 3 C.A.
Rep. 808)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Threat to Inflict real injury as unlawful aggression.
A mere threatening or intimidating attitude, not preceded by an
outward and material aggression, is not unlawful aggression, because
it is required that the act be offensive and positively strong, showing
the wrongful intent of the aggressor to cause an injury.
Mere threatening attitude is not unlawful aggression.
U.S. v. Guy-sayco
(13 PHiL. 292)

Facts: As her husband had stayed away from home for more than two
weeks, remaining in the barrio of Dujat, distant about two and one-half
hours walk from the town under the pretext that he was engaged in field
work, on the 20th of March, 1907, at about 2:00 p.m., the accused decided to
go to said barrio and join him. To this end she hired a carromata, and aft.e r
getting some clothes and other things necessary for herself and husband,
started out with her infant child and servant girl; but before reaching the
barrio and the camarin where her husband ought to be, night came on, and
at about 7:00 p.m., she alighted and dismissed the vehicle after paying the
driver. They had yet to travel some distance. On seeing her husband's horse
tied in front of a house, she suspected that he was inside; thereupon she
went to the steps leading to the house, which was a low one, and then saw
her husband sitting down with his back toward the steps. She immediately
entered the house and encountered her husband, the deceased and the owners
of the house taking supper together. Overcome and blinded by jealousy, she
rushed at Lorenza Estrada, attacked her with a pen knife that she carried
and inflicted five wounds upon her in consequence of which Lorenza fell to
the ground covered with blood and died a few moments afte rwards.
The accused pleaded not guilty, and in exculpation she alleged that,
when Lorenza Estrada saw her and heard her remonstrate with her husband,
she being then upstairs, Lorenza at once asked what had brought her there
and manifested her intention to attack her with a knife that she carried in
her hand, whereupon the accused caught the deceased by the right hand in
which she held the weapon, and immediately grappled with her, and in the
struggle that ensued she managed to get hold of a pen knife that she saw on
the floor close by; she could not say whether she struck the deceased with it
as she could not account for what followed.

Held: Even though it was true that when the accused Emilia, made
her appearance, the deceased Lorenza arose with a knife in her hand and in
a threatening manner asked the accused what had brought her there, such
attitude, under the provisions of Article 8, No. 4, of the Penal Code (Art. 11,
par. 1, of the R.P.C.), does not constitute the unlawful aggression, which,
185

184

Art. 11

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

among others, is the first indispensable requisite upon which exemption
justification) by self-defense may be sustained.

In order to consider that unlawful aggression was actually
committed, it is necessary that an attack or material aggression, an
offensive act positively determining the intent of the aggressor to cause
an injury shall have been made; a mere threatening or intimidating
attitude is not sufficient to justify the commission of an act which is
punishable per se, and allow a claim of justification on the ground
that it was committed in self-defense.
Examples of threats to Inflict real injury:
1.

When one aims a revolver at another with the intention
of shooting him. (December Supreme Court of Spain,
September 29, 1905)

2.

The act of a person in retreating two steps and placing his
hand in his pocket with a motion indicating his purpose
to commit an assault with a weapon. (December Supreme
Court of Spain, June 26, 1891)

3.

The act of opening a knife, and making a motion as if
to make an attack. (December Supreme Court of Spain,
October 24, 1895)

Note that in the above cases, the threatening attitude of the
aggressor is offensive and positively strong, showing the wrongful
intent of the aggressor to cause an injury.
When Intent to attack Is manifest, picking up a weapon Is sufficient
unlawful aggression.
When the picking up of a weapon is preceded by circumstances
indicating the intention of the deceased to use it in attacking the
defendant, such act is considered unlawful aggression. (People v.
Javier, 46 O.G. No. 7, July, 1950)
Aggression must be real, not merely imaginary.
Thus, when the accused, disliking the intervention of the
deceased in a certain incident between the accused and a couple,
armed himself with a gun and went to the house of the deceased, and
upon seeing the latter holding a kris in his hand, shot him to death,
186

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

there was no unlawful aggression, notwithstanding the claim of the
accused that the deceased was a man of violent temper, quarrelsome
and irritable, and that the latter might attack him with the kris,
because he merely imagined a possible aggression. The aggression
must be real or at least, imminent. (People v. De la Cruz, 61 Phil. 422)
Aggression that is expected.
An aggression that is expected is still real, provided it is
imminent.
It is well-known that the person who pursues another with
the intent and purpose of assaulting him does not raise his hand to
discharge the blow until he believes that his victim is within his reach.
In this case, it is not necessary to wait until the blow is about
to be discharged, because in order that the assault may be prevented
it is not necessary that it has been actually perpetrated. (U.S. v.
Batungbacal, 37 Phil. 382)
A public officer exceeding his authority may become an unlawful
aggressor.
Thus, a provincial sheriff who, in carrying out a writ of execution,
exceeded his authority by taking against the will of the judgment
debtor personal property with sentimental value to the latter,
although other personal property sufficient to satisfy the claim of the
plaintiff was made available to said sheriff, was an unlawful aggressor
and the debtor had a right to repel the unlawful aggression. (People
v. Hernandez, 59 Phil. 343)
The lawful possessor of a fishing net was justified in using force
to repel seizure by a peace officer who was making it without order
from the court. (People v. Tilos, (CA] 36 O.G. 54)
Second requisite of defense of person or right: Reasonable
necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it.
This second requisite of defense presupposes the existence of
unlawful aggression, which is either imminent or actual. Hence, in
stating the second requisite, two phrases are used, namely: (1) "to
prevent" and (2) "to repel." When we are attacked, the danger to our
187

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
life or limb is either imminent or actual. In making a defense, we
prevent the aggression that places us in imminent danger or repel
the aggression that places us in actual danger. A threat to inflict real
injury places us in imminent danger. An actual physical assault places
us in actual danger.
In the case of U.S. v. Batungbacal, 37 Phil. 382, the Supreme
Court stated: "The law protects not only the person who repels an
aggression (meaning actual), but even the person who tries to prevent
an aggression that is expected (meaning imminent)."
The second requisite of defense means that: (1) there be a
necessity of the course of action taken by the person making a
defense, and (2) there be a necessity of the means used. Both must
be reasonable.
The reasonableness of either or both such necessity depends on
the existence of unlawful aggression and upon the nature and extent
of the aggression.
The necessity to take a course of action and to use a means of
defense.
The person attacked is not duty-bound to expose himself to be
wounded or killed, and while the danger to his person or life subsists,
he has a perfect and indisputable right to repel such danger by
wounding his adversary and, if necessary, to disable him completely
so that he may not continue the assault. (U.S. v. Molina, 19 Phil. 227)
Doctrine of rational equivalence.
Reasonable necessity of the means employed does not imply
material commensurability between the means of attack and defense.
What the law requires is rational equivalence, in the consideration
of which will enter as principal factors the emergency, the imminent
danger to which the person attacked is exposed, and the instinct,
more than the reason, that moves or impels the defense, and the
proportionateness thereof does not depend upon the harm done, but
rests upon the imminent danger of such injury. (People v. Encomienda,
No. L-26750, August 18, 1972, 46 SCRA 522, 534, quoting People v.
Lara, 48 Phil. 153; U.S v. Paras, 9 Phil. 367)

In emergencies of this kind, human nature does not act upon
processes of formal reason but in obedience to the instinct of selfpreservation; and when it is apparent that a person has reasonably
acted upon this instinct, it is the duty of the courts to sanction the act
and hold the act irresponsible in law for the consequences. (People v.
Lara, 48 Phil. 153)
In U.S. v. Paras, supra, the accused used a revolver after
having been assaulted and knocked down by the deceased. With his
nose bleeding and while still being kicked by the aggressor, he fired
several shots at his assailant. In finding the means employed to be
reasonable, the Court held that it would not be proper or reasonable
to claim that he should have fled or selected a less deadly weapon,
because in the emergency in which he was placed, and being attacked
by a person larger and stronger than himself, there was nothing
more natural than to have made use of the weapon he held in order
to defend himself.
1.

Necessity of the course of action taken.
The necessity of the course of action taken depends
on the existence of unlawful aggression. If there was no
unlawful aggression or, if there was, it has ceased to exist,
there would be no necessity for any course of action to take
as there is nothing to prevent or to repel.
In determining the existence of unlawful aggression
that induced a person to take a course of action, the place
and occasion of the assault and the other circumstances
must be considered.

a.

Place and occasion of the assault considered.
The command given to the accused by the
deceased in a dark and an uninhabited place, for the
purpose of playing a practical joke upon him, "Lie
down and give me your money or else you die," made
the accused act immediately by discharging his pistol
against the deceased. It was held that a person under
such circumstances cannot be expected to adopt a less
violent means of repelling what he believed was an
attack upon his life and property. (December Supreme
Court Spain, March 17, 1885)
189

188

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Similar illustration is given in the case of U.S.
v. Ah Chong, 15 Phil. 501-502.
b.

No necessity of the course of action taken.
(1)

When the deceased who had attacked Alconga ran away,
there was no necessity for Alconga to pursue and kill the
deceased. (People v. Alconga, 78 Phil. 366)

(2)

The theory of self-defense is based on the necessity on the
part of the person attacked to prevent or repel the unlawful
aggression, and when the danger or risk on his part has
disappeared, his stabbing the aggressor while defending
himself should have stopped. (People v. Calavagan, C.A.
G.R. No. 12952-R, August 10, 1955)

(3)

The claim of self-defense is not credible as the accused
narrated that he had succeeded in disarming the victim
of the piece of wood the latter was allegedly carrying so
that stabbing with such frequency, frenzy and force can
no longer be considered as reasonably necessary. (People
v. Masangkay, No. L-73461, October 27, 1987, 155 SCRA
113, 122)

(4)

(5)

While the accused might have been and doubtless was
justified in picking up the bamboo pole to keep his
adversary at bay, he was not justified in striking the head
of the deceased with it, as he was not in any real danger
of his life, for his adversary, although armed with a bolo,
had not attempted to draw it, and limited his assault to
an attempt to push the accused back to the shallow pool
into which he had been thrown at the outset of the quarrel.
(U.S. u. Pasca, 28 Phil. 222, 226)

(6)

While there was an actual physical invasion of appellant's
property when the deceased chiselled the walls of his house
and closed appellant's entrance and exit to the highway,
which he had the right to resist, the reasonableness of
the resistance is also a requirement of the justifying
circumstance of self-defense or defense of one's rights.
When the appellant fired his shotgun from his window,
killing his two victims, his resistance was disproportionate
to the attack. (People u. Naruaez, 121 SCRA 402-403)

The darkness of the night and the surprise which
characterized the assault considered.
When the accused, while walking along in a
dark street at night with pistol in hand on the lookout
for an individual who had been making an insulting
demonstration in front of his house, was suddenly
held from behind and an attempt was made to wrench
the pistol from him, he was justified in shooting him
to death, in view of the darkness and the surprise
which characterized the assault. The deceased might
be able to disarm the accused and to use the pistol
against the latter. (People v. Lara, supra)

When the deceased who endeavored to set fire to the house
of the accused in which the two small children of the latter
were sleeping was already out of the house and prostrate
on the ground, having been haloed by the accused, there
was no reasonable necessity of killing her. (U.S. v. Rivera,
41 Phil. 472, 474)
190

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Reasonable necessity of the means employed, when aggressor is
disarmed.
When the wife was disarmed by her husband aft.er wounding him
seriously but she struggled to regain possession of the bolo, there was
a reasonable necessity for him to use said bolo to disable her, because
he was already losing strength due to loss of blood and to throw away
the bolo would only give her a chance to pick it up and again use it
against him. (People v. Rabandaban, 85 Phil. 636, 637-638; People u.
Datinguinoo, 47 O.G. 765)
But when the defendant, who had been attacked by the deceased,
succeeded in snatching the bolo away from the latter, and the deceased
already manifested a refusal to fight, the defendant was not justified
in killing him. (People v. Alviar, 56 Phil. 98, 101)
When only minor physical injuries are inflicted after unlawful
aggression has ceased to exist, there is still self-defense if mortal
wounds were inflicted at the time the requisites of self-defense
were present.
The fact that minor physical injuries were inflicted by the
accused after the unlawful aggression had ceased and after he had
191

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

stabbed the deceased with two mortal wounds, said mortal wounds
having been inflicted at a time when the requisites of complete selfdefense were still present, cannot and should not affect the benefit of
said complete self-defense in the absence ofproof that those relatively
small wounds contributed to or hastened the death of the deceased.
(People v. Del Pilar, C.A., 44 O.G. 596)
This ruling should not be applied if the deceased, after receiving
minor wounds, dropped his weapon and signified his refusal to fight
any longer, but the accused hacked him to death. The reason is that
the wound inflicted, after the aggression had ceased, was the cause
of death.
The person defending is not expected to control his blow.
Defense of person or rights does not necessarily mean the killing
of the unlawful aggressor. But the person defending himself cannot
be expected to think clearly so as to control his blow. The killing of
the unlawful aggressor may still be justified as long as the mortal
wounds are inflicted at a time when the elements of complete selfdefense are still present.
One is not required, when hard pressed, to draw fine distinctions
as to the extent of the injury which a reckless and infuriated assailant
might probably inflict upon him. (Brownell v. People, 38 Mich. 732,
cited in the case of People v. Sumicad, 56 Phil. 647)
The fact that the accused struck one blow more than once was
absolutely necessary to save his own life, or that he failed to hold
his hand so as to avoid inflicting a fatal wound where a less severe
stroke might have served the purpose, would not negative self-defense,
because the accused, in the heat of an encounter at close quarters,
was not in a position to reflect coolly or to wait after each blow to
determine the effects thereof. (U.S. v. Macasaet, 35 Phil. 229)
And if it was necessary for the accused to use his revolver, he
could hardly, under the circumstances, be expected to take deliberate and careful aim so as to strike a point less vulnerable than
the body of his assailant. (U.S. • Mack, 8 Phil. 701; U.S. v. Darnen,
37 Phil. 57)

192

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
The measure of rational necessity is to be found In the situation
as it appeared to the person defending at the time when the blow
was struck.
Cano u. People
(G.R. No. 155258 (2003))
Facts: Petitioner and the victim were brothers and rivals in the Rush

ID Photo business and had booths along the sidewalk of Rizal Avenue. The
petitioner took the business permi t of the victim from the victim's booth to
have it photocopied, incurring the latter's ire. Whi le petitioner was in his

booth, facing the mirror and combing his hair, the victim held the petitioner
on the shoulder, turned him around, and asked the petitioner - "Anong gusto
mong mangyari?" Petitioner noticed the victim holding a balisong, and he ran

to the dark room of his stall. The victim pursued him and tried to force open
the locked dark room door by kicking it and stabbing it with the balisong.
He kept shouting, "Get out of there! Pakialamero ka! Get out of there and
I will kill you!" The door suddenly gave way and, as it opened, the victim
charged at petitioner, but he was able to evade the attack. Snatching a pair
of scissors nearby, petitioner retaliated but the scissors fell from his grasp
because it was parried by the victim. Petitioner then grabbed the hand of
the victim holding the balisong and they grappled to gain possession thereof.

He eventually wrested control of the knife and as he stood momentarily, the
victim picked up the scissors and again lunged at him. With nowhere to go,

petitioner was forced to defend himself from the onslaught of the victim who
was arm ed with the nine-inch long pair of pointed scissors. No bystanders

tried to pacify them as they engaged in their deadly struggle for almost
two minutes. Suddenly, the victim collapsed and fell bloodied to the floor.
Numerous wounds were sustain ed by the victim. Of the 35 wounds supposedly
inflicted, 33 were scratches and contusions while six were penetrating or stab
wounds.
Held: The particular circumstances which confronted the petitioner at
the time of the incident condoned the means he employed to protect his life.
It must be remembered that the measure of rational necessity is to be found
in the situation as it appeared to petitioner at the time when the blow was
struck. The law does not require that he should mete out his blows in such
manner that upon a calm and deliberate review of the incident, it will not
appear that he exceeded the precise limits of what was absolutely necessary
to put his antagonist hors de combat, or that he struck one blow more than
was absolutely necessary to save his own life; or that he failed to hold his hand

so as to avoid inflicting a fatal wound where a less severe stroke might have
served the purpose. Under such conditions, an accused cannot be expected

to reflect coolly nor wait after each blow to determine the effects thereof.

193

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art.11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

In repelling or preventing an unlawful aggression, the one defending
must aim at his assailant, and not indiscriminately fire his deadly

was no reasonable necessity to kill him with a knife
because there was no danger to her chastity or honor.
(People u. Jaurigue, 76 Phil. 174)

weapon.

Even granting that while in a private discussion or quarrel with
his wife, appellant Galacgac was suddenly beaten twice on his head
with an iron bar by Pablo Soriano thus causing blood to ooze over
his eyes, appellant Galacgac certainly had no right to fire at random
his unlicensed revolver. He knew that there were many innocent
persons in Soriano's house, namely, his (Galacgac's) wife, his sister
and brother-in-law. Besides, there were many inhabited houses in
the vicinity of house No. 1238, Anacleto Street. Of course, appellant
Galacgac had a perfect and lawful right to defend himself against the
unjustified assault upon his person made by Pablo Soriano. However,
because he did not aim at his assailant but instead indiscriminately
fired his deadly weapon at the risk of the lives and limbs of the
innocent persons he knew were in the place of occurrence, his act of
defense was not exercised with due care.

a.

However, there being no intent to k..ill, appellant Galacgac was
held liable for physical injuries. (People v. Galacgac, C.A., 54 O.G.
1027)

Where the accused pulled out the knife inserted at the
left side of her husband's belt, while he was chok..ing
her neck as she lay on her back on the ground, and
plunged the knife at her husband's body, hitting
the left back portion just below the waist, there was
reasonable necessity of the use of the knife. (People u.
Boholst-Caballero, No. L-23249, November 25, 1974,
61 SCRA 180, 189)

b.

As a rule, a man is not justified in taking the life of
one who assaults him with his fist only, without the
use of a dangerous weapon. The person assaulted
must, in such case, either resist with the arms that
nature gave him or with other means of defense
at his disposal, short of taking life. But that rule
contemplates the situation where the contestants are
in the open and the person assaulted can exercise the
option of running away. It can have no binding force in
the case where the person assaulted has retreated to
the wall and uses in a defensive way the only weapon
at his disposal. One is not required, when hard
pressed, to draw fine distinctions as to the extent of
the injury which a reckless and infuriated assailant
might probably inflict upon him. (Browell v. People, 38
Mich., 732) And it was not incumbent on the accused
in this case, when assailed by a bully of known violent
disposition, who was larger and stronger than himself.
On the contrary, under the circumstances stated, he
had the right to resist the aggression with the bolo,
and if he unfortunately inflicted a fatal blow, it must
be considered to have been given in justifiable selfdefense. (People v. Sumicad, 56 Phil. 643)

2.

Necessity of the means used.
The means employed by the person making a defense
must be rationally necessary to prevent or repel an
unlawful aggression.
Thus in the following cases, there was no rational
necessity to employ the means used.
a.

A sleeping woman, who was awakened by her brotherin-law grasping her arm, was not justified in using
a knife to kill him as the latter did not perform any
other act which could be construed as an attempt
against her honor. (U.S. v. Apeg0, 23 Phil. 391)

b.

When a person was attacked with fist blows only,
there was no reasonable necessity to inflict upon the
assailant a mortal wound with a dagger. (People v.
Montalbo, 56 Phil. 443)

c.

When a man placed his hand on the upper thigh of
a woman seated on a bench in a chapel where there
were many people and which was well-lighted, there
194

There was in this case a reasonable necessity to
stop the deceased from further doing the same thing
or more. But there was no necessity to use a knife.
In the following cases, there was reasonable necessity
to employ the means used:

195

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law
The test of reasonableness of the means used.

defending himselfwas to use his service pistol against
one who wielded a deadly balisong knife.

Whether the means employed is reasonable, will depend upon the
nature and quality of the weapon used by the aggressor, his physical
condition, character, size and other circumstances, and those of the
person defending himself, and also the place and occasion of the
assault.

In Lacson v. Court of Appeals, No. L-46485
November 21, 1979, the use of a gun against a knife
was held to be a reasonable means to ward off the
attack. Considering that Pitalio was drunk at the
time he was shot, was known as a person of bad
character in the locality, had been convicted of serious
physical injuries committed against his own uncle,
had admitted stoning the house of accused on another
occasion, and had intruded into the residence of the
accused, the use by the accused of a gun as the only
available weapon to repel the aggression cannot be
considered as an unreasonable means of defending
himself and his wife from Pitalio. There was an
imminent danger of the lives of the accused and of his
wife from the unlawful attack of an enraged, drunken,
and armed Pitalio. The gun in the bag of his wife, who
was beside him, afforded accused the only reasonable
means to ward off the attack.

Perfect equality between the weapon used by the one defending
himself and that of the aggressor is not required, because the person
assaulted does not have sufficient tranquility of mind to think, to
calculate and to choose which weapon to use. (People v. Padua, C.A.,
40O.G. 998)
As was already mentioned, the reasonableness of the means
employed will depend upon 1.

The nature and quality of the weapons:
a.

b.

Knife or dagger against a club. Although as a general
rule a dagger or a knife is more dangerous than a club,
the use of a knife or dagger, when attacked with a
club, must be deemed reasonable ifit cannot be shown
that the person assaulted (1) had other available
means or (2) if there was other means, he could coolly
choose the less deadly weapon to repel the assault.
(People v. Padua, CA., 40 O.G. 998)
Firearm against a dagger or knife. To use a firearm
against a dagger or a knife, in the regular order of
things, does not imply any difference between such
weapons. (December Supreme Court of Spain, October
27, 1887)
This ruling is subject to the limitations
mentioned in the case of People v. Padua, supra,
namely: (1) there was no other available means; or (2)
if there was other means, the one making a defense
could not coolly choose the less deadly weapon to repel
the aggression.
In People v. Maliwanag, 58 SCRA 323, 331-332,
it was held that there was reasonable necessity of
the means employed to repel the aggression from
the deceased when the appellant's only recourse in
196

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

c.

Pocket knife against a cane. Laurel, in defending
himself with a pocket knife against the assault made
upon him with a cane, which may also be a deadly
weapon, employed reasonable means to prevent or
repel the same. (U.S. v. Laurel, 22 Phil. 252)

d.

Gun against a bolo. The use of a revolver against an
aggressor armed with a bolo was held reasonable
it appearing that the deceased was advancing upon
the accused and within a few feet of striking distance
when the latter shot him. (U.S. v. Mack, 8 Phil.
701)

e.

Bolo or knife against a stick. The use of a bolo to repel
the aggression by means of a stick, the use of a knife
against a rod, or a knife against a stick was held to
be reasonable under the circumstances. (People v.
Romero, CA., 34 O.G. 2046)
But it was held that the use of a bayonet against
a cane is not reasonable. The accused could have
197

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 11

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
warded off the blows made by the deceased with his
cane. If the accused had only drawn his bayonet in
defense that would have been enough to discourage
and prevent the deceased from further continuing
with his attack or sufficient to ward off the blows
given by the deceased when he attacked the accused.
In stabbing the deceased with his bayonet, the
accused went beyond what was necessary to defend
himself against the unlawful aggression made by
the deceased. (People v. Oras, 6 SCRA 688, 692693)
f.

Fist blows. When a person is attacked with fist blows,
he must repel the same with the weapon that nature
gave him, meaning with fists also. (People v. Montalbo,
56 Phil. 443)
This ruling applies only when the aggressor and
the one defending himself are of the same size and
strength.

2.

Physical condition, character and size.
a.

Thus when the one defending himself who was of
middle age, was cornered, had his back to the iron
railing, and three or four men bigger, and stronger
than he were striking him with fists, such person was
justified in using a knife. (People v. Ignacio, 58 Phil.
858)

b.

The aggressor was a bully, a man larger and stronger,
of known violent character, with previous criminal
records for assault. He attacked with fist blows a
smaller man who was then armed with a bolo. In spite
of having received, as a warning, a cut with a bolo on
the left shoulder, the aggressor continued to attempt
to possess himselfof the bolo. Killing him with a bolo
was justified in this case. (People v. Sumicad, 56 Phil.
643,647)

C.

The character of the aggressor is emphasized in this
case:
Considering that the aggressor provoked the
incident and started the aggression; considering that
198

he is of violent temperament, troublesome, strong
and aggressive with three criminal records, twice of
slander by deed and once ofthreat to kill; considering
that he wanted to impose his will on the family of
the accused for having rejected his nephew as a
suitor of the sister of the accused, boxing them one
after another and in their own home
the Court of
Appeals held that the accused was justified in striking
him with a bolo on the forehead and on the right eye.
(People v. Padua, CA., 40 O.G. 998)
3.

Other circumstances considered.
In view of the imminence of the danger, a shotgun is
a reasonable means to prevent an aggression with a bolo.
M, being abruptly awakened by shouts that P was
pursuing H and M's two children, and seeing, upon
awakening, that in fact P was infuriated and pursuing H
with a bolo in his hand and his arm raised in an attitude
as ifto strike, took up a shotgun lying within his reach and
fired at P, killing him at once.
Held: Under the circumstances, in view of the
imminence of the danger, the only remedy which could
be considered reasonably necessary to repel or prevent
that aggression, was to render the aggressor harmless.
As M had on hand a loaded shotgun, this weapon was the
most appropriate one that could be used for the purpose,
even at the risk of killing the aggressor, since the latter's
aggression also gravely threatened the lives of the parties
assaulted. (U.S. v. Batungbacal, 37 Phil. 382, 387-388)

Reasonable necessity of means employed to prevent or repel
unlawful aggression to be liberally construed in favor of law-abiding
citizens.
These are dangerous times. There are many lawless elements
who kill for the thrill of killing. There is no adequate protection for the
law-abiding citizens. When a lawless person attacks on the streets or
particularly in the victim's home, he should assume the risk oflosing
his life from the act of self-defense by firearm of his victim; otherwise,
the law-abiding citizens will be at the mercy of the lawless elements.
199

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Hence, the requisite of reasonable necessity of the means employed
to prevent or repel the unlawful aggression should in these times of
danger be interpreted liberally in favor of the law-abiding citizens.
(People v. So, 5 CAR [2s] 671, 674)
Rule regarding the reasonableness of the "necessity of the means
employed" when the one defending himself is a police officer.

A police officer, in the performance of his duty, must stand his
ground and cannot, like a private individual, take refuge in flight; his
duty requires him to overcome his opponent. The force which he may
exert therefore differs somewhat from that which may ordinarily be
offered in self-defense. (U.S. v. Mojica, 42 Phil. 784, 787)
Thus, the fact that a policeman, who was armed with a revolver
and a club, might have used his club instead, does not alter the
principle since a policeman's club is not a very effective weapon as
against a drawn knife and a police officer is not required to afford a
person attacking him, the opportunity for a fair and equal struggle.
(U.S. v. Mojica, ibid.)
A policeman who inflicted fatal gunshot wounds on a person
who attacked him with a bolo used necessary and reasonable means
in repelling the attack. (Masipequina v. Court of Appeals, L-51206,
August 25, 1989)

Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 11

Affect Criminal Liability
Reason for the third requisite of self-defense.

When the person defending himself from the attack by another
gave sufficient provocation to the latter, the former is also to be blamed
for having given cause for the aggression.
Hence, to be entitled to the benefit of the justifying circumstance
of self-defense, the one defending himself must not have given cause
for the aggression by his unjust conduct or by inciting or provoking
the assailant.
Cases In which third requisite of self-defense considered present.

The third requisite of self-defense is present
1.

When no provocation at all was given to the aggressor by
the person defending himself; or

2.

When, even if a provocation was given, it was not sufficient;
or

3.

When, even if the provocation was sufficient, it was not
given by the person defending himself; or

4.

When, even if a provocation was given by the person
defending himself, it was not proximate and immediate
to the act of aggression. (Decisions of the Supreme Court
of Spain of March 5, 1902 and of April 20, 1906)

In U.S. v. Mendoza, 2 Phil. 109, 110, it was held that it is not
reasonably necessary for a policeman to kill his assailant to repel an
attack with a calicut. A calicut is a comparatively harmless weapon.
It is an instrument shaped like a small chisel (escoplo) with no point
or cutting edge on either side, and is used for the purpose of taking
out the contents of betel nuts.

Thus, when A shot B to death, because B was running amuck
and with a dagger was rushing towards A manifestly intending to
stab A, there was no provocation whatsoever on the part of A. The
third requisite of self-defense is present.

First two requisites common to three kinds of legitimate defense.

There was provocation, but not sufficient.

The first two requisites thus far explained are common to self
defense, defense of a relative, and defense of a stranger. These three
kinds of legitimate defense differ only in the third requisite.

"Lack ofsufficient provocation on the part ofthe person defending
himself."

A, having discovered that B had built a part of his fence on A's
land, asked B why he had done so. This question angered B who
immediately attacked A. IfA would kill B to defend himself, the third
requisite ofself-defense would still be present, because even ifit is true
that the question of A angered B, thereby making B attack A, such
provocation is not sufficient. (U.S. v. Pascua, 28 Phil. 222) A had a
right to demand explanation why B had built the fence on A's property.
The exercise of a right cannot give rise to sufficient provocation.

200

201

Third requisite of self-defense.

No provocation at all.

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

How to determine the sufficiency of provocation.
The provocation must be sufficient, which means that it should
be proportionate to the act of aggression and adequate to stir the
aggressor to its commission. (People v. Alconga, 78 Phil. 366)
Thus, to engage in a verbal argument cannot be considered
sufficient provocation. (Decision of the Supreme Court of Spain of
October 5, 1877)
Is it necessary for the provocation to be sufficient that the one
who gave it must have been guilty of using violence and thus becoming
an unlawful aggressor himself?
No, it is not necessary.
The provocation is sufficient 1.

2.

3.

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

to the deceased to attack him. There is no complete selfdefense, because the third requisite is not present. (People
v. Getda, CA-G.R. No. 2181-R, January 6, 1951)
Sufficient provocation not given by the person defending himself.
Note the phrase "on the part of the person defending himself"
in the third requisite of self-defense. Thus, in the case of People v.
Balansag, 60 Phil. 266, it was held that the third requisite of selfdefense was present, because the provocation proven at the trial was
not given by the accused but by the brother-in-law of the deceased.
Requisite of "lack of sufficient provocation" refers exclusively to
"the person defending himself."

When one challenges the deceased to come out of the house
and engage in a fist fight with him and prove who is the
better man. (U.S. v. McCray, 2 Phil. 545)

Thus, if the accused appears to be the aggressor, it cannot be said
that he was defending himselffrom the effect of another's aggression.
(People v. Espino, 43 0.G. 4705)

The version of the defense deserves no credit. Accused
father and son challenged the deceased to fight and they
killed him when he came out. One of the first requisites of
self-defense is unlawful aggression. Accused father called
out the deceased from his house and provoked him to
fight. Coming out, said accused threw a stone at him. The
deceased merely fought back but together both accused
assaulted him until he fell wounded. (People v. Valencia,
No. L-58426, October 31, 1984, 133 CRA 82, 86-87)

In the case ofPeople v. Alconga, 78 Phil. 366, the attack made by
the deceased when Alconga was the one defending himself during the
first stage of the fight, was not considered as a provocation to'Alcona
in the second stage of the fight, because then he was the aggressor and
the third requisite of self-defense is limited to the person defending
himself.
Provocation by the person defending himself not proximate and
Immediate to the aggression.

When one hurls insults or imputes to another the utterance
of vulgar language, as when the accused and his brothers
imputed to the deceased, the utterance of vulgar language
against them, which imputation provoked the deceased to
attack them. (People v. Sotelo, 55 Phil. 403)

Thus, if A slapped the face of B one or two days before and B,
upon meeting A, attacked the latter but was seriously injured when A
defended himself, the provocation given by A should be disregarded,
because it was not proximate and immediate to the aggression made
by B. In this case, the third requisite of self-defense is still present.

However, when the response of the victim to the query
of the accused regarding the theft of fish and wood might
have hurt the pride of the accused, such petty question
of pride docs not justify the wounding and killing of the
victim. (People v. Sanchez, G.R. No. 118423, June 16, 1999)

In the case of U.S. v. Laurel, supra, the kissing of the girlfriend
of the aggressor was a sufficient provocation to the latter, but since
the kissing of the girl took place on December 26 and the aggression
was made on December 28, the provocation was disregarded by the
Supreme Court.

When the accused tried to forcibly kiss the sister of the
deceased. The accused thereby gave sufficient provocation
202

203

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 11

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Criminal Law

Art. 11

Affect Criminal Liability
Illustration of the three requisites of self-defense:
People v. Boholst-Caballero
(61 SCRA 180, 189, 195-196[1974))

Facts: Cunigunda Boholst and Francisco Caballero were married on
June 7, 1956 but separated before the end of the year 1957. In the evening
of January 2, 1958, Francisco met his wife unexpectedly at past midnight
on the road, reacted angrily, and suspecting that she was out for some bad

purpose, held her by the collar of her dress and said: "Where have you been
prostituting? You are a son of a bitch." This was followed by a slapping on
the face until Cunigunda's nose bled, pulling of her hair, pushing her down
to the ground, and strangling her. Because she had "no other recourse" as
she was being choked, she pulled out the knife of her husband and thrust it

at him, hitting the left side of his body near the "belt line" just above his left
thigh, killing him. Cunigunda was charged with parricide.
Held: All the elements of self-defense are present in this case.
(1)
Unlawful aggression-The deceased husband of the accused was
kneeling over her as she lay on her back on the ground and his hand was
choking her neck.
(2)
Reasonable necessity of means employed to prevent or repel it A woman being strangled and choked by a furious aggressor and rendered

almost unconscious by the strong pressure on her throat had no other recourse

but to get hold ofany weapon within her reach to save herselffrom impending
death. Reasonable necessity of the means employed in self-defense does not
depend upon the harm done but rests upon the imminent danger of such
injury.

(3)

Lack of sufficient provocation -- She did not give sufficient

provocation to warrant the aggression or attack on her person by her husband.

While it was understandable for the latter to be angry at his wife for finding
her on the road in the middle of the night, he was not justified in inflicting
bodily punishment with an intent to kill by choking his wife's throat. All that

Battered Woman Syndrome as a defense.

Victim-survivors who are found by the courts to be suffering from
battered women syndrome do not incur criminal and civil liability
notwithstanding the absence of any of the elements for justifying
circumstances of self-defense. (Sec. 26, R.A. No. 9262 [Anti-Violence
Against Women and their Children Act of 2004))
"Battered Woman Syndrome" refers to a scientifically defined
pattern of psychological and behavioral symptoms found in women
living in battering relationships as a result of cumulative abuse.
The Battered Woman Syndrome, explained.

A battered woman has been defined as a woman "who is
repeatedly subjected to any forceful physical or psychological behavior
by a man in order to coerce her to do something he wants her to do
without concern for her rights. Battered women include wives or
women in any form ofintimate relationship with men. Furthermore, in
order to be classified as a battered woman, the couple must go through
the battering cycle at least twice. Any woman may find herself in an
abusive relationship with a man once. If it occurs a second time, and
she remains in the situation, she is defined as a battered woman.
Battered women exhibit common personality traits, such as low
self-esteem, traditional beliefs about the home, the family and the
female sex role; emotional dependence upon the dominant male; the
tendency to accept responsibility for the batterer's actions; and false
hopes that the relationship will improve.
The battered woman syndrome is characterized by the so-called
"cycle of violence," which has three phases:
( 1)

the tension-building phase: minor battering occurs - it
could be verbal or slight physical abuse or another form
of hostile behavior. The woman usually tries to pacify the
batterer through a show of kind, nurturing behavior; or by
simply staying out of his way.

(2)

the acute battering incident: characterized by brutality,
destructiveness and, sometimes, death. The battered
woman deems this incident as unpredictable, yet also
inevitable. During this phase, she has no control; only the
batterer may put an end to the violence.

she did was to provoke an imaginary commission of a wrong in the mind of her
husband, which is not a sufficient provocation under the law of self-defense.
Flight, incompatible with self-defense.

The appellant went into hiding after the hacking incident. Suffice
it to state that flight after the commission of the crime is highly
evidentiary of guilt, and incompatible with self-defense. (People v.
Maranan, G.R. No. L-47228-32, citing People v. Maruhom, 132 SCRA
116)
204

205

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 11

(3)

the tranquil, loving (non-violent) phase: During this
tranquil period, the couple experience profound relief.
On the one hand, the batterer may show a tender and
nurturing behavior towards his partner. He knows that
he has been viciously cruel and tries to make up for it,
begging for her forgiveness and promising never to beat
her again. On the other hand, the battered woman also
tries to convince herself that the battery will never happen
again; that her partner will change for the better; and that
this "good, gentle and caring man" is the real person whom
she loves. (People v. Genosa, G.R. No. 135981, January 15,
2004)

Effect ofbattery on appellant
Just as the battered woman believes that she is somehow
responsible for the violent behavior of her partner, she also believes
that he is capable of killing her, and that there is no escape. Battered
women feel unsafe, suffer from pervasive anxiety, and usually fail to
leave the relationship. Unless a shelter is available, she stays with
her husband, not only because she typically lacks a means of selfsupport, but also because she fears that if she leaves, she would be
found and hurt even more. (People v. Genosa, supra)
Par. 2- Defense of relatives.
Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights of his
spouse, ascendants, descendants, or legitimate, natural or
adopted brothers or sisters, or of his relatives by affinity in the
same degrees, and those by consanguinity within the fourth civil
degree, provided that the first and second requisites prescribed
in the next preceding circumstance are present, and the further
requisite, in case the provocation was given by the person
attacked, that the one making defense had no part therein.

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
4.

Legitimate, natural or adopted brothers and sisters, or
relatives by affinity in the same degrees.

5.

Relatives by consanguinity within the fourth civil degree.

Relatives by affinity.

Relatives by affinity, because of marriage, are parents-in-law,
son or daughter-in-law, and brother or sister-in-law.
The relationship by affinity created between the surviving spouse
and the blood relatives of the deceased spouse survives the death of
either party to the marriage which created the affinity. (Intestate
Estate of Manolita Gonzales Vda. de Carungcong v. People, G.R. No.
181409, February 11, 2010)
Relatives by consanguinity.

Consanguinity refers to blood relatives. Brothers and sisters are
within the second civil degree; uncle and niece or aunt and nephew are
within the third civil degree; and first cousins are within the fourth
civil degree.
Thus, if A acted in defense of the husband of A's sister-in-law
there is no defense of relative, because the relation between A and the
husband ofA's sister-in-law is not one of those mentioned in paragraph
2 of Article 11. (People v. Cabellon, 51 Phil. 846) The husband of A's
sister-in-law is a stranger to A for purpose of the law on defense of
relatives.
Basis ofjustification.
The justification of defense of relatives by reason of which
the defender is not criminally liable, is founded not only upon a
humanitarian sentiment, but also upon the impulse of blood which
impels men to rush, on the occasion of great perils, to the rescue of
those close to them by ties of blood. (Albert)

Relatives that can be defended.

1.

Spouse.

2.

Ascendants.

3.

Requisites of defense of relatives:

Descendants.
206

1.

Unlawful aggression;

2.

Reasonable necessity of the means employed to prevent or
repel it; and
207

Art.11

3.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

In case the provocation was given by the person attacked,
the one making a defense had no part therein. (See People
v. Eduarte, G.R. No. 72976, July 9, 1990, 187 SCRA 291,
295; People v. Agapinay, G.R. No. 77776, June 27, 1990,
186 SCRA 812, 823)

First two requisites are the same as those of self-defense.
The meaning of "unlawful aggression" and that of "reasonable
necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel it" are already
explained in the discussion of self-defense.
Defense of relatives also requires that there be unlawful aggression.

Of the three requisites of defense of relatives, unlawful
aggression is the most essential and primary, without which any
defense is not possible or justified. (People v. Agapinay, supra)
Of the three requisites of defense of relatives, unlawful
aggression is a condition sine qua non, for without it any defense
is not possible or justified. In order to consider that an unlawful
aggression was actually committed, it is necessary that an attack
or material aggression, an offensive act positively determining the
intent of the aggressor to cause an injury shall have been made; a
mere threatening or intimidating attitude is not sufficient to justify
the commission of an act which is punishable per se, and allow a claim
of exemption from liability on the ground that it was committed in
self-defense or defense of a relative. (Balunueco v. Court ofAppeals,
G.R. No. 126968, April 9, 2003)
When two persons are getting ready to strike each other, there
can be no unlawful aggression, and hence, a relative of either who
butts in and administers a deadly blow on the other to prevent him
from doing harm is not acting in defense of a relative, but is guilty of
homicide. (People v. Moro Munabe, C.A., 46 O.G. 4392)
In this case, when he saw the deceased and his brother facing
each other in a fight, each holding a taki taki, an instrument for
uprooting rubber seedlings, the accused hit the deceased on the head
with his taki taki, causing the latter's death.
If the accused appears to be the aggressor, he cannot invoke the
defense of having acted in defense of a relative. (People v. Panuril,
C.A., 40 O.G. 1477)
208

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability
Must unlawful aggression exist as a matter of fact, or can it be made
to depend upon the honest belief of the one making a defense?

Yes. It can be made to depend upon the honest belief of the one
making a defense. (U.S. v. Esmedia, 17 Phil. 260, 264)
Thus, when A attacked and wounded B with a dagger, causing
the latter to fall down, but B immediately stood up and defended
himself by striking A with a bolo and as a result, A was seriously
wounded and fell in the mud with B standing in front ofA in a position
as if to strike again in case A would stand up, there is no doubt that
A was the unlawful aggressor. But when the sons of A came, what
they saw was that their father was lying in the mud wounded. They
believed in good faith that their father was the victim of an unlawful
aggression. If they killed B under such circumstances, they are
justified.
In that case, there was a mistake of fact on the part of the sons
of A.
Even in self-defense, the Supreme Court of Spain held that when
a person while walking at night in an uninhabited place was ordered
by someone to halt and give his money, such person was justified
in shooting that someone, even if he turned out to be a friend, only
playing a practical joke.
Olbinar v. Court of Appeals
(G.R. No. 76235, January 21, 1991)
Facts: Romeo Cahilog and Fernando Jimenez attacked accused's
husband, Emiliano Olbinar. Accused did not see the commencement of the
assault on her husband. She had no way of knowing if her husband had
given sufficient provocation therefor. All that she saw, on responding to her
husband's cry for help, was that he was on the ground, there was blood on
his person, and two men were boxing and kicking him. Afte r she had tried
vainly to get the men to stop beating her husband, she got a bolo from her
home and rushed back to defend her fallen spouse who was already seriously
wounded. Unarmed, and her husband to all appearances already hors de
combat, she evidently could offer no reasonable defense, or otherwise cause
cessation of the assault on her husband. Accused was charged with serious
physical injuries.
Held: Under the circumstances, she obviously felt the compelling
urgency for swift action to stop the assault on her prostrate husband, and
there was nothing else she could do towards this end except to try to hit out
at his attackers. She must have been near panic. She had no time to think .
209

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art . 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
She had to act, end act quickly. The circumstances certainly afforded her no
time to investigate the nature of her husband's injuries, determine if he was
in danger of death, analyze the situation and ascertain what would be the
most reasonable mode by which with her bolo she could stop her husband's
mauling - whether she should use the flat, not the sharp edge of the weapon,
should first announce that she had a bolo and would use it if they did not
cease in their nefarious acts, etc.

The Court is therefore satisfied that Procerfina had acted in justifiable
defense of her husband. In the situation in which she had found herself, she
was justified in believing that her husband was the victim of an unlawful
aggression by two men, who had gotten the better of him and hud already

succeeded in bloodying his face and dropping him to the ground; she had
no way of knowing if her husband had given provocation for the attack; she
herself had not given any such provocation; and the means employed by her
were not in the premises unreasonable considering that without any weapon,
she was no match for either of the assailants, much less both of them.

Gauge of reasonable necessity of the means employed to repel the
aggression.
The gauge of reasonable necessity of the means employed to
repel the aggression as against one's self or in defense of a relative is
to be found in the situation as it appears to the person repelling the
aggression. It has been held time and again that the reasonableness of
the means adopted is not one of mathematical calculation or "material
commensurability between the means of attack and defense" but the
imminent danger against the subject of the attack as perceived by the
defender and the instinct more than reason that moves the defender
to repel the attack. (Eslabon v. People, No. L-66202, February 24,
1984, 127 SCRA 785, 790-791)
Third requisite of defense of relative.

The clause, "in case the provocation was given by the person
attacked," used in stating the third requisite of defense of relatives,
does not mean that the relative defended should give provocation to
the aggressor. The clause merely states an event which may or may
not take place.
The phrase "in case" means "in the event that."
There is still a legitimate defense ofrelative even if the relative
being defended has given provocation, provided that the one defending
such relative has no part in the provocation.
210

Reason for the rule:
That although the provocation prejudices the person who gave it,
its effects do not reach the defender who took no part therein, because
the latter was prompted by some noble or generous sentiment in
protecting and saving a relative.
When the third requisite is lacking.
The accused was previously shot by the brother of the victim. It
cannot be said, therefore, that in attacking the victim, the accused
was impelled by pure compassion or beneficence or the lawful desire
to avenge the immediate wrong inflicted on his cousin. Rather, he was
motivated by revenge, resentment or evil motive because of a running
feud between them. (People v. Toring, G.R. No. 56358, October 26,
1990, 191 SCRA 38, 47)
The fact that the relative defended gave provocation is Immaterial.

Thus, even ifA had slapped the face of B who, as a consequence
of the act of A, immediately commenced to retaliate by drawing a
knife and trying to stab A, and C, father of A, killed B in defense of
his son, C is completely justified, notwithstanding the fact that the
provocation was given by his son A.
But if C had induced his son A to injure B, thereby taking part
in the provocation made by A, C would not be completely justified
in killing B while the latter was about to stab A, because the third
requisite of defense of relative is lacking.
Suppose, the person defending his relative was also induced by
revenge or hatred, would there be a legitimate defense of relative?
As long as the three requisites of defense of relatives are present, it
will still be a legitimate defense.
Examples of defense of relatives.
1.

The accused, at a distance of about 20 "brazas" from his house,
heard his wife shouting for help. He rushed to the house and
once inside saw the deceased on top of his wife. He drew his
bolo and hacked the deceased at the base of his neck when the
latter was forcibly abusing his wife. (People v. Ammalun, C.A.,
51 0.G. 6250)
211

Art. 11

2.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Domingo Rivera challenged the deceased to prove who of them
was the better man. When the deceased picked up a bolo and
went after him, Domingo Rivera took to flight. The deceased
pursued him and upon overtaking him inflicted two wounds.
Antonio Rivera, father of Domingo, rushed to his son's assistance
and struck with a cane the bolo from the hands of the deceased.
Domingo Rivera inflicted fatal wounds upon the deceased. While
the son was originally at fault for giving provocation to the
deceased, yet the father was justified in disarming the deceased,
having acted in lawful defense of his son. But Domingo Rivera
was declared guilty of the crime of homicide. (U.S. v. Rivera, 26
Phil. 138)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 11

Third requisite of defense of stranger.

This Code requires that the defense of a stranger be actuated
by a disinterested or generous motive, when it puts down "revenge,
resentment, or other evil motive" as illegitimate. (Albert)
Who are deemed strangers?

Any person not included in the enumeration of relatives
mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article, is considered stranger for
the purpose of paragraph 3. Hence, even a close friend or a distant
relative is a stranger within the meaning of paragraph 3.
The person defending "be not induced."

Par. 3- Defense of stranger.
Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights of a
stranger, provided that the first and second requisites mentioned
in the first circumstance of this article are present and that the
person defending be not induced by revenge, resentment, or other
evil motive.
Requisites:
1.

Unlawful aggression;

2.

Reasonable necessity of the means employed to prevent or
repel it; and

3.

The person defending be not induced by revenge, resentment,
or other evil motive. (See People v. Moral, No. L-31139,
October 12, 1984, 132 SCRA 474, 485)

Paragraph 3 of Article 11 uses the phrase "be not induced."
Hence, even if a person has a standing grudge against the assailant,
if he enters upon the defense of a stranger out of generous motive
to save the stranger from serious bodily harm or possible death, the
third requisite of defense of stranger still exists. The third requisite
would be lacking if such person was prompted by his grudge against
the assailant, because the alleged defense of the stranger would be
only a pretext.
If in defending his wife's brother-in-law, the accused acted also
from an impulse ofresentment against the deceased, the third requisite
of defense of stranger is not present. (People v. Cabellon and Gaviola,
51 Phil. 851)
Examples of defense of stranger:
1.

Note that the first two requisites are the same as those of selfdefense and defense of relatives.
Basis of defense of stranger.
What one may do in his defense, another may do for him. Persons
acting in defense of others are in the same condition and upon the
same plane as those who act in defense of themselves. The ordinary
man would not stand idly by and see his companion killed without
attempting to save his life. (U.S. v. Aviado, 38 Phil. 10, 13)

212

A was able to deprive B, a constabulary lieutenant, of his pistol
during the fray. B ordered C, a constabulary soldier under
his command, to search A for the pistol. When C was about to
approach A to search him, the latter stepped back and shot at C
who was able to avoid the shot. When A was about to fire again
at C, D, another constabulary soldier, fired at A with his rifle
which killed him.
Held: D was justified in killing A, having acted in defense
of stranger. (People v. Ancheta, et al., 66 Phil. 638)

2.

A heard screams and cries for help. When A responded, he saw

B attacking his (B's) wife with a dagger. A approached B and
213

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
struggled for the possession of the weapon, in the course ofwhich
A inflicted wounds on B.

"That the evil sought to be avoided actually exists."

Held: A acted in defense of a stranger. (People v. Valdez,
58 Phil. 31)

The evil must actually exist. If the evil sought to be avoided
is merely expected or anticipated or may happen in the future,
paragraph 4 of Article 11 is not applicable.

Furnishing a weapon to one in serious danger of being throttled is
defense of stranger.
A Japanese hit an old man, 78 years of age on the face, shoved
him to the ground and attempted to choke him. The accused furnished
the old man with a small gaff, used by game cocks, with which the
old man killed his assailant. The accused was justified in furnishing
the old man with the gaff, it being in defense of stranger. (U.S. v.
Subingsubing, 31 Phil. 376)

Example of injury to person under paragraph 4:

A person was driving his car on a narrow road with due diligence
and care when suddenly he saw a "six by six" truck in front of his car.
If he would swerve his car to the left, he would fall into a precipice,
or ifhe would swerve it to the right he would kill a passerby. He was
forced to choose between losing his life in the precipice or sacrificing
the life of the innocent bystander. He chose the latter, swerved his
car to the right, ran over and killed the passerby. (Guevara)

Par. 4 - Avoidance ofgreater evil or injury.

In view of this example and the principle involved, the killing
of the foetus to save the life of the mother may be held excusable.

Any person who, in order to avoid an evil or injury, does an
act which causes damage to another, provided that the following
requisites are present:

"That the injury feared be greater than that done to avoid it."

First. That the evil sought to be avoided actually exists;
Second. That the injury feared be greater than that done to
avoid it;
Third. That there be no other practical and less harmful
means ofpreventing it.
"Damage to another."
This term covers injury to persons and damage to property.
The Court of Appeals applied paragraph 4 of Article 11 in a
case of slander by deed, a crime against honor, where the accused (a
woman) who was about to be married to the offended party eloped
with another man, after the offended party had made preparations
for the wedding, the Court holding that there was a necessity on the
part of the accused of avoiding a loveless marriage with the offended
party, and that her refusal to marry him and her eloping with the
man whom she loved were justified and did not amount to the crime
of slander by deed. (People v. Norma Hernandez, C.A., 55 O.G. 8465)
214

Does the foregoing example violate the second condition required
by the Code, that is, that the injury feared be greater than that done
to avoid it?
No. The instinct of self-preservation will always make one feel
that his own safety is of greater importance than that of another.
The greater evil should not be brought about by the negligence or
imprudence of the actor.
Thus, if in the example above, the driver drove his car at full
speed, disregarding the condition of the place, and although he saw
the "six by six" truck at a distance 500 meters away, he did not slacken
his speed, he cannot invoke paragraph 4 of this Article, because the
state of necessity was brought about by his own reckless imprudence.
When the accused was not avoiding any evil, he cannot invoke the
justifying circumstance of avoidance of a greater evil or injury.
Pio with a bolo and Severo with an axe attacked Geminiano
who was wounded. Nearby, Juan embraced Marianito, Geminiano's
son, who had a gun slung on his shoulder, and grappled with him.
Geminiano died. Pio, Severo and Juan were prosecuted for murder.
215

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Criminal Law
Juan invoked the justifying circumstance of avoidance of a greater evil
or injury (Art. 11, par. 4, R.P.C.) in explaining his act of preventing
Marianito from shooting Pio and Severo.
Held: His reliance on that justifying circumstance is erroneous.
The act of Juan Padernal in preventing Marianito de Leon from
shooting Ricohermoso and Severo Padernal, who were the aggressors,
was designed to insure the killing of Geminiano de Leon without
any risk to his assailants. Juan Padernal was not avoiding any evil
when he sought to disable Marian.ito. (People v. Ricohermoso, et al.,
56SCRA 431)
Note:

Even if Mariani to was about to shoot Pio and Severo,
his act, being in defense of his father, is not an evil that
could justifiably be avoided by disabling Marian.ito.

Examples of damage to property under paragraph 4:
1.

2.

3.

Fire breaks out in a cluster of nipa houses, and in order to
prevent its spread to adjacent houses of strong materials, the
surrounding nipa houses are pulled down. (Albert)
Where a truck of the Standard Vacuum Oil Co. delivering
gasoline at a gas station caught fire and, in order to prevent
the burning of the station, the truck was driven to the middle
of the street and there abandoned, but it continued to move and
thereafter crashed against and burned a house on the other side
of the street, the owner ofthe house had a cause of action against
the owner of the gas station under paragraph 2 of Article 101, in
relation to paragraph 4 of Article 11. (Tan v. Standard Vacuum
Oil Co., 91 Phil. 672)
During the storm, the ship which was heavily loaded with goods
was in danger of sinking. The captain of the vessel ordered
part of the goods thrown overboard. In this case, the captain is
not criminally liable for causing part of the goods to be thrown
overboard.

The evil which brought about the greater evil must not result from a
violation of law by the actor.
Thus, an escaped convict who has to steal clothes in order to
move about unrecognized, does not act from necessity. (Albert) He is
liable for theft of the clothes.
216

Art. 11

There is civil liability under this paragraph.
Although, as a rule there is no civil liability in justifying
circumstances, it is only in paragraph 4 of Article 11 where there is
civil liability, but the civil liability is borne by the persons benefited.
In cases falling within subdivision 4 of Article ll, the persons
for whose benefit the harm has been prevented, shall be civilly liable
in proportion to the benefit which they may have received. (Art. 101)
Par. 5. - Fulfillment ofduty or lawful exercise of right or office.
Any person who acts in the fulfillment of a duty or in the
lawful exercise of a right or office.
Requisites:
1.

That the accused acted in the performance of a duty or in
the lawful exercise of a right or office;

2.

That the injury caused or the offense committed be the
necessary consequence of the due performance of duty or
the lawful exercise of such right or office. (People v. Oanis,
74 Phil. 257,259; People v. Pajenado, No. L-26458, January
30, 1976, 69 CRA 172, 177)

In the case ofPeople v. Oanis, supra, the first requisite is present,
because the accused peace officers, who were trying to get a wanted
criminal, were acting in the performance of a duty.
The second requisite is not present, because through impatience,
over-anxiety, or in their desire to take no chances, the accused
exceeded in the fulfillment of their duty when they killed a sleeping
person whom they believed to be the wanted criminal without making
any previous inquiry as to his identity.
Fulfillment of a duty.
People v. Felipe Delima
(46 Phil. 738)
Facts: Lorenzo Napilon escaped from the jail where he was serving

sentence.
Some days afte rwards the policeman, Felipe Delima, who was looking
for him, found him in the house of Jorge Alegria, armed with a pointed piece
217

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

of bamboo in the shape of a lance, and demanded his surrender. 'The fugitive
answered with a stroke of his lance. The policeman dodged it, and to impose

his authority fired his revolver, but the bullet did not hit him. The criminal
ran away, without parting with his weapon. 'The peace officer went after him
and fired again his revolver, this time hitting and killing him.

The policeman was tried and convicted by the Court of First Instance
of homicide and sentenced to reclusion temporal and the accessory penalties.
Held: The killing was done in the performance of a duty. The deceased
was under the obligation to surrender, and had no right, after evading service
of his sentence, to commit assault and disobedience with a weapon in his
hand, which compelled the policeman to resort to such an extreme means,

which, although it proved to be fatal, was justified by the circumstances.
Article 8, No. 11 of the Penal Code (Art. 11, par. 5, R.P.C.) being
considered, Felipe Delima committed no crime, and he is hereby acquitted
with costs de officio.

Ruling In the Delima case, applied to a case where an escaping
detainee charged with stealing a chicken was shot to death by a
policeman.
In this case, four members of the police force went after the
detention prisoner as soon as he had escaped. When the escaping
detainee saw one of the policemen, he lunged at the latter, hitting
him with a stone on the right cheek, as a consequence of which he
fell down, and while in that position on the ground, he was again
struck with a stone by the escaping detainee; thereafter, the latter
ran away pursued by the policeman and his companions; in the course
of the pursuit, the policeman fired a warning shot into the air, and as
the escaping detainee paid no heed to this, the policeman fired into
the air four times more and kept on pursuing him; as the latter was
apparently widening the distance between them, and fearing that
he might finally be able to elude arrest, the policeman fired directly
at him while he was in the act ofjumping again into another part of
the creek, hitting him on the back and causing his death. Held: The
act performed by policeman was committed in the performance of his
official duty and was more or less necessary to prevent the escaping
prisoner from successfully eluding the officers of the law. In the
spirit of the Court's decision in People v. Delima, the policeman was
acquitted. (Valcorza v. People, 30 SCRA 148-150)

218

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Shooting of prisoner by guard must be In self-defense or be
absolutely necessary to avoid his escape.
People v. Lagata
(83 Phil. 159)
Facts: When the guard called his order to assemble, one of the prisoners
was missing. So, he ordered the others to look for him. The other prisoners
scampered. The guard fired at two of the prisoners, wounding one (Abria)
and killing the other Tipace). His reason was to prevent the attempt of the
prisoners to escape.
Held: As regards the shooting of Abria and Tipace, [the Court] [is]
convinced that the facts were as narrated by the witnesses for the prosecution.
Abria was shot when he was only three meters away from the guard and
the defense has not even shown that Abria attempted to escape. Tipace was
also shot when he was about four or five meters away from the guard. The
latter's allegation that Tipace was running - conveying the idea that said
prisoner was in the act of escaping - appears to be inconsistent with his
own testimony to the effect that Tipace was running sidewise, with his face

looking towards him (the guard), and with the undisputed fact that Tipace
was hit near one axilla, the bullet coming out from the opposite shoulder. If
Tipace's purpose was to escape, the natural thing for him to do would have

been to give his back to the guard.
It is clear that the guard had absolutely no reason to fire at Tipace.
The guard could have fired at him in self-defense or if absolutely necessary
to avoid his escape.
Five Justices believed that the prisoner who was killed was not escaping.
The four Justices who dissented believed that the prisoner was escaping or
running away when he was shot by the guard. All the Justices agreed that
a guard is justified in shooting an escaping prisoner.

In the case of U.S. v. Magno, et al., 8 Phil. 314, where the
prisoner attempted to escape, and the Constabulary soldiers, his
custodians, shot him to death in view of the fact that the prisoner,
disregarding the warning of his custodians, persisted in his attempt
to escape, and there was no other remedy but to fire at him in order
to prevent him from getting away, it was held that the Constabulary
soldiers acted in the fulfillment of duty and, therefore, were not
criminally liable.
Shooting an offender who refused to surrender is justified.
In the case ofPeople v. Gayrama, 60 Phil. 796, where the accused,
who had slashed with a bolo the municipal president on his arm, ran
219

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

away and refused to be arrested, it was stated that if the chiefofpolice
had been armed with a revolver and had used it against the accused,
the act of the chief of police under those circumstances would have
been fully justified.
The reason for this is that it is the duty of peace officers to
arrest violators of the law not only when they are provided with the
corresponding warrant of arrest but also when they are not provided
with said warrant if the violation is committed in their own presence;
and this duty extends even to cases the purpose of which is merely to
prevent a crime about to be consummated. (U.S. v. Bertucio, 1 Phil.
47; U.S. v. Resaba, 1 Phil. 311; U.S. v. Vallejo, 11 Phil. 193; U.S. •
Santos, 36 Phil. 853)

TITLE ONE

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability
Legitimate performance of duty.

When the victim without apparent reason, but probably due
to drunkenness, fired his gun several times at the Alta Vista Club,
the accused and his partner had to intervene for they were with the
NBI. They would have been remiss in their duty if they did not. True,
the deceased companion of the accused shot the victim who died as a
result. But it would be doing injustice to a deceased agent of the law
who cannot now defend himself to state that when he approached the
trouble making victim he had a preconceived notion to kill. It must be
presumed that he acted pursuant to law when he tried to discharge h.is
duty as an NBI agent and that the killing of the victim was justified
under the circumstances. The same is true for the accused. (People
v. Cabrera, No. L-31178, October 28, 1980, 100 SCRA 424, 431)

But shooting a thief who refused to be arrested is not justified.

A security guard accosted a thief who had stolen ore in the
tunnel of a mining company. The thief tried to flee. The security
guard ordered him to stop, but the latter disregarded the order. The
security guard fired four shots into the air with his carbine to scare
the thief and to stop him. As the thief continued to flee, saying that
he would not stop even ifhe died, the security guard fired a fifth shot
directed at the leg of the thief, but the bullet hit him in the lumbar
region. The thief died.
Held: The security guard acted in the performance of his duty,
but he exceeded the fulfillment of his duty by shooting the deceased.
He was adjudged guilty of homicide. (People v. Bentres, CA., 49 0.G.
4919)
In the case of People v. Oanis, supra, it was held that although
an officer in making a lawful arrest is justified in using such force as
is reasonably necessary to secure and detain the offender, overcome
his resistance, prevent his escape, recapture him if he escapes,
and protect himself from bodily harm, yet he is never justified in
using unnecessary force or in treating him with wanton violence, or
in resorting to dangerous means when the arrest could be effected
otherwise. (6 C.J.S., par. 13, p. 612) The doctrine is restated in the
Rules of Court thus: "No violence or unnecessary force shall be used
in making an arrest, and the person arrested shall not be subject to
any greater restraint than is necessary for his detention." (Rule 113,
Sec. 2, par. 2)
220

Illegal performance of duty.

The defense of fulfillment of a duty does not avail. The attitude
adopted by the deceased in putting h.is hands in his pocket is not
sufficient to justify the accused to shoot him. The deceased was
unarmed and the accused could have first warned him, as the latter
was coming towards him, to stop where he was, raise his hands, or do
the things a policeman is trained to do, instead of mercilessly shooting
him upon a mere suspicion that the deceased was armed. (People v.
Tan, No. L-22697, October 5, 1976, 73 SCRA 288, 292-293)
[The Court] find[s] the requisites absent in the case at bar.
Appellant was not in the performance of his duties at the time of the
shooting for the reason that the girls he was attempting to arrest
were not committing any act of prostitution in his presence. If at all,
the only person he was authorized to arrest during that time was
Roberto Reyes, who offered him the services of a prostitute, for acts of
vagrancy. Even then, the fatal injuries that the appellant caused the
victim were not a necessary consequence of appellant's performance
of his duty as a police officer. The record shows that appellant shot
the victim not once but twice after a heated confrontation ensued
between them. His duty to arrest the female suspects did not include
any right to shoot the victim to death. (People • Peralta, G.R. No.
128116, January 24, 2001)

221

Art. 11

THE REVJSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Distinguished from self-defense and from consequence of felonious
act.

Fulfillment of duty to prevent the escape of a prisoner is different
from self-defense, because they are based on different principles.
In the case ofPeople v. Delima, supra, the prisoner who attacked
the policeman with "a stroke of his lance" was already running away
when he was shot, and, hence, the unlawful aggression had already
ceased to exist; but the killing was done in the performance of a duty.
The rule of self-defense does not apply.
The public officer acting in the fulfillment of a duty may appear to
be an aggressor but his aggression is not unlawful, it being necessary
to fulfill his duty.
Thus, when the guard levelled his gun at the escaping prisoner
and the prisoner grabbed the muzzle of the gun and, in the struggle
for the possession of the gun, the guard jerked away the gun from the
hold of the prisoner, causing the latter to be thrown halfway around,
and because of the force of the pull, the guard's finger squeezed the
trigger, causing it to fire, hitting and killing the prisoner, the guard
was acting in the fulfillment of duty. (People v. Bisa, CA., 51 0.G.
4091)
In either case, if the accused were a private person, not in the
performance of a duty, the result would be different. In the first
case, there would be no self-defense because there is no unlawful
aggression. In the second case, the one pointing the gun at another
would be committing a felony. (Grave threat under Art. 282)
For instance, A levelled his gun at B, threatening the latter
with death. B grabbed the muzzle of the gun and in the struggle for
the possession of the gun, A squeezed the trigger causing it to fire,
hitting and killing B. In this case, A is criminally liable under Article
4, paragraph 1, in relation to Articles 282 and 249.
Lawful exercise of right or office.

Of right.
Under the Civil Code (Art. 429), the owner or lawful possessor
of a thing has the right to exclude any person from the enjoyment
and disposal thereof. For this purpose, he may use such force as may
222

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 11

be reasonably necessary to repel or prevent an actual or threatened
unlawful physical invasion or usurpation of his property.
If in protecting his possession of the property he injured (not
seriously) the one trying to get it from him, he is justified under this
paragraph.
Under this paragraph (lawful exercise of a right), it is not
necessary that there be unlawful aggression against the person
charged with the protection of the property. If there is unlawful
aggression against the person charged with the protection of the
property, then paragraph 1 of Article 11 applies, it being a defense
of right to property.
Doctrine of "self-help" under Article 429, Civil Code, applied in
Criminal Law.

People v. Depante
(CA., 58 0.G. 926)

Facts: At about 9:00 in the mornin g of December 29, 1958, while Mariano
Depante was in a Chinese store, Paciencia Iquiran, his querida, saw him
holding a five-peso bill in his left hand. Mariano had just bought a package
of cigarettes and the five-peso bill he was holding was part of the change he
had just received from the storekeeper. Paciencia, who was in a bad mood
because Mariano had not given her support for sometime, approached him
and after uttering insulting words, grabbed the five-peso bill from Mariano's
hand. When he acted to recover the same, she grabbed his shirt, tearing the
same. Mariano gave her fist blows on the forehead, on the right side of the
head and on the middle part of her left arm, knocking her down. He was able
to regain possession of the five-peso bill.
Was the act of Paciencia in grabbing the five-peso bill an actual or
threatened unlawful physical invasion or usurpation of Mariano Depante's
property? [The Court] find(s] that it was. More than that, the act could be
attempted robbery. The fact that Paciencia was a querida and that Mariano
had not supported her for sometime was not an exempting or justifying
circumstance. Robbery can even be committed by a wife against her husband.
Only theft, swindling and malicious mischief cannot be committed by a wife
against her husband. (Art. 332, R.P.C.)
Did Mariano use such force as was reasonably necessary to repel or
prevent the actual or threatened unlawful physical invasion or usurpation
of his property? On this point, [The Court] find[s] that he cannot claim full
justification, for the three fist blows which rendered Paciencia unconscious
for sometime were not reasonable, considering the sex of the complainant.
223

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 11

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Hence, appellant is criminally liable. However, his criminal liability may be
mitigated under Article 69 of the R.P.C.
Held: The requisites mentioned in Article 429, Civil Code, in relation
to Article 11, paragraph 5, R.PC., to justify the act not being all present,
a penalty lower by one or two degrees than that prescribed by law may be

A surgeon who amputated the leg of a patient to save him from
gangrene is not liable for the crime of mutilation, because he was
acting in the lawful exercise of his office.

imposed.

Par. 6. - Obedience to an order issued for some lawful purpose.
The actual Invasion of property may consist of a mere disturbance
of possession or of a real dispossession.
!fit is mere disturbance of possession, force may be used against
it at any time as long as it continues, even beyond the prescriptive
period for an action of forcible entry. Thus, if a ditch is opened by
Pedro in the land of Juan, the latter may close it or cover it by force
at anytime.
If the invasion, however, consists of a real dispossession,
force to regain possession can be used only immediately after the
dispossession. Thus, ifJuan, without the permission of Pedro, picks up
a book belonging to the latter and runs off with it, Pedro can pursue
Juan and recover the book by force.
If the property is immovable, there should be no delay in the
use of force to recover it; a delay, even if excusable, such as when due
to the ignorance of the dispossession, will bar the right to the use of
force. Once the usurper's possession has become firm by the lapse of
time, the lawful possessor must resort to the competent authority to
recover his property. (Tolentino's comment on Article 429 of the new
Civil Code, Vol. II, p. 54, citing 3-1 Ennecerrus, Kipp and Wolff 92-93)
Of right.
The exercise of a statutory right to suspend installment
payments under Section 23 of P.D. No. 957 is a valid defense against
the purported violations of B.P. Big. 22 that petitioner is charged
with. Petitioner's exercise of the right of a buyer under Article 23 of
P.D. No. 957 is a valid defense to the charges against him. (Sycip v.
Court ofAppeals, G.R. No. 125059, March 17, 2000)

Any person who acts in obedience to an order issued by a
superior for some lawful purpose.
Requisites:
1.

That such order must be for some lawful purpose.

3.

That the means used by the subordinate to carry out said
order is lawful.

Both the person who gives the order and the person who executes
it, must be acting within the limitations prescribed by law. (People v.
Wilson and Dolores, 52 Phil. 919)
Example of absence of the third requisite:
The court ordered that the convict should be executed on a
certain date. The executioner put him to death on a day earlier than
the date fixed by the court.
The execution of the convict, although by virtue of a lawful order
of the court, was carried out against the provision of Article 82. The
executioner is guilty of murder.
When the order Is not for a lawful purpose, the subordinate who
obeyed It Is criminally liable.
(1)

One who prepared a falsified document with full knowledge of
its falsity is not excused even if he merely acted in obedience to
the instruction of his superior, because the instruction was not
for a lawful purpose. (People v. Barroga, 54 Phil. 247)

(2)

A soldier who, in obedience to the order of his sergeant, tortured

Of office.
The executioner of the Bili bid Prison cannot be held liable for
murder for the execution performed by him because he was merely
acting in the lawful exercise of his office. (Guevara)

That an order has been issued by a superior.

2.

to death the deceased for bringing a kind of fish different from
that he had been asked to furnish a constabulary detachment, is
225

224

I

Art. 11

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

criminally liable. Obedience to an order of a superior is justified
only when the order is for some lawful purpose. The order to
torture the deceased was illegal, and the accused was not bound
to obey it. (People v. Margen, et al., 85 Phil. 839)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

II.

Exempting circumstances.
1.

2.

Held: Tabuena had no other choice but to make the withdrawals, for
that was what the MARCOS Memorandum required him to do. He could
not be faulted if he had to obey and strictly comply with the presidential
directive. Marcos was undeniably Tabuena's superior
the former being
then the President of the Republic who unquestionably exercised control
over government agencies such as the MIAA and PNCC. The MARCOS
Memorandum is patently legal (for on its face it directs payment of an
outstanding liability) and Tabuena acted under the honest belief thut the
P55 million was a due and demandable debt and that it was just a portion of
a bigger liability to PNCC. 'Tabuena is entitled to the justifying circumstance
of "Any person who acts in obedience to an order issued by a superior for some
lawful purpose."

Basis.
The exemption from punishment is based on the
complete absence of intelligence, freedom of action, or
intent, or on the absence of negligence on the part of the
accused.

Tabuena v. Sandiganbayan
(G.R. Nos. 103501-03, February 17, 1997)
Facts: Tabuena, General Manager of Manila International Airport
Authority (MIAA), was instructed over the phone by then President Marcos
to pay directly to the President's office and in cash what the MIAA owes
the Philippine National Construction Corporation (PNCC). About a week
later, Tabuena received a Presidential Memorandum dated January 8, 1986
(MARCOS Memorandum) reiterating such verbal instruction, directing
the payment of P55 Million in cash as partial payment of MIAA's account
with PNCC. In obedience to President Marcos' verbal instruction and
memorandum, Tabuena. with the help of other officials of MIAA, caused the
release of P55 Million of MIAA funds by means of three withdrawals. The
unlawfulness of the MARCOS Memorandum is questioned since MIAA's
liability appeared to amount to only P34.5 Million.

Definition.
Exempting circumstances (non-imputability) are those
grounds for exemption from punishment because there is
wanting in the agent of the crime any of the conditions
which make the act voluntary or negligent.

The subordinate is not liable for carrying out an illegal order of his
superior, if he is not aware of the illegality of the order.

When the accused acted upon orders of superior officers, which
he, as military subordinate, could not question, and obeyed the orders
in good faith, without being aware oftheir illegality, without any fault
or negligence on his part, he is not liable because he had no criminal
intent and he was not negligent. (People v. Beronilla, 96 Phil. 566)

Art. 12

Affect Criminal Liability

Under the R.P.C., a person must act with malice or
negligence to be criminally liable. One who acts without
intelligence, freedom of action or intent does not act
with malice. On the other hand, one who acts without
intelligence, freedom of action or fault does not act with
negligence.

Art. 12. Circumstances which exempt from criminal
liability. -- The following are exempt from criminal liability:
1. An imbecile or an insane person, unless the latter
has acted during a lucid interval.
When the imbecile or an insane person has committed
an act which the law defines as a felony (delito), the court
shall order his confinement in one of the hospitals or asylums
established for persons thus afflicted, which he shall not be
permitted to leave without first obtaining the permission of
the same court.
2.

A person under nine years of age.

3.
A person over nine years of age and under fifteen,
unless he has acted with discernment, in which case, such
Modified by Section 6 of RA. No. 9344. Minimum age of responsibility is now
fifteen (15) years or under.

226

227

,.------

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
minor shall be proceeded against in accordance with the
provisions of Article 80 of this Code.

Par. I - An imbecile or an insane person, unless the latter has
acted during a lucid interval.

When such minor is adjudged to be criminally
irresponsible, the court, in conformity with the provisions
of this and the preceding paragraph, shall commit him to the
care and custody of his family who shall be charged with his
surveillance and education; otherwise, he shall be committed
to the care of some institution or person mentioned in said
Article 80.

This paragraph establishes the distinction between imbecility
and insanity, because while the imbecile is exempt in all cases from
criminal liability, the insane is not so exempt ifit can be shown that
he acted during a lucid interval.

4. Any person who, while performing a lawful act with
due care, causes an injury by mere accident without fault or
intention of causing it.

An imbecile is one who, while advanced in age, has a mental
development comparable to that of children between two and seven
years of age.

5.
Any person who acts under the compulsion of an
irresistible force.

An imbecile within the meaning of Article 12 is one who is
deprived completely ofreason or discernment and freedom of the will
at the time of committing the crime. (People v. Ambal, No. L-52688,
October 17, 1980, 100 SCRA 325, 333, citing People v. Formigones,
87 Phil. 658, 660)

6.
Any person who acts under the impulse of an
uncontrollable fear of an equal or greater injury.
7.
Any person who fails to perform an act required by
law, when prevented by some lawful or insuperable cause.

In exempting circumstances, there Is a crime committed but no
criminal liability arises.
Technically, one who acts by virtue of any of the exempting
circumstances commits a crime, although by the complete absence of
any of the conditions which constitute free will or voluntariness of the
act, no criminal liability arises. (Guevara)
Burden ofproof.
Any of the circumstances mentioned in Article 12 is a matter
of defense and the same must be proved by the defendant to the
satisfaction of the court.

"See Section 6 of R.A. No. 9344, where the age is now above ffeen (15) years
but below eighteen (18) years of age. The child shall now be subject to an intervention

Imbecility distinguished from Insanity.

During lucid interval, the insane acts with intelligence.

To constitute Insanity, there must be complete deprivation of
intelligence or that there be a total deprivation of the freedom of
the will.
The Supreme Court of Spain held that in order that the
exempting circumstance of insanity may be taken into account, it is
necessary that there be a complete deprivation of intelligence while
committing the act, that is, that the accused be deprived of reason;
that he acts without the least discernment; or that there be a total
deprivation of freedom ofthe will. (People v. Formigones, 87 Phil. 658,
661)
Insanity exists when there is a complete deprivation of
intelligence in committing the act, that is, the accused is deprived
of reason, he acts without the least discernment, because there is
a complete absence of the power to discern, or that there is a total
deprivation of freedom of the will. (People v. Puna, No. L-33211, June
29, 1981, 105 SCRA 151, 158-159, citing earlier cases. Also, People v.
Magallano, No. L-32978, October 30, 1980, 100 SCRA 570, 578-579)
Thus, mere abnormality of mental faculties is not enough,
especially if the offender has not lost consciousness of his acts. At
most, it is only a mitigating circumstance. (Art. 13, par. 9)

program.

229
228

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Procedure when the imbecile or the insane committed a felony.
The court shall order his confinement in one of the hospitals
or asylums established for persons afflicted, which he shall not be
permitted to leave without first obtaining the permission of the court.
But the court has no power to permit the insane person to leave
the asylum without first obtaining the opinion of the Director of Health
that he may be released without danger. (Chin Ah Foo v. Concepcion,
54 Phil. 775)
Who has the burden of proof to show Insanity?
The defense must prove that the accused was insane at the time
of the commission of the crime, because the presumption is always
in favor of sanity. (People v. Bascos, 44 Phil. 204, 206)
Sanity being the normal condition of the human mind, the
prosecution may proceed upon the presumption that the accused was
sane and responsible when the act was committed. The presumption
is always in favor of sanity and the burden of proof of insanity is on
the defense. (People v. Aquino, G.R. No. 87084, June 27, 1990, 186
SCRA 851, 858, citing cases)
How much evidence is necessary to overthrow the presumption
of sanity?
The wife of the accused and his cousin testified that the accused
had been more or less continuously out of his mind for many years.
The assistant district health officer who, by order of the court,
examined the accused found that the accused was a violent maniac.
The physician expressed the opinion that the accused was probably
insane when he killed the deceased. The total lack of motive on the
part of the accused to kill the deceased bears out the assumption that
the former was insane. (People v. Bascas, supra)
In order to ascertain a person's mental condition at the time of
the act, it is permissible to receive evidence of the condition of his
mind during a reasonable period both before and after that time.
Direct testimony is not required, nor are specific acts of derangement
essential to establish insanity as a defense. Mind can be known only
by outward acts. Thereby, we read the thoughts, the motives and
emotions of a person and come to determine whether his acts conform
230

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
to the practice of people of sound mind. To prove insanity, therefore,
circumstantial evidence, if clear and convincing, will suffice. (People
v. Bonoan, 64 Phil. 93)
Insanity at the time of the commission of the felony distinguished
from insanity at the time of the trial.
When a person was insane at the time of the commission of the
felony, he is exempt from criminal liability.
When he was sane at the time of the commission of the crime,
but he becomes insane at the time of the trial, he is liable criminally.
The trial, however, will be suspended until the mental capacity of the
accused be restored to afford him a fair trial.
Evidence of insanity.
The evidence of insanity must refer to the time preceding the
act under prosecution or to the very moment of its execution. If the
evidence points to insanity subsequent to the commission of the crime,
the accused cannot be acquitted. He is presumed to be sane when he
committed it. (U.S. v. Guevara, 27 Phil. 547, 550; People v. Fausto,
No. L-16381, December 30, 1961, 3 SCRA 863, 866-867; People v.
Puno, No. L-33211, June 29, 1981, 105 SCRA 151, 158)
If the insanity is only occasional or intermittent in its nature,
the presumption of its continuance does not arise. He who relies on
such insanity proved at another time must prove its existence also at
the time of the commission of the offense. Where it is shown that the
defendant had lucid intervals, it will be presumed that the offense
was committed in one of them. But a person who has been adjudged
insane, or who has been committed to a hospital or to an asylum for
the insane, is presumed to continue to be insane. (People v. Bonoan,
64 Phil. 87)
When defense of insanity is not credible.
1)

Appellant himself testified that he was acting very sanely that
Monday morning, as shown by the fact that he went to the
canteen in a jovial mood "singing, whistling, and tossing a coin
in his hand"; he saw persons inside the canteen xx x; he noticed
the arrival of Lira who banged his folders on the table, elbowed
him, and said in a loud voice: "Ano ka"; he saw Lira put his right
231

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

hand inside his pocket and with the other hand pushed a chair
towards him; he became "confused" because he remembered that
Lira threatened to kill him if he would see him again; at this
point "he lost his senses" and regained it when he heard the voice
of Mrs. Tan saying: "Loreto, don't do that"; and then he found
out that he had wounded Lira. If appellant was able to recall all
those incidents, we cannot understand why his memory stood
still at that very crucial moment when he stabbed Lira to return
at the snap of the finger as it were, after he accomplished the
act of stabbing his victim. The defense of insanity is incredible.
(People v. Renegado, No. L-27031, May 31, 1974, 57 SCRA 275,
286-287)
2)

3)

4)

The accused knew that his wife was dead because he was
informed of her death. He said that his wife quarrelled with
him. She was irritable. He remembered that a week before
the incident he got wet while plowing. He fell asleep without
changing his clothes. He immediately surrendered after the
incident. He remembered that he rode on a tricycle. During his
confinement in jail, he mopped the floor and cooked food for his
fellow prisoners. Sometimes, he worked in the town plaza or
was sent unescorted to buy food in the market. He is not insane.
(People v. Ambal, No. L-52688, October 17, 1980, 100 SCRA 325,
330-331, 337)
Government psychiatric doctors who had closely observed the
accused for a month and a half found him in good contact with
his environment and that he did not manifest any odd behavior
for in fact he could relate the circumstances that led to his
confinement. He exhibited remorse for killing the victim, his
wife, and he voluntarily surrendered to the police headquarters
where he executed a statement confessing his misdeed. He was
coherent and intelligent. Before the killing, he was working for
a living through fishing three times a week and he himself fixed
the prices for his catch. The presumption of sanity has not been
overcome. (People v. Magallano, No. L-32978, October 30, 1980,
100 SCRA 570, 577-578)
The accused was afflicted with "schizophrenic reaction" but
knew what he was doing; he had psychosis, a slight destruction
of the ego; in spite of his schizophrenic reaction," his symptoms
were "not socially incapacitating" and he could adjust to his
232

Art.12

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

environment. He could distinguish between right and wrong. He
had no delusions and he was not mentally deficient. The accused
was not legally insane when he killed the hapless and helpless
victim. (People v. Puno, No. L-33211, June 29, 1981, 105 SCRA
151, 156, 159)
5)

The mental illness of the accused was described as "organic
mental disorder with psychosis" but the doctor said that a
person suffering from insanity may know that what he is doing
is wrong. He also observed that the mental illness of the accused
came on and off When interviewed upon his admission to the
mental institution, he recalled having taken 120 cc of cough
syrup and consumed about three sticks of marijuana before
the commission of the crime, an admission confirming his prior
extrajudicial confession. The presence of his reasoning faculties,
which enabled him to exercise sound judgment and satisfactorily
articulate the aforesaid matters, sufficiently discounts any
intimation of insanity of the accused when he committed the
dastardly felonies. (People v. Aquino, G.R. No. 87084, June 27,
1990, 186 SCRA 851, 862-863)

Dementia praecox Is covered by the term insanity.

Thus, when a person is suffering from a form of psychosis, a type
ofdementia praecox, homicidal attack is common, because of delusions
that he is being interfered with sexually, or that his property is being
taken. During the period of excitement, such person has no control
whatever of his acts. (People v. Bonoan, supra)
The unlawful act of the accused may be due to his mental disease
or a mental defect, producing an irresistible impulse," as when the
accused has been deprived or has lost the power of his will which
would enable him to prevent himself from doing the act.
In the Bonoan case, supra, an irresistible homicidal impulse
was considered embraced in the term "insanity."
Schizophrenia, formerly called dementia praecox.

Medical books describe schizophrenia as a chronic mental
disorder characterized by inability to distinguish between
fantasy and reality and oft.en accompanied by hallucinations and
delusions. Formerly called dementia praecox, it is the most common
233

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
form of psychosis. (People v. Aldemita, 145 SCRA 451 [1986))
Symptomatically, schizophrenic reactions are recognizable through
odd and bizarre behavior apparent in aloofness or periods of impulsive
destructiveness and immature and exaggerated emotionality, often
ambivalently directed. The interpersonal perceptions are distorted in
the more serious states by delusions and hallucinations. In the most
disorganized form of schizophrenic living, withdrawal into a fantasy
life takes place and is associated with serious thought disorder and
profound habit deterioration in which the usual social customs are
disregarded. During the initial stage, the common early symptom is
aloofness, a withdrawal behind barriers of loneliness, hopelessness,
hatred and fear. Frequently, the patient would seem preoccupied
and dreamy and may appear "faraway." He does not empathize
with the feelings of others and manifests little concern about the
realities of life situations. The schizophrenic suffers from a feeling
of rejection and an intolerable lack of self-respect. He withdraws
from emotional involvement with other people to protect himself
from painful relationships. There is shallowness of affect, a paucity
of emotional responsiveness and a loss of spontaneity. Frequently,
he becomes neglectful of personal care and cleanliness. A variety of
subjective experiences, associated with or influenced by mounting
anxiety and fears precede the earliest behavioral changes and oddities.
He becomes aware of increasing tension and confusion and becomes
distracted in conversation manifested by his inability to maintain a
train of thought in his conversations. Outwardly, this will be noticed
as blocks or breaks in conversations. The schizophrenic may not speak
or respond appropriately to his companions. He may look fixedly
away, or he may appear to stare, as he does not regularly blink his
eyes in his attempt to hold his attention. (People v. Madarang, G.R.
No. 132319, May 12, 2000)
Kleptomania.

If the accused appears to have been suffering from kleptomania
when he committed the crime of theft, how shall we regard his
abnormal, persistent impulse or tendency to steal? ls it an exempting
circumstance or only a mitigating circumstance?
The courts in the United States have conflicting opinions. Some
believe that it is an exempting circumstance. Others believe that it
is only a mitigating circumstance.
234

In this jurisdiction, the question has not been brought before
the court for its determination.
The case of a person suffering from kleptomania must be
investigated by competent alienist or psychiatrist to determine
whether the impulse to steal is irresistible or not. If the unlawful
act of the accused is due "to his mental disease or a mental defect,
producing an irresistible impulse, as when the accused has been
deprived or has lost the power of his will which would enable him to
prevent himself from doing the act," the irresistible impulse, even to
take another's property, should be considered as covered by the term
"insanity." In the case of People v. Bonoan, 64 Phil. 87, an irresistible
homicidal impulse was considered embraced in the term "insanity."
It may be said that a person who has lost the power of his will, at the
moment, also lost consciousness of his acts.
On the other hand, if the mental disease or mental defect of the
accused only diminishes the exercise of his willpower, and did not
deprive him of the consciousness of his acts, then kleptomania, ifit be
the result of his mental disease or mental defect, is only a mitigating
circumstance.
Epilepsy may be covered by the term "Insanity."

Epilepsy is a chronic nervous disease characterized by fits,
occurring at intervals, attended by convulsive motions of the muscles
and loss of consciousness. Where the accused claimed that he was an
epileptic but it was not shown that he was under the influence of an
epileptic fit when he committed the offense, he is not exempt from
criminal liability. (People v. Mancao and Aguilar, 49 Phil. 887)
Feeblemindedness is not imbecility.

In the case of People v. Formigones, supra, it was held that
feeblemindedness is not exempting, because the offender could
distinguish right from wrong. An imbecile or an insane cannot
distinguish right from wrong.
Crazy ls not synonymous with insane.

Unusual behaviors such as smiling to oneself and calling
a chicken late at night are not proof of a complete absence of
intelligence, because not every aberration of the mind or mental
235

r
Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability

deficiency constitutes insanity. The Court has held that "the prevalent
meaning of the word 'crazy' is not synonymous with the legal terms
'insane,' 'non compos mentis,' 'unsound mind,' 'idiot,' or 'lunatic.' The
popular conception of the word 'crazy' is being used to describe a
person or an act unnatural or out of the ordinary. A man may behave
in a crazy manner but it does not necessarily and conclusively prove
that he is legally so. In order to be exempt from criminal liability, the
accused must be so insane as to be incapable of criminal intent. (People
v. Miraia, G.R. No. 219113, April 25, 2018)

it appearing that the act was committed while in a dream.
(People v. 1'aneo, 58 Phil. 255) The act was done without
criminal intent.
Somnambulism or sleepwalking, where the acts of
the person afflicted are automatic, is embraced in the plea
of insanity and must be clearly proven. (People v. Gimena,
55 Phil. 604)
In the case of U.S. v. Odicta, 4 Phil. 309, it was held
that the case of the somnambulist falls under the rule that
a person is not criminally liable ifhis acts are not voluntary.
The ruling in the case of People u. Gimena and that in the
case of U.S. v. Odicta are not inconsistent. The act of a
person is not voluntary when he does not have intelligence
and intent while doing the act.

Pedophilia is not insanity.

The doctor's testimony, however, did not help accused's case
because although he admitted having initially categorized accused
as insane, the doctor eventually diagnosed accused to be afflicted
with pedophilia, a mental disorder not synonymous with insanity. He
explained that pedophilia is a sexual disorder wherein the subject has
strong, recurrent and uncontrollable sexual and physical fantasies
about children which he tries to fulfill, especially when there are
no people around. He claimed, however, that despite his affliction,
the subject could distinguish between right and wrong. In fact, he
maintained that pedophilia could be committed without necessarily
killing the victim although injuries might be inflicted on the victim
in an effort to repel any resistance. (People v. Diaz, G.R. No. 130210,
December 8, 1999)
Amnesia is not proof of mental condition of the accused.

Amnesia, in and of itself, is no defense to a criminal charge
unless it is shown by competent proof that the accused did not know
the nature and quality of his action and that it was wrong. Failure to
remember is in itself no proof of the mental condition of the accused
when the crime was performed. (People v. Tabugoca, G.R. No. 125334,
January 28, 1998)
Other cases of lack of intelligence.

l.

a.

2.

Hypnotism. Whether or not hypnotism is so
effective as to make the subject act during artificial
somnambulism, is still a debatable question. (Albert)

Committing a crime while suffering from malignant
malaria.
Thus, one who was suffering from malignant malaria
when she wounded her husband who died as a consequence
is not criminally liable, because such illness affects the
nervous system and causes among others such complication
as acute melancholia and insanity at times. (People u.
Lacena, 69 Phil. 350)

Basis of paragraph 1.

The exempting circumstance of insanity or imbecility is based
on the complete absence of intelligence, an element of voluntariness.

Par.2.- A person under nine years of age.

Committing a crime while in a dream.

Age of absolute irresponsibility raised to 15 years of age.

One who, while sleeping, suddenly got up, got a bolo,
and upon meeting his wife who tried to stop him, wounded
her and also attacked other persons, is not criminally liable,

Republic Act No. 9344, otherwise known as "Juvenile Justice
and Welfare Act of 2006," raised the age of absolute irresponsibility
from nine to 15 years of age.

236

237

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Basis of paragraph 2.
The exempting circumstance of minority is based also on the
complete absence of intelligence.

Par.3.- A person over nine years of age and under fifteen,
unless he has acted with discernment, in which case,
such minor shall be proceeded against in accordance
with the provisions ofArticle 80 of this Code.
Paragraphs 2 and 3, Article 12 of the R.PC. repealed by Republic
Act No. 9344.
(1) A child 15 years ofage or under is exempt from criminal liability.

Under R.A. No. 9344, a child 15 years of age or under
is exempt from criminal liability. However, the child shall be
subject to an intervention program pursuant to Section 20
thereof.

A child is deemed to be 15 years of age on the day of the
15th anniversary of his/her birthdate. (Sec. 6, R.A. No. 9344)
(2)

A child above 15 but below 18 is exempt from criminal liability
unless he I she acted with discernment.
A child above 15 years but below 18 years of age shall
likewise be exempt from criminal liability and be subjected to an
intervention program, unless he/she has acted with discernment,
in which case, such child shall be subject to the appropriate
proceedings in accordance with this Act.
The exemption from criminal liability does not include
exemption from civil liability, which shall be enforced in
accordance with existing laws.

Periods of criminal responsibility.
Thus, under the Code as amended by R.A. No. 9344 (Juvenile
Justice and Welfare Act of2006), the life of a human being is divided
into four periods:
(1)

The age of absolute irresponsibility - 15 years and below
(infancy).

(2)

The age ofconditional responsibility
to 18 years.

(3)

The age of full responsibility - 18 years or over
(adolescence) to 70 (maturity).

(4)

The age of mitigated responsibility
15 years and 1 day
to 18 years, the offender acting with discernment; over 70
years of age.

Hence, senility which is the age over 70 years, although said to
be the second childhood, is only a mitigated responsibility. It cannot
be considered as similar to infancy which is exempting.
Child in Conflict with the Law
A child in conflict with the law is a person who at the time of
the commission of the offense is below 18 years old but not less than
15 years and one day old. (Sec. 1, A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised Rule
on Children in Conflict with the Law)
Meaning of "discernment."
Discernment means the capacity of the child at the time of the
commission of the offense to understand the differences between right
and wrong and the consequences of the wrongful act. (Section 4[J],
A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised Rule on Children in Conflict with the
Law)

The discernment that constitutes an exception to the exemption
from criminal liability of a minor under 15 years of age but over nine
(now, 15 years of age and below), who commits an act prohibited by
law, is his mental capacity to understand the difference between right
and wrong, and such capacity may be known and should be determined
by taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances afforded
by the records in each case, the very appearance, the very attitude, the
very comportment and behaviour of said minor, not only before and
during the commission of the act, but also after and even during the
trial. (People v. Doquena, 68 Phil. 580, 583; Guevarra v. Almodovar,
G.R. No. 75256, January 26, 1989, 169 SCRA 476, 481)
Determination of discernment
The determination of discernment shall take into account
the ability of a child to understand the moral and psychological
239

238

15 years and 1 day

Art, 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

components of criminal responsibility and the consequences of
the wrongful act; and whether a child can be held responsible for
essentially antisocial behavior. (Sec. 10, A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised
Rule on Children in Conflict with the Law)
Discernment and Intent distinguished.
The terms "intent" and "discernment" convey two distinct
thoughts. While both are products of the mental processes within
a person, "intent" refers to the desired act of the person while
"discernment" relates to the moral significance that a person ascribes
to the said act. Hence, a person may not intend to shoot another but
may be aware of the consequences of his negligent act which may
cause injury to the same person in negligently handling an air rifle.
(Guevara v. Almodovar, supra, at 481)
Discernment may be shown by (1) the manner the crime was
committed, or (2) the conduct of the offender after its commission.
1.

Conduct of offender.
Rodel, who was 16 years old, punched the body
and the head of the victim with a brass knuckle (llave
inglesa) wrapped around his right fist. Raymund then
tied a handkerchief around the victim's neck, fastened a
dog chain to the ends of the said handkerchief and, with
the aid of Raymund and Rodel, hoisted the victim's body
to and hanged it from a nearby tree. Rodel, together with
his cohorts, warned Jovencio not to reveal their hideous
act to anyone; otherwise, they would kill him. Rod el knew,
therefore, that killing the victim was a condemnable act
and should be kept in secrecy. He fully appreciated the
consequences of his unlawful act. (Madali v. People, G.R.
No. 180380, August 4, 2009)

The child in conflict with the law shall enjoy the presumption
of minority and shall enjoy all the rights of a child in conflict with
the law until proven to be 18 years old or older at the time of the
commission of the offense. (Sec. 5, A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised Rule
on Children in Conflict with the Law)
In case of doubt as to the age of the child, it shall be resolved in
his/her favor. (Sec. 7, R.A. No. 9344)
Determination of Age.
The age of the child shall be determined according to the
following rules:
(1)

The best evidence to prove the age of a child is an original
or certified true copy of the certificate of live birth;

(2)

In the absence of a certificate oflive birth, similar authentic
documents such as baptismal certificates and school records
or any pertinent document that shows the date of birth of
the child;

(3)

In the absence of the documents under paragraphs 1 and
2 of this section due to loss, destruction or unavailability,
the testimony of the child, the testimony of a member of
the family related to the child by affinity or consanguinity
who is qualified to testify on matters respecting pedigree
such as the exact age or date of birth of the child pursuant
to Section 40, Rule 130 of the Rules on Evidence, the
testimonies of the other persons, the physical appearance of
the child and other relevant evidence, shall suffice. (Sec. 5,
A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised Rule on Children in Conflict
with the Law)

Burden of Proof of Age.
Any person alleging the age of the child in conflict with the law
has the burden of proving the age of such child.
If the age of the child is contested prior to the filing of the
information in court, a case for determination of age under summary
proceeding may be filed before the Family Court which shall render
241

240

Art. 12

Affect Criminal Liability
Presumption of Minority.

Manner of committing the crime.
Thus, when the minor committed the crime during
nighttime to avoid detection or took the loot to another town
to avoid discovery, he manifested discernment. (People v.
Magsino, G.R. No. 40176, May 3, 1934)

2.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

r
Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

its decision within 24 hours from receipt of the appropriate pleadings
of all the parties. (Sec. 6, A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC in relation to December
7, R.A. No. 9344)
In all cases involving a child, the court shall make a categorical
finding as to the age of the child. (Sec. 6, A.M. No. 01-1-18-SC, Revised
Rule on Children in Conflict with the Law)
The allegation of "with intent to kill" in the information is sufficient
allegation of discernment.
Where the information for homicide filed in the court of first
instance alleges "that said accused, with the intent to kill, did then
and there wilfully, criminally, and feloniously push one Lolita Padilla,
a child 8 1/2 years of age, into a deep place xxxand as a consequence
thereof Lolita got drowned and died right then and there," it is held
that the requirement that there should be an allegation that she acted
with discernment should be deemed amply met with the allegation
in the information that the accused acted "with the intent to kill."
The allegation clearly conveys the idea that she knew what would be
the consequence of her unlawful act of pushing her victim into deep
water and that she knew it to be wrong. (People v. Neito, 103 Phil.
1133)
Basis of paragraph 3.
The exempting circumstance in paragraph 3 of Article 12 is
based also on the complete absence of intelligence.

Par. 4.- Any person who, while performing a lawful act with
due care, causes an injury by mere accident without
fault or intention of causing it.
Elements:
1.

A person is performing a lawful act;

2.

With due care;

3.

He causes an injury to another by mere accident;

4.

Without fault or intention of causing it.
242

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 12

The person must be performing a lawful act.
While defending himself against the unjustified assault upon his
person made by his assailant, appellant Galacgac fired his revolver
at random, wounding two innocent persons.
Held: The discharge of a firearm in such a thickly populated
place in the City of Manila being prohibited and penalized by Article
155 of the R.P.C., appellant Galacgac was not performing a lawful act
when he accidentally hit and wounded Marina Ramos and Alfonso
Ramos. Hence, the exempting circumstance provided for in Article 12,
paragraph 4, of the R.P.C., cannot be properly invoked by appellant
Galacgac. (People v. Galacgac, 54 0.G. 1027)
Striking another with a gun in self-defense, even if It fired and
seriously injured the assailant, is a lawful act.
When the defendant drew his gun and with it struck the
deceased after the latter had given him a fist blow on the shoulder,
the defendant was performing a lawful act. The striking with the
gun was a legitimate act of self-defense. But we might ask - was
the striking done with due care as required by the second element
for exemption? [The Court] believe[s) so, since the striking could not
have been done in any other manner except how it was done so by
the appellant. Whether the gun was cocked or uncocked, the striking
could not have been done in any other manner. The injury, therefore,
that resulted from the firing of the gun was caused by accident and
without any fault or intention on the part of defendant in causing it,
in accordance with the 3rd and 4th requisites.
The trial court puts much stress on the fact that since the
appellant allegedly had his finger on the trigger with the gun already
cocked it was reckless and imprudent of him to have used the gun
in striking the deceased. [The Court) do[es) not agree. Under the
circumstances, striking him, as was done here, and not shooting him,
was the more prudent and reasonable thing to do, whether the gun
was cocked or uncocked. (People v. Vitug, 8 CA. Rep. 905; People v.
Tiongco, C.A., 63 0.G. 3610)
But the act of drawing a weapon in the course ofa quarrel, not
being in self-defense, is unlawful
it is light threat (Art. 285, par.
1, R.P.C.), and there is no room for the invocation of accident as a
ground for exemption. (People v. lleyta, Jr., 13 CA. Rep. 1190)
243

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which
The person performing a lawful act must do so with due care, without
fault or negligence.

Appellant claims exemption from criminal liability under Article
12, paragraph 4, of the R.P.C. which provides that any person who,
while performing a lawful act with due care, causes an injury by
mere accident without fault or intention of doing it is exempted from
criminal liability. But, this exempting circumstance cannot be applied
to the appellant because its application presupposes that there is no
fault or negligence on the part of the person performing the lawful
act with due care, whereas, in this case, the prosecution had duly
established that the appellant was guilty of negligence. (People v.
San Juan, C.A., 65 O.G. 11264)
Examples of an accident.

the truck, and was knocked down, ran over and instantly killed.
The accused was acquitted of all criminal liability arising out of the
unfortunate accident which resulted in the death of the boy. (U.S. v.
Knight, 26 Phil. 216)
What is an accident?

An accident is something that happens outside the sway of our
will, and although it comes about through some act of our will, lies
beyond the bounds of humanly foreseeable consequences.

If the consequences are plainly foreseeable, it will be a case of
negligence. (Albert)
Accident presupposes lack of intention to commit the wrong done.

U.S. v. Tanedo
(15 Phil. 196)
Facts: The accused, while hunting, saw wild chickens and fired a shot.
The slug, after hitting a wild chicken, recoiled and struck the tenant who
was a relative of the accused. The man who was injured died.

Held: If life is taken by misfortune or accident while the actor is in the
performance of a lawful act executed with due care and without intention of
doing harm, there is no criminal liability.

I

Affect Criminal Liability

There is no question that the accused was engaged in the
performance of a lawful act when the accident occurred. He was not
negligent or at fault, because the deceased was not in the direction
at which the accused fired his gun. It was not foreseeable that the
slug would recoil after hitting the wild chicken.
A chauffeur, while driving his automobile on the proper side
of the road at a moderate speed and with due diligence, suddenly
and unexpectedly saw a man in front of his vehicle coming from the
sidewalk and crossing the street without any warning that he would
do so. Because it was not physically possible to avoid hitting him, the
said chauffeur ran over the man with his car. It was held that he was
not criminally liable, it being a mere accident. (U.S. v. Tayongtong,
21 Phil. 476)
Just as the truck then being driven by the accused was passing
the slow-moving road roller, a boy about ten or 12 years of age jumped
from the step of the sideboard of the road roller directly in front of
244

Article 12(4) of the R.P.C., the legal provision pertinent to
accident, contemplates a situation where a person is in fact in the
act of doing something legal, exercising due care, diligence and
prudence, but in the process produces harm or injury to someone or
to something not in the least in the mind of the actor - an accidental
result flowing out of a legal act. Indeed, accident is an event that
happens outside the sway of our will, and although it comes about
through some act of our will, it lies beyond the bounds of humanly
foreseeable consequences. In short, accident presupposes the lack of
intention to commit the wrong done. (Talampas v. People, G.R. No.
180219, November 23, 2011)
Caso of negligence, not accident.

As the two persons fighting paid him no attention, the defendant
drew a .45 caliber pistol and shot twice in the air. The bout continued,
however, so he fired another shot at the ground, but unfortunately the
bullet ricocheted and hit Eugenio Francisco, an innocent bystander,
who died thereafter.
Held: The mishap should be classed as homicide through reckless
imprudence. It is apparent the defendant wilfully discharged his gun,
without taking the precautions demanded by the circumstances that
the district was populated, and the likelihood that his bullet would
glance over the hard pavement of the thoroughfare. (People v. Nocum,
77 Phil. 1018)
Comment: The consequence here was clearly foreseeable.
245

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Accident and negligence, Intrinsically contradictory.

3)

In Jarco Marketing Corporation v. Court ofAppeals, 321 SCRA
375 (1999), the Supreme Court held that an accident is a fortuitive
circumstance, event or happening; an event happening without any
human agency, or if happening wholly or partly through human
agency, an event which under the circumstance is unusual or
unexpected by the person to whom it happens. Negligence, on the
other hand, is the failure to observe, for the protection of the interest
of another person, that degree of care, precaution and vigilance which
the circumstances justly demand without which such other person
suffers injury. Accident and negligence are intrinsically contradictory;
one cannot exist with the other. (People v. Fallorina, G.R. No. 137347,
March 4, 2004)
The death of the deceased In this case was considered caused by
mere accident.
The accused was prosecuted for having killed her husband.
Explaining what took place, she said, in part: "When the door was ajar
my son went in, and then my husband pushed it and as I saw that
he was about to crush my son's head, I jabbed my husband with the
point of the umbrella downwards to prevent him from crushing my
son's head." [The Court] find[s] nothing improbable in this statement
and ifwe add to this the absence of any reasonable motive to prompt
said defendant to injure her husband, [the Court] [is] compelled to
conclude that in thrusting her umbrella in the opening of the door
in question, she did so to free her son from the imminent danger of
having his head crushed or being strangled; and if she thus caused
her husband's injury, it was by a mere accident, without any fault or
intention to cause it. (People v. Ayaya, 52 Phil. 354, 358)
When claim of accident not appreciated.
1)

2)

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Husband and wife had an altercation. The deceased
husband got a carbine and holding it by the muzzle raised
it above his right shoulder in an attempt to strike accused
wife. She side-stepped and grappled with him for the
possession of the gun and in the scuffle the gun went off,
the bullet hitting her husband in the neck. So went the
version of the accused. Held: It was difficult, if not wellnigh impossible, for her who was frail and shorter than her
husband, who was robust and taller, to have succeeded in
taking hold of the carbine, for if her husband was to strike
her with the butt of the carbine and she side-stepped,
he would not have continued to hold the carbine in a
raised position. Actual test during the trial showed that
the carbine was not defective and could not fire without
pressing the trigger. The absence of any powder burns at
the entrance of the wound in the body of the deceased is
convincing proof that he was shot from a distance, and not
with the muzzle of the gun almost resting on his shoulder
or the back of the neck. (People v. Samson, No. L-14110,
March 29, 1963, 7 SCRA 478, 482-483)

Basis of paragraph 4.
The exempting circumstance in paragraph 4 ofArticle 12 is based
on lack of negligence and intent. Under this circumstance, a person
does not commit either an intentional felony or a culpable felony.
Par. 5. - Any person who acts under the compulsion of an
irresistible force.
This exempting circumstance presupposes that a person is
compelled by means of force or violence to commit a crime.

Repeated blows negate claim of wounding by mere accident.
(People v. Taylaran, No. L-49149, October 23, 1981, 108
SCRA 373, 376)

Elements:
1.

That the compulsion is by means ofphysical force.

Accidental shooting is negated by threatening words
preceding it and still aiming the gun at the prostrate body
of the victim, instead of immediately helping him. (People
v. Reyes, No. L-33154, February 27, 1976, 69 SCRA 474,
478)

2.

That the physical force must be irresistible.

3.

That the physical force must come from a third person.

246

Before a force can be considered to be an irresistible one, it
must produce such an effect upon the individual that, in spite of
247

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

all resistance, it reduces him to a mere instrument and, as such,
incapable of committing a crime. It must be such that, in spite of the
resistance of the person on whom it operates, it compels his members
to act and his mind to obey. Such a force can never consist in anything
which springs primarily from the man himself; it must be a force
which acts upon him from the outside and by a third person. (U.S. v.
Elicanal, 35 Phil. 209)
Example: In the case of U.S. v. Caballeros, et al., 4 Phil.
350, it appears that Baculi, one of the accused who was not a
member of the band which murdered some American schoolteachers, was in a plantation gathering bananas. Upon hearing
the shooting, he ran. However, Baculi was seen by the leaders
of the band who called him, and striking him with the butts of
their guns, they compelled him to bury the bodies.
Held: Baculi was not criminally liable as accessory for
concealing the body of the crime (Art. 19) of murder committed
by the band, because Baculi acted under the compulsion of an
irresistible force.
No compulsion of Irresistible force.
The pretension of an accused that he was threatened with a gun
by his friend, the mastermind, is not credible where he himself was
armed with a rife. (People v. Sarip, Nos. L-31481-31483, February
28, 1979, BB SCRA 666, 673-674)
Passion or obfuscation cannot be irresistible force.
The irresistible force can never consist in an impulse or passion,
or obfuscation. It must consist of an extraneous force coming from a
third person. (December of Sup. Ct. of Spain, March 15, 1876)
Basis of paragraph 5.
The exempting circumstance in paragraph 5 ofArticle 12 is based
on the complete absence of freedom, an element of voluntariness.

A person who acts under the compulsion of an irresistible force,
like one who acts under the impulse of uncontrollable fear of equal
or greater injury, is exempt from criminal liability because he docs
not act with freedom. (People v. Loreno, No. L-54414, July 9, 1984,
130 CRA 311, 321)

Affect Criminal Liability
Nature of force required.
The force must be irresistible to reduce the actor to a mere
instrument who acts not only without will but against his will.
The duress, force, fear or intimidation must be present, imminent
and impending and of such a nature as to induce a well-grounded
apprehension of death or serious bodily harm if the act is not done.
A threat of future injury is not enough. The compulsion must be of
such a character as to leave no opportunity to the accused for escape
or self-defense in equal combat. (People v. Loreno, No. L-54414, July
9, 1984, 130 SCRA 311, 321-322, citing People v. Villanueva, 104 Phil.
450)
Par.6.- Any person who acts under the impulse of an
uncontrollable fear of an equal or greater injury.
This exempting circumstance also presupposes that a person
is compelled to commit a crime by another, but the compulsion is by
means of intimidation or threat, not force or violence.
Elements:
1.

That the threat which causes the fear is of an evil greater
than or at least equal to, that which he is required to
commit;

2.

That it promises an evil of such gravity and imminence
that the ordinary man would have succumbed to it. (U.S.
v. Elicanal, 35 Phil. 209, 212, 213)

For the exempting circumstance of uncontrollable fear to
be invoked successfully, the following requisites must concur: (a)
existence of an uncontrollable fear; (b) the fear must be real and
imminent; and (c) the fear ofan injury is greater than or at least equal
to that committed. (People v. Petenia, No. L-51256, August 12, 1986,
143 SCRA 361, 369)
Illustration:
Liberato Exaltacion and Buenaventura Tanchinco were
compelled under fear of death to swear allegiance to the
Katipunan whose purpose was to overthrow the government by
force of arms.
249

248

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

In this case, the accused cannot be held criminally liable
for rebellion, because they joined the rebels under the impulse
of an uncontrollable fear of an equal or greater injury. (U.S. v.
Exaltacion, 3 Phil. 339)
The penalty for rebellion, the crime which Exaltacion was
required to commit, is prision mayor, that is, imprisonment for a
period of six years and one day to 12 years, and fine. The act which
he was asked to commit was to swear allegiance to the Katipunan
and become one of those engaged in overthrowing the government
by force of arms. Ifhe did not commit it, he would be killed. Death is
a much greater injury than imprisonment for 12 years and paying a
fine.
But ifA had threatened to burn the house of B should the latter
not kill his (B's) father, and B killed his father for fear that A might
burn his (B's) house, B is not exempt from criminal liability for the
reason that the evil with which he was threatened was much less
than that of killing his father.
Nature of duress as a valid defense.

Duress as a valid defense should be based on real, imminent, or
reasonable fear for one's life or limb and should not be speculative,
fanciful, or remote fear. (People v. Borja, No. L-22947, July 12, 1979,
91 CRA 340, 355, citing People v. Quilloy, 88 Phil. 53)
The accused must not have opportunity for escape or self-defense.

A threat of future injury is not enough. The compulsion must
be of such a character as to leave no opportunity to the accused for
escape or self-defense in equal combat.
Duress is unavailing where the accused had every opportunity
to run away if he had wanted to or to resist any possible aggression
because he was also armed. (People v. Palencia, No. L-38957, April 30,
1976, 71 SCRA 679, 690; People v. Abanes, No. L-30609, September
28, 1976, 73 SCRA 44, 47)
Where the accused, who testified that he was intimidated into
committing the crime, had several opportunities of leaving the gang
which had decided to kidnap the victim, his theory that he acted under
intimidation is untenable. (People v. Parulan, 88 Phil. 615, 623)
250

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Where the accused testified that he joined the band because he
was threatened by the leader thereof, but it appears that the leader
was armed with a revolver only, while the accused was armed with
a rifle, so that he could have resisted said leader, it was held that
the accused did not act under the impulse of an uncontrollable fear
of an equal or greater injury. (People v. Vargas and Kamatoy, CA.,
45 O.G. 1332)
As regards accused Domingo Golfeo, the evidence is clear that
it was he who first struck Areza with the butt of his gun hitting him
on the side of his body, then gave him a fist blow on his stomach, and
after he had been taken to a secluded place, it was he who ordered
Areza to lie down in the fashion adopted by the Kcmpetai during
gloomy days of Japanese occupation and in that position gave him
a blow on the back of his neck which almost severed his head from
the body. His participation in the killing of Areza cannot therefore
be doubted. His only defense is that he did so in obedience to the
order of his commander, and because he acted under the influence of
uncontrollable fear, he should be exempt from criminal responsibility.
This defense of Golfeo is clearly untenable not only because of
the well-settled rule that obedience to an order of a superior will only
justify an act which otherwise would be criminal when the order is
for a lawful purpose, but also because the circumstances under which
Golfeo participated in the torture and liquidation of Areza cannot
in any way justify his claim that he acted under an uncontrollable
fear of being punished by his superiors if he disobeyed their order.
In the first place, at the time of the killing, Golfeo was armed with
an automatic carbine such that he could have protected himself from
any retaliation on the part of his superiors if they should threaten
to punish him ifhe disobeyed their order to kill Area. In the second
place, the evidence shows that Areza was brought to a secluded place
quite far from that where his superiors were at the time and in such
a predicament, he and his companion Arsenal could have escaped
with Areza to avoid the ire of their superiors. The fact that he carried
out their order although his superiors were at some distance from
him and that without pity and compunction he struck his victim in a
Kempetai fashion shows that he acted on the matter not involuntarily
or under the pressure offear or force, as he claims, but out of his own
free will and with the desire to collaborate with the criminal design
of his superiors. (People v. Rogado, et al., 106 Phil. 816)
251

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Command of Hukbalahap killers, as cause of uncontrollable fear.
Timoteo Montemayor was accused of murder, for having told his
two companions to fetch shovels and to dig a grave and for having
walked behind the Hukbalahap killers to the place of the execution of
the victim. It appears that the two Hukbalahaps were ruthless killers
and were then in a mood to inflict extreme and summary punishment
for disobedience to the command. The place was isolated, escape was
at least risky, and protection by lawfully constituted authorities was
out of reach. The accused was acquitted, for having acted under the
impulse of uncontrollable fear of an equal or greater injury. (People
v. Regala, et al., G.R. No. L-1751, May 28, 1951)
In treason.
In the eyes of the law, nothing will excuse that act of joining
an enemy, but the fear of immediate death. (People v. Bagalawis, 78
Phil. 174, citing the case of Republica v. MCarty, 2 Dall., 36, 1 Law,
ed., 300, 301)
This ruling is similar to that in the Exaltacion case.
Speculative, fanciful and remote fear is not uncontrollable fear.

The defendant ordered the deceased whose both hands were tied
at the back to kneel down with the head bent forward by the side of
the grave already prepared for him by order of said defendant. Then,
defendant hacked the head of the deceased with a Japanese sabre and
immediately kicked the prostrate body of the victim into the grave.

/

When prosecuted for murder, the defendant claimed that he had
been ordered by Major Sasaki to kill the deceased. He also claimed
that he could not refuse to comply with that order, because the
Japanese officer made a threat.
Held: If the only evidence relating to a sort of a threat is the
testimony of the defendant· "As they insisted and I informed them that
I could not do it, then Captain Susuki told me, 'You have to comply
with that order of Major Sasaki; otherwise, you have to come along
with us,' " that threat is not of such a serious character and imminence
as to create in the mind of the defendant an uncontrollable fear that
an equal or greater evil or injury would be inflicted upon him if he
did not comply with the alleged order to kill the deceased. (People v.
Moreno, 77 Phil. 549)

Mere fear of a member of the Huk movement to disobey or refuse
to carry out orders of the organization, in the absence ofproofofactual
physical or moral compulsion to act, is not sufficient to exempt the
accused from criminal liability. (People • Fernando, No. L-24781,
May 29, 1970, 33 SCRA 149, 157)
Real, imminent or reasonable fear.

The case of U.S. v. Exaltacion, 3 Phil. 339, is the example. There
is here fear of immediate death.
A threat offuture injury is not enough.
To appreciate duress as a valid defense, a threat of future injury
is not enough. It must be clearly shown that the compulsion must be
of such character as to leave no opportunity for the accused to escape.
(People v. Palencia, No. L-38957, April 30, 1976, 71 SCRA 679, 690;
People v. Abanes, No. L-30609, September 28, 1976, 73 SCRA 44, 47)
Distinction between Irresistible force and uncontrollable fear.

In irresistible force (par. 5), the offender uses violence or physical
force to compel another person to commit a crime; in uncontrollable
fear (par. 6), the offender employs intimidation or threat in compelling
another to commit a crime.
Basis of paragraph 6.

The exempting circumstance in paragraph 6 of Article 12 is also
based on the complete absence of freedom.
Actus me invito factus non est meus actus." ("An act done by me
against my will is not my act.")

Par. 7.-- Any person who fails to perform an act required by
law, when prevented by some lawful or insuperable
cause.
Elements:
1.

That an act is required by law to be done;

2.

That a person fails to perform such act;
253

252

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 12

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
3.

That his failure to perform such act was due to some lawful
or insuperable cause.

When prevented by some lawful cause.

Basis of paragraph 7.

The circumstance in paragraph 7 of Article 12 exempts the
accused from criminal liability, because he acts without intent, the
third condition of voluntariness in intentional felony.

Example:
A confessed to a Filipino priest that he and several other persons
were in conspiracy against the Government. Under Article 116, a
Filipino citizen who knows of such conspiracy must report the same
to the governor or fiscal of the province where he resides. if the priest
does not disclose and make known the same to the proper authority,
he is exempt from criminal liability, because under the law, the priest
cannot be compelled to reveal any information which he came to know
by reason of the confession made to him in h.is professional capacity.
(Vide, Rule 130, Sec. 24[d], Rules of Court)
When prevented by some Insuperable cause.

Examples:
1.

Intent presupposes the exercise of freedom and the use of
intelligence. Hence, in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of Article 12, the
imbecile, insane, or minor, not having intelligence, does not act with
intent. The person acting under any of the circumstances mentioned
in paragraphs 5 and 6 ofArticle 12, not having freedom of action, does
not act with intent. In paragraph 4 of Article 12, it is specifically stated
that the actor causes an injury by mere accident without intention of
causing it.
Distinction between Justifying and exempting circumstances.
(1)

The municipal president detained the offended party for
three days to take him to the nearest justice of the peace
required a journey for three days by boat as there was no
other means of transportation. (U.S. v. Vicentillo, 19 Phil.
118, 119)
Under the law, the person arrested must be delivered
to the nearest judicial authority at most within 18 hours
(now 36 hours, Art. 125, R.P.C., as amended); otherwise,
the public officer will be liable for arbitrary detention.
The distance which required a journey for three days was
considered an insuperable cause. Hence, it was held that
the accused was exempt from criminal liability.

2.

In all the exempting circumstances, intent is wanting In the agent
of the crime.

A mother who at the time of childbirth was overcome by
severe dizziness and extreme debility, and left the child in
a thicket where said child died, is not liable for infanticide,
because it was physically impossible for her to take home
the child. (People v. Bandian, 63 Phil. 530, 534-535)
The severe dizziness and extreme debility of the
woman constitute an insuperable cause.

A person who acts by virtue of a justifying circumstance does
not transgress the law, that is, he does not commit any crime in
the eyes of the law, because there is nothing unlawful in the act
as well as in the intention of the actor. The act of such person
is in itselfbothjust and lawful.
In justifying circumstances, there is neither a crime nor
a criminal. No civil liability, except in paragraph 4 (causing
damage to another in state of necessity).

(2)

In exempting circumstances, there is a crime but no criminal
liability. The act is not justified, but the actor is not criminally
liable. There is civil liability, except in paragraphs 4 and 7
(causing an injury by mere accident; failing to perform an act
required by law when prevented by some lawful or insuperable
cause) of Article 12. (See Art. 101 which does not mention pars.
4and 7 of Art. 12)

Absolutory causes, defined.

Absolutory causes are those where the act committed is a crime
but for reasons of public policy and sentiment there is no penalty
imposed.
255

254

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability

Other absolutory causes.

In addition to the justifying circumstances (Art. 11) and the
exempting circumstances (Art. 12), there are other absolutory causes
in the following articles, to wit:
Art. 6.- The spontaneous desistance of the person who
commenced the commission of a felony before he could perform
all the acts of execution.
Art. 20.- Accessories who are exempt from criminal
liability. The penalties prescribed for accessories shall not be
imposed upon those who are such with respect to their spouses,
ascendants, descendants, legitimate, natural, and adopted
brothers and sisters, or relatives by affinity within the same
degrees, with the single exception of accessories falling with the
provisions of paragraph 1 of the next preceding article.
The provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 19 read, as follows:
"By profiting themselves or assisting the offenders to profit
by the effects of the crime."
Art. 124, last paragraph. --- The commission of a crime, or violent
insanity or any other ailment requiring the compulsory confinement
of the patient in a hospital, shall be considered legal grounds for the
detention of any person.
Art. 247, pars. I and 2.- Death or physical injuries inflicted
under exceptional circumstances. - Any legally married person
who, having surprised his spouse in the act of committing sexual
intercourse with another person, shall kill any of them or both of
them in the act or immediately thereafter, or shall inflict upon them
any serious physical injury, shall suffer the penalty of destierro.
Ifhe shall inflict upon them physical injuries of any other kind,
he shall be exempt from punishment.
Art. 280, par. 3.- The provisions of this article (on trespass
to dwelling) shall not be applicable to any person who shall enter
another's dwelling for the purpose of preventing some serious harm
to himself, the occupants of the dwelling or a third person, nor shall it
be applicable to any person who shall enter a dwelling for the purpose
of rendering some service to humanity or justice, nor to anyone who
shall enter cafes, taverns, inns and other public houses, while the
same are open.
256

Art. 332.
Persons exempt from criminal liability.- No
criminal, but only civil, liability shall result from the commission
of the crime of theft, swindling or malicious mischief committed or
caused mutually by the following persons:
1.

Spouses, ascendants and descendants, or relatives by
affinity in the same line;

2.

The widowed spouse with respect to the property which
belonged to the deceased spouse before the same shall have
passed into the possession of another; and

3.

Brothers and sisters and brothers-in-law and sisters-inlaw, if living together.

Art. 344, par. 4.- In cases of seduction, abduction, acts of
lasciviousness and rape, the marriage of the offender with the offended
party shall extinguish the criminal action or remit the penalty already
imposed upon him. The provisions of this paragraph shall also be
applicable to the co-principals, accomplices and accessories after the
fact of the above-mentioned crimes.
Instigation Is an absolutory cause.

Example:
An internal revenue agent, representing himself as a
private individual engaged in gambling, approached the accused
and induced the latter to look for an opium den where he said he
could smoke opium. The agent went to the accused three times
to convince the latter of his desire to smoke opium. Because of
the insistence of the agent, the accused made efforts to look for
a place where both of them could smoke opium until finally he
found one. The agent and the accused went to the place which
turned out to be the house of a Chinaman, and there the agent
received an opium pipe and paid P2.00 for the service to both of
them. After a while, the agent left. He returned later to arrest
the accused allegedly for smoking opium.
Held: The accused was not criminally liable. He was
instigated to commit the crime of smoking opium. (U.S. v. Phelps,
16 PhL. 440)
257

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Suppose that the agent in that case induced the accused to sell
opium to him and the accused sold opium, could the accused be held
liable for illegal possession of opium?

Suppose, the accused had not yet ordered for opium in Hong
Kong when he talked with the Collector of Customs but that on the
strength of the assurance of the Collector of Customs, he later ordered
for opium in Hong Kong, would it be instigation? Yes, it would be
instigation, not entrapment, because the accused was instigated to
import a prohibited drug, a crime punished by Article 192.

Art. 12

Yes. The accused was then in possession of opium and the mere
possession of opium is a violation of the law within itself.
Basis of exemption from criminal liability.

A sound public policy requires that the courts shall condemn
this practice (instigation) by directing the acquittal of the accused.
Entrapment is not an absolutory cause.
Example:
The accused wrote to his correspondent in Hong Kong to
send to him a shipment of opium. This opium had been in Hong
Kong for sometime, awaiting a ship that would go direct to Cebu.
The Collector of Customs of Cebu received information
that the accused was intending to land opium in the port. The
Collector promised the accused that he would remove all the
difficulties in the way, and for this purpose agreed to receive
P2,000.00. Juan Samson, a secret serviceman, pretended to
smooth the way for the introduction of the prohibited drug.
The accused started landing the opium. At this time,
the agents of the law seized the opium and had the accused
prosecuted.
Held: It is true that Juan Samson smoothed the way for
the introduction of the prohibited drug, but that was after the
accused had already planned its importation and ordered for
said drug.
Juan Samson neither induced nor instigated the accused
to import the opium in question, but pretended to have an
understanding with the Collector of Customs, who had promised
them that he would remove all the difficulties in the way of their
enterprise so far as the customs house was concerned.
This is not a case where an innocent person is induced to
commit a crime merely to prosecute him, but it is simply a trap
set to catch a criminal. (People v. Lua Chua and Uy Se Tieng,
56 Phil. 44)

The doctrines referring to the entrapment of offenders and
instigation to commit crime, as laid down by the courts of the United
States, are summarized in 16 Corpus Juris, page 88, Section 57, as
follows:
"ENTRAPMENT AND INSTIGATION. -- While it has been
said that the practice of entrapping persons into crime for the purpose
of instituting criminal prosecutions is to be deplored, and while
instigation, as distinguished from mere entrapment, has often been
condemned and has sometimes been held to prevent the act from being
criminal or punishable, the general rule is that it is no defense to the
perpetrator of a crime that facilities for its commission were purposely
placed in his way, or that the criminal act was done at the 'decoy
solicitation' of persons seeking to expose the criminal, or that detectives
feigning complicity in the act were present and apparently assisting
its commission. Especially is this true in that class of cases where
the offense is one of a kind habitually committed, and the solicitation
merely furnishes evidence of a course of conduct. Mere deception by the
detective will not shield defendant, if the offense was committed by him
free from the influence or the instigation of the detective. The fact that
an agent of an owner acts as a supposed confederate of a thief is no
defense to the latter in a prosecution for larceny, provided the original
design was formed independently of such agent; and where a person
approached by the thief as his confederate notifies the owner or the
public authorities, and being authorized by them to do so, assists the
thief in carrying out the plan, the larceny is nevertheless committed."
(Cited in People v. Lua Chu and Uy Se Tieng, 56 Phil. 44)

A detective representing to be a private individual, jobless, and
in need of money, befriended a well-known thief. The thief told him
that there was easy money around if he would take a chance. The
detective asked the thief what it was and the latter told him that he
was going to break into the house of a rich man to steal some jewels
and money. The detective pretended to have agreed with him and
the two went to the house, entered it through the window, and once
inside, the thief opened with a false key the wardrobe in the house
259

258

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

and took jewels and money. Then and there the detective arrested
the thief.

In entrapment, a person has planned, or is about to commit, a
crime and ways and means are resorted to by a public officer to trap
and catch the criminal. Entrapment is not a defense.

Art. 12

Is the thief criminally liable for the robbery committed?
Yes, it was entrapment. The fact that an agent of the law acted as
a supposed confederate of a thief is no defense to the latter, provided
that the original design was formed by the thief independently of
such agent.
Entrapment and Instigation distinguished.

Instigation is the means by which the accused is lured into the
commission of the offense charged in order to prosecute him. On the
other hand, entrapment is the employment of such ways and means
for the purpose of trapping or capturing a lawbreaker. Thus, in
instigation, officers of the law or their agents incite, induce, instigate
or lure an accused into committing an offense which he or she would
otherwise not commit and has no intention of committing. But in
entrapment, the criminal intent or design to commit the offense
charged originates in the mind of the accused, and law enforcement
officials merely facilitate the apprehension of the criminal by
employing ruses and schemes; thus, the accused cannot justify his or
her conduct. In instigation, where law enforcers act as co-principals,
the accused will have to be acquitted. But entrapment cannot bar
prosecution and conviction. As has been said, instigation is a "trap
for the unwary innocent" while entrapment is a "trap for the unwary
criminal." (People v. Bartolome, 703 Phil. 148)
In entrapment, the entrapper resorts to ways and means to
trap and capture a lawbreaker while executing his criminal plan. In
instigation, the instigator practically induces the would-be defendant
into committing the offense, and himself becomes a co-principal. In
entrapment, the means originates from the mind of the criminal.
The idea and the resolve to commit the crime come from him. In
instigation, the law enforcer conceives the commission of the crime
and suggests to the accused who adopts the idea and carries it into
execution. The legal effects of entrapment do not exempt the criminal
from liability. Instigation does. (People v. Marcos, G.R. No. 83325,
May 8, 1990, 185 SCRA 154, 164, citing earlier cases)
In instigation, a public officer or a private detective induces an
innocent person to commit a crime and would arrest him upon or after
the commission of the crime by the latter. It is an absolutory cause.
260

Art. 12

Instigation must be made by public officers or private detectives.

A criminal act may not be punishable if the accused was induced
to commit it by active cooperation and instigation on the part ofpublic
detectives. (State v. Hayes, 105 Mo. 76, 16 S.W.514,24 Am. St. Rep.
360)
A sound public policy requires that the courts shall condemn
this practice by directing an acquittal whenever it appears that the
public authorities or private detectives, with their cognizances, have
taken active steps to lead the accused into the commission of the act.
As was said in a Michigan case: "Human nature is frail enough at
best, and requires no encouragement in wrongdoing. If we cannot
assist another, and prevent him from committing crime, we should
at least abstain from any active efforts in the way ofleading him into
temptation." (Saunders v. People, 38 Mich. 218, 222)
If the one who made the instigation is a private individual, not
performing public function, both he and the one induced are criminally
liable for the crime committed: the former, as principal by induction;
and the latter, as principal by direct participation.
There Is neither Instigation nor entrapment when the violation of
the law is simply discovered.

Charged with and prosecuted for a violation of E.O. No. 62, series
of 1945, the accused having sold a can of Mennen Talcum Powder
for Pl.00 when the ceiling price for said article was only P0.86, the
defense contended that the government agent induced the accused
to violate the law by purchasing from him the article and paying for
it in an amount above the ceiling price.
Held: The agent did not induce the accused to violate the law.
He simply discovered the violation committed by the accused when
he (the agent) purchased the article from him. It was the accused who
charged and collected the price. There was not even an entrapment.
(People v. Tan Tong, CA., 43 0.G. 1285)

261

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 12

Affect Criminal Liability
Assurance of immunity by a public officer does not exempt a person
from criminal liability.
Thus, the accused who delivered to the barrio lieutenant a
gun and ammunition when the latter announced "that anyone who
is concealing firearms should surrender them so that he will not be
penalized" is not exempt from criminal responsibility arising from
the possession of the unlicensed firearm and ammunition. In fact,
not even the President could give such assurance of immunity to any
violator of the firearm law. His constitutional power of clemency can
be exercised only after conviction. (People v. Alabas, C.A., 52 O.G.
3091)
Complete defenses in criminal cases.

1.

Any of the essential elements of the crime charged is not proved
by the prosecution and the elements proved do not constitute
any crime.

2.

The act of the accused falls under any of the justifying
circumstances. (Art. 11)

3.

The case of the accused falls under any of the exempting
circumstances. (Art. 12)

4.

The case is covered by any of the absolutory causes:
a.

Spontaneous desistance during attempted stage (Art. 6),
and no crime under another provision of the Code or other
penal law is committed.

b.

Light felony is only attempted or frustrated, and is not
against persons or property. (Art. 7)

c.

The accessory is a relative of the principal. (Art. 20)

d.

Legal grounds for arbitrary detention. (Art. 124)

e.

Legal grounds for trespass. (Art. 280)

f.

The crime of theft, swindling or malicious mischief is
committed against a relative. (Art. 332)

g.

When only slight or less serious physical injuries are
inflicted by the person who surprised his spouse or
daughter in the act of sexual intercourse with another
person. (Art. 247)
262

h.

Marriage of the offender with the offended party when the
crime committed is rape, abduction, seduction, or acts of
lasciviousness. (Art. 344)

i.

Instigation.

5.

Guilt of the accused not established beyond reasonable doubt.

6.

Prescription of crimes. (Art. 89)

7.

Pardon by the offended party before the institution of criminal
action in crime against chastity. (Art. 344)

III. Mitigating circumstances.
1.

Definition
Mitigating circumstances are those which, if present
in the commission of the crime, do not entirely free the
actor from criminal liability, but serve only to reduce the
penalty.

2.

Basis
Mitigating circumstances are based on the diminution
of either freedom of action, intelligence, or intent, or on the
lesser perversity of the offender.

Classes of mitigating circumstances.

1.

Ordinary mitigating those enumerated in subsections
1 to 10 of Article 13.
Those mentioned in subsection 1 of Article 13 are
ordinary mitigating circumstances, if Article 69, for
instance, is not applicable.

2.

Privileged mitigating a.

Article 68. Penalty to be imposed upon a person under
eighteen years of age. -- When the offender is a minor
under 18 years of age and his case falls under the
provisions of the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act,
the following rules shall be observed:
263

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 12

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
(1) A person under 15 years of age, and a
person over 15 and under 18 years of age who acted
without discernment, are exempt from criminal
liability;

(2) Upon a person over 15 and under 18 years
of age who acted with discernment, the penalty next
lower than that prescribed by law shall be imposed,
but always in the proper period. (As amended by R.A.
No. 9344)
b.

c.

Article 69. Penalty to be imposed when the crime
committed is not wholly excusable. - A penalty lower
by one or two degrees than that prescribed by law
shall be imposed if the deed is not wholly excusable by
reason of the lack of some of the conditions required to
justify the same or to exempt from criminal liability
x xx, Provided, That the majority of such conditions
be present.
Article 64. Rules for the application of penalties
which contain three periods. - In cases in which
the penalties prescribed by law contain three
periods, whether it be a single divisible penalty or
composed of three different penalties, each one of
which forms a period x xx, the courts shall observe
for the application of the penalty the following rules,
according to whether there are or are not mitigating
or aggravating circumstances:
xxx.
(5) When there are two or more mitigating
circumstances and no aggravating circumstances
are present, the court shall impose the penalty
next lower to that prescribed by law, in the
period that it may deem applicable, according to
the number and nature of such circumstances.
xxx.

Privileged mitigating circumstances applicable only to particular
crimes.

1.

Voluntary release of the person illegally detained within
three days without the offender attaining his purpose and
264

before the institution of criminal action. (Art. 268, par. 3)
The penalty is one degree lower.
2.

Abandonment without justification of the spouse who
committed adultery. (Art. 333, par. 3) The penalty is one
degree lower.

Distinctions.

1.

Ordinary mitigating is susceptible of being offset by any
aggravating circumstance; while privileged mitigating
cannot be offset by aggravating circumstance.

2.

Ordinary mitigating, if not offset by an aggravating
circumstance, produces only the effect of applying the
penalty provided by law for the crime in its minimum
period, in case of divisible penalty; whereas, privileged
mitigating produces the effect of imposing upon the
offender the penalty lower by one or two degrees than that
provided by law for the crime.
People v. Honradez
(CA, 40 0.G., Supp. 4, 1)

Facts: 'The accused who was charged with robbery was less than 18
years old. He committed the crime during nighttime purposely sought, which
is an aggravating circumstance.
Held: The aggravating circumstance of nighttime cannot offset the
privileged mitigating circumstance of minority.
Mitigating circumstances only reduce the penalty, but do not change
the nature of the crime.

Where the accused is charged with murder, as when treachery
as a qualifying circumstance is alleged in the information, the fact
that there is a generic or privileged mitigating circumstance does not
change the felony to homicide.
If there is an ordinary or generic mitigating circumstance, not
offset by any aggravating circumstance, the accused should be found
guilty of the same crime of murder, but the penalty to be imposed is
reduced to the minimum of the penalty for murder.
266

Art. 12

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

If there is a privileged mitigating circumstance, the penalty for
murder will be reduced by one or two degrees lower.
In every case, the accused should be held guilty of murder.
The judgment of the trial court that the mitigating circumstance
of non-habitual drunkenness changes the felony to homicide is
erroneous, because treachery is alleged in the information and the
crime committed by the appellant is that of murder. The mitigating
circumstance reduces the penalty provided by law but does not change
the nature of the crime. (People • Talam, C.A., 56 O.G. 3654)

Chapter Three
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MITIGATE
CRIMINAL LIABILITY
Art. 13. Mitigating circumstances. - The following are
mitigating circumstances:
1.
Those mentioned in the preceding chapter, when all
the requisites necessary to justify the act or to exempt from
criminal liability in the respective cases are not attendant.
2. That the offender is under eighteen years of age
or over seventy years. In the case of the minor, he shall be
proceeded against in accordance with the provisions of Article
80.
3. That the offender had no intention to commit so
grave a wrong as that committed.
4. That sufficient provocation or threat on the part of
the offended party immediately preceded the act.
5. That the act was committed in the immediate
vindication of a grave offense to the one committing the felony
(delito), his spouse, ascendants, descendants, legitimate,
natural or adopted brothers or sisters, or relatives by affinity
within the same degrees.
6. That of having acted upon an impulse so powerful
as naturally to have produced passion or obfuscation.
7.
That the offender had voluntarily surrendered
himself to a person in authority or his agents, or that he had
voluntarily confessed his guilt before the court prior to the
presentation of the evidence for the prosecution.
8. That the offender is deaf and dumb, blind, or
otherwise suffering some physical defect which thus restricts
his means of action, defense, or communication with his fellow
beings.

266

267

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

9.
Such illness of the offender as would diminish the
exercise of the willpower of the offender without however
depriving him of consciousness of his acts.

condition of a person is indivisible; that is, there is no middle ground
between sanity and insanity, between presence and absence of
intelligence. (Dees. of Supreme Court of Spain of December 19, 1891
and of October 3, 1884)

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability

10. And, finally, any other circumstances of a similar
nature and analogous to those above-mentioned.

Par. 1. - Those mentioned in the preceding chapter when all
the requisites necessary to justify the act or to exempt
from criminal liability in the respective cases are not
attendant.

But if the offender is suffering from some illness which would
diminish the exercise of his willpower, without however depriving
him of consciousness of his acts, such circumstance is considered a
mitigation under paragraph 9 of Article 13. It would seem that one
who is suffering from mental disease without however depriving one of
consciousness of one's act may be given the benefit of that mitigating
circumstance.

"Those mentioned In the preceding chapter."

When all the requisites necessary to justify the act are not attendant

This clause has reference to ()justifying circumstances, and (2)
exempting circumstances which are covered by Chapter Two of Title
One.

1.

Incomplete self-defense, defense of relatives, and defense of
stranger.

Circumstances of justification or exemption which may give place
to mitigation.

Note that in these three classes of defense, unlawful
aggression must be present, it being an indispensable requisite.
What is absent is either one or both of the last two requisites.

The circumstances ofjustification or exemption which may give
place to mitigation, because not all the requisites necessary to justify
the act or to exempt from criminal liability in the respective cases are
attendant, arc the following:

Paragraph 1 of Article 13 Is applicable only when unlawful
aggression Is present but the other two requisites are not present
in any of the cases referred to in circumstances Nos. 1, 2, and 3
of Article 11.

(1)

Self-defense (Art. 11, par. 1);

(2)

Defense of relatives (Art. 11, par. 2);

(3)

Defense of stranger (Art. 11, par. 3);

(4)

State of necessity (Art. 11, par. 4);

(5)

Performance of duty (Art. 11, par. 5);

(6)

Obedience to order of superior (Art. 11, par. 6);

(7)

Minority above 15 but below 18 years of age (R.A. No. 9344);

(8)

Causing injury by mere accident (Art. 12, par. 4); and

(9)

Uncontrollable fear. (Art. 12, par. 6)

Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 12 cannot give place to mitigation,
because, as stated by the Supreme Court of Spain, the mental
268

Article 13, paragraph 1, applies only when unlawful aggression
is present, but the other two requisites are not present. (Guevara)
When two of the three requisites mentioned therein are present
(for example, unlawful aggression and any one of the other two), the
case must not be considered as one in which an ordinary or generic
mitigating circumstance is present. Instead, it should be considered
a privileged mitigating circumstance referred to in Article 69 of this
Code.
Thus, if in self-defense there was unlawful aggression on the
part of the deceased, the means employed to prevent or repel it was
reasonable, but the one malting a defense gave sufficient provocation,
he is entitled to a privileged mitigating circumstance, because the
majority of the conditions required to justify the act is present. (Art.
69) Also, if in the defense of a relative there was unlawful aggression
269

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art .13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
on the part of the deceased, but the one defending the relative used
unreasonable means to prevent or repel it, he is entitled to a privileged
mitigating circumstance.

person, her home, and her children. (U.S. v. Rivera, 41 Phil. 472,
473-474)

When there is unlawful aggression on the part of the deceased
without sufficient provocation by the defendant, but the latter uses
means not reasonably necessary, for after having snatched the rope
from the deceased, he should not have wound it around her neck and
tightened it.

Example of incomplete self-defense:

Held: There is incomplete self-defense on the part of the
defendant, which may be considered a privileged mitigating
circumstance. (People v. Martin, 89 Phil. 18, 24)

The accused is entitled to only incomplete self-defense.
The deceased was in a state of drunkenness, so he was not as
dangerous as he would if he had been sober. His aim proved
faulty and easily evaded as shown by the fact that the person
defending was not hit by the stab attempts-blows directed
against him. The necessity of the means used to repel the
aggression is not clearly reasonable. (People v. De Jesus, No.
L-58506, November 19, 1982, 118 SCRA 616, 627)

But if there is no unlawful aggression, there could be no selfdefense or defense of a relative, whether complete or incomplete.

Example of incomplete defense of relative:
The deceased hit the first cousin of the accused with the
butt of a shotgun. The deceased also pointed the shotgun at
the first cousin, took a bullet from his jacket pocket, showed it
to him and asked him, "Do you like this, Dong?" to which the
latter replied, "No, Noy, I do not like that." The deceased then
placed the bullet in the shotgun and was thus pointing it at the
first cousin when the accused came from behind the deceased
and stabbed him. There was unlawful aggression on the part
of the deceased and there was no provocation on the part of
the accused. However, because of a running feud between the
deceased and his brother on one side and the accused and his
brother on the other side, the accused could not have been
impelled by pure compassion or beneficence or the lawful desire
to avenge the immediate wrong inflicted on his cousin. He was
motivated by revenge, resentment or evil motive. He is only
entitled to the privileged mitigating circumstance of incomplete
defense of relative. (People v. Taring, G.R. No. 56358, October
26, 1990, 191 SCRA 38, 45-48)

Incomplete self-defense, when ordinary mitigating and when
privileged mitigating.
When wtlawful aggression (by the victim) alone is proved, such
incomplete self-defense is to be appreciated as an ordinary mitigating
circumstance under Article 13, paragraph 1 of the Revised Penal
Code. When it is combined with another element of self-defense, such
incomplete self-defense becomes a privileged mitigating circumstance
under Article 69 of the same Code. (De Luna v. CA, 244 SCRA 762763)
Example of incomplete defense:
The deceased was about to set on fire the house of the
accused, where she was sleeping together with her two children.
They grappled and the accused boloed to death the deceased.
There was unlawful aggression consisting in trying to set on
fire the house of the accused. There was the element of danger
to the occupants of the house. But having already driven the
aggressor out of the house, who was prostrate on the ground,
the accused should not have persisted in wounding her no less
than 14 times. There is, therefore, absence ofone circumstance
to justify the act - reasonable necessity of killing the aggressor.
The accused was entitled to a privileged mitigating circumstance
of incomplete defense. Here, the accused acted in defense of her
270

2.

Incomplete justifying circumstance of avoidance of greater evil
or injury.
Avoidance of greater evil or injury is a justifying
circumstance if all the three requisites mentioned in paragraph
4 of Article 11 are present. But if any of the last two requisites
is absent, there is only a mitigating circumstance.
271

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
3.

Incomplete justifying circumstance ofperformance of duty.

"For all the foregoing, the judgment is modified and
appellants are hereby declared guilty of murder with the
mitigating circumstance above-mentioned, and accordingly
sentenced to an indeterminate penalty of from five (5) years of
prision correccional to fifteen (d5) years of reclusion temporal,
with the accessories of the law, and to pay the heirs of the
deceased Serapio Tecson, jointly and severally, an indemnity
of P2,000, with costs."

As has been discussed under Article 11, there are two
requisites that must be present in order that the circumstance
in Article 11, No. 5, may be taken as a justifying one, namely:
a.

That the accused acted in the performance of a duty or in
the lawful exercise of a right or office; and

b.

That the injury caused or offense committed be the
necessary consequence of the due performance of such duty
or the lawful exercise of such right or office.

Since the Supreme Court considered one of the two
requisites as constituting the majority, it seems that there is no
ordinary mitigating circumstance under Article 13, paragraph
l, when the justifying or exempting circumstance has two
requisites only.

In the case of People v. Oanis, supra, where only one of the
requisites of circumstance No. 5 of Article 11 was present, Article 69
was applied. The Supreme Court said
"As the deceased was killed while asleep, the crime
committed is murder with the qualifying circumstance of
alevosia. There is, however, a mitigating circumstance of
weight consisting in the incomplete justifying circumstance
defined in Article l1, No. 5, of the R.P.C. According to such legal
provision, a person incurs no criminal liability when he acts in
the fulfillment of a duty or in the lawful exercise of a right or
office. There are two requisites in order that the circumstance
may be taken as a justifying one: (a) that the accused acted in
the performance of a duty or in the lawful exercise of a right or
office; and (b) that the injury caused or offense committed be the
necessary consequence of the due performance of such duty or
the lawful exercise of such right or office. In the instant case,
only the first requisite is present
appellants have acted in
the performance of a duty. The second requisite is wanting for
the crime committed by them is not the necessary consequence
of a due performance of their duty. Their duty was to arrest
Balagtas, or to get him dead or alive if resistance is offered
by him and they are overpowered. But through impatience or
over anxiety or in their desire to take no chances, they have
exceeded in the fulfillment of such duty by killing the person
whom they believed to be Balagtas without any resistance from
him and without making any previous inquiry as to his identity.
According to Article 69 of the R.P.C., the penalty lower by one
or two degrees than that prescribed by law shall, in such case,
be imposed.
272

4.

Incomplete justifying circumstance of obedience to an order.
Roleda fired at Pilones, following the order of Sergeant
Benting, Roleda's superior. It appears that on their way to the
camp, Roleda learned that Pilones had killed not only a barrio
lieutenant but also a member of the military police, and th.is
may have aroused in Roleda a feeling of resentment that may
have impelled him to readily and without questioning follow
the order of Sgt. Benting. To this may be added the fact of h.is
being a subordinate of Sgt. Benting who gave the order, and
while out on patrol when the soldiers were supposed to be under
the immediate command and control of the patrol leader, Sgt.
Benting. (People v. Bernal, et al., 91 Phil. 619)

When all the requisites necessary to exempt from criminal liability

are not attendant.
1.

Incomplete exempting circumstance ofminority over 15 and under
18 years of age.
To be exempt from criminal liability under R.A. No. 9344,
two conditions must be present:
a.

That the offender is over 15 and under 18 years old; and

b.

That he does not act with discernment.

Therefore, if the minor over 15 and under 18 years of
age acted with discernment, he is entitled only to a mitigating
273

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 13

circumstance, because not all the requisites necessary to exempt
from criminal liability are present.
The case of such minor is specifically covered by R.A. No.
9344 (The Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of2006), as amended
by R.A. No. 10630.
2.

Incomplete exempting circumstance of accident.
Under paragraph 4 of Article 12, there are four requisites
that must be present in order to exempt one from criminal
liability, namely:
a.

A person is performing a lawful act;

b.

With due care;

c.

He causes an injury to another by mere accident; and

d.

Without fault or intention of causing it.

If the second requisite and the lst part of the fourth
requisite are absent, the case will fall under Article 365 which
punishes a felony by negligence or imprudence.
In effect, there is a mitigating circumstance, because the
penalty is lower than that provided for intentional felony.
If the first requisite and the 2nd part of the fourth requisite
are absent, because the person committed an unlawful act and
had the intention of causing the injury, it will be an intentional
felony. The 2nd and 3rd requisites will not be present either.
In this case, there is not even a mitigating circumstance.
3.

Incomplete exempting circumstance of uncontrollable fear.
Under paragraph 6 of Article 12, uncontrollable fear is an
exempting circumstance if the following requisites are present:
a.

That the threat which caused the fear was of an evil greater
than, or at least equal to, that which he was required to
commit;

b.

That it promised an evil of such gravity and imminence
that an ordinary person would have succumbed to it
(uncontrollable).
274

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art . 13

Ifonly one ofthese requisites is present, there is only a mitigating
circumstance.
Illustration:
People v. Magpantay
(C.A., 46 O.G. 1655)
Facts: In the night of May 8, 1947, Felix and Pedro took turns to guard,
so that when one was asleep the other was awake. At about 9:00 p.m. when
Pedro was asleep, the silhouette of a man passed in front of their house
without any light. The night was dark and it was drizzling. The coconut trees
and the bushes on the sides of the road increased the darkness. When Felix
saw the silhouette, he asked it who it was, but it walked hurriedly, which
made Felix suspicious as it might be a scouting guard of the Dilim gang. Felix
fired into the air, yet the figure continued its way.
When Pedro heard the shot, he suddenly grabbed the rifle at his side
and fired at the figure on the road, causing the death of the man. This man
was afterward found to be Pedro Pinion, who was returning home unarmed
after fishing in a river.
'The accused voluntarily surrendered to the barrio-lieutenant and then
to the chief of police.

Held: The accused acted under the influence of the fear of being
attacked. Having already in his mind the idea that they might be raided at
any moment by the Dilim gang and suddenly awakened by the shot fired by
Felix, he grabbed his gun and fired before he could be fired upon. The fear,
however, was not entirely uncontrollable, for had he not been so hasty and
had he stopped a few seconds to think, he would have ascertained that there
was no imminent danger.
He is entitled to the mitigating circumstance of grave fear, not entirely
uncontrollable, under paragraph 1 of Article 13 in connection with paragraph
6 of Article 12 of the R.P.C. 'That said two provisions may be taken together
to constitute a mitigating circumstance has been declared by the Supreme
Court of Spain in its decision of February 24, 1897 and by Groizard. (Codigo
Penal, Vol. I, pp. 370-372, Third Edition)
Consequently, there are two marked mitigating circumstances in
favor of the accused. Art icle 64, in paragraph 6, of the R.P.C. provides that:
"When there are two or more mitigating circumstances and no aggravating
circumstances arc present, the court shall impose the penalty next lower to
that prescribed by law, in the period that it may deem applicable, according
to the number and nature of such circumstances." The penalty for homicide
is reclusion temporal. The next lower penalty is prision mayor, which may
275

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

be imposed in the period that the court may deem applicable according to
the number and nature of such circumstance.

In view ofthe foregoing, this Court finds the accused Pedro Magpantay
guilty of homicide, with two very marked mitigating circumstances, and
modifies the judgment appealed from by imposing upon him the penalty of
from six months and one day ofprision correccional to six years and one day
of prision mayor.

With due respect, it is believed that Article 69, in connection
with paragraph 6 of Article 12, not Article 13, paragraph 1, in relation
to paragraph 6 of Article 12, should be applied.
When it considered grave fear, not entirely uncontrollable, as
ordinary mitigating circumstance under Article 13, paragraph 1,
together with voluntary surrender, and applied Article 64, the Court
ofAppeals should have fixed the maximum term of the indeterminate
penalty (prision mayor) in its medium period. The two mitigating
circumstances having been considered already for the purpose
of lowering the penalty for homicide by one degree, pursuant to
paragraph 5 of Article 64, there is no mitigating circumstance that
will justify the imposition ofprision mayor in its minimum period.
Had Article 69 in connection with paragraph 6 of Article 12
been applied, the penalty imposed would have a correct basis. Under
Article 69, the penalty one or two degrees lower than that provided
for the offense may be imposed. The mitigating circumstance of
voluntary surrender need not be considered in lowering the penalty
by one degree. Therefore, the voluntary surrender of the accused,
which is a generic mitigating circumstance, may be considered for
the purpose of fixing prision mayor in its minimum period. (Art. 64,
par. 2)
Par. 2.- That the offender is under eighteen years of age or
over seventy years. In the case ofthe minor, he shall be
proceeded against in accordance with the provisions
ofArticle 80.
Paragraph 2, Article 13 of the R.P.C. impliedly repealed by Republic
Act No. 9344.
Paragraph 2, Article 13 of the R.P.C. providing that offender
under 18 years of age is entitled to a mitigating circumstance of
276

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

minority is deemed repealed by R.A. No. 9344 which declares that a
child above l years old but below 18 years old shall be exempt from
criminal liability unless he/she has acted with discernment. (Sec. 6,
R.A. No. 9344)
In other words, whereas before, an offender 15 or over but under
18 years of age is entitled only to the benefits provided under Article
68 of the R.P.C., under R.A. No. 9344 or the "Juvenile Justice and
Welfare Act of 2006," such offender may be exempt from criminal
liability if he/she acted without discernment.
On the other hand, if such offender acted with discernment,
such child in conflict with the law shall undergo diversion programs
provided under Chapter 2 of R.A. No. 9344.
Meaning of Diversion and Diversion Program under Republic Act
No. 9344
"Diversion" refers to an alternative, child-appropriate process
of determining the responsibility and treatment of a child in conflict
with the law on the basis of his/her social, cultural, economic,
psychological, or educational background without resulting to formal
court proceedings. (Sec. 4ljl, R.A. No. 9344)
"Diversion Program" refers to the program that the child
in conflict with the law is required to undergo after he/she is
found responsible for an offense without resorting to formal court
proceedings. (Sec. 4[j), R.A. No. 9344)
System of Diversion.
Children in conflict with the law shall undergo diversion
programs without undergoing court proceedings subject to the
following conditions:
(a) Where the imposable penalty for the crime committed is
not more than six years imprisonment, the law enforcement office
or Punong Barangay with the assistance of the local social welfare
and development officer or other members of the Local Councils for
the Protection of Children (LCPC) established in all levels of local
government pursuant to R.A. No. 9344, shall conduct mediation,
family conferencing and conciliation and, where appropriate, adopt
277

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

indigenous modes of conflict resolution in accordance with the best
interest of the child with a view to accomplishing the objectives of
restorative justice and the formulation of a diversion program. The
child and his/her family shall be present in these activities.

The child shall present himself/herself to the competent
authorities that imposed the diversion program at least once a
month for reporting and evaluation of the effectiveness of the
program.

(b) In victimless crimes where the imposable penalty is not
more than six years of imprisonment, the local social welfare and
development officer shall meet with the child and his/her parents
or guardians for the development of the appropriate diversion and
rehabilitation program, in coordination with the Barangay Council
for the Protection of Children (BCPC) created pursuant to R.A. No.
9344.

Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the contract
of diversion, as certified by the local social welfare and development
officer, shall give the offended party the option to institute the
appropriate legal action.
The period of prescription of the offense shall be suspended
during the effectivity of the diversion program, but not exceeding a
period of two years. (Sec. 26, R.A. No. 9344)

(c) Where the imposable penalty for the crime committed
exceeds six years imprisonment, diversion measures may be resorted
to only by the court. (Sec. 23, R.A. No. 9344)

Where diversion may be conducted.

Conferencing, Mediation and Conciliation.

Diversion may be conducted at the Katarungang Pambarangay,
the police investigation or the inquest or preliminary investigation
stage and at all levels and phases of the proceedings including judicial
level. (Sec. 24, R.A. No. 9344)

A child in conflict with the law may undergo conferencing,
mediation or conciliation outside the criminal justice system or
prior to his entry into said system. A contract of diversion may be
entered into during such conferencing, mediation or conciliation
proceedings. (Sec. 25, R.A. No. 9344)
Contract of Diversion.

If during the conferencing, mediation or conciliation, the
child voluntarily admits the commission of the act, a diversion
program shall be developed when appropriate and desirable as
determined under Section 30. Such admission shall not be used
against the child in any subsequent judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative proceedings. The diversion program shall be
effective and binding if accepted by the parties concerned. The
acceptance shall be in writing and signed by the parties concerned
and the appropriate authorities. The local social welfare and
development officer shall supervise the implementation of the
diversion program. The diversion proceedings shall be completed
within 45 days. The period of prescription of the offense shall be
suspended until the completion of the diversion proceedings but
not to exceed 45 days.
278

Duty of the Punong Baran gay or the Law Enforcement Officer when
there is no diversion.

If the offense does not fall under the category where the
imposable penalty for the crime committed is not more than six years
of imprisonment or in cases of victimless crimes where the imposable
penalty is also not more than six years imprisonment, or if the
child, his/her parents or guardians does not consent to a diversion,
the Punong Barangay handling the case shall, within three days
from determination of the absence of jurisdiction over the case or
termination of the diversion proceeding as the case may be, forward
the records of the case to the law enforcement officer, prosecutor or
the appropriate court, as the case may be. (Sec. 27, R.A. No. 9344)
In case a Law Enforcement Officer is the one handling the
case, within same period, the Law Enforcement Officer shall forward
the records of the case to the prosecutor or judge concerned for the
conduct of inquest and/or preliminary investigation. The document
transmitting said records shall display the word "CHILD" in bold
letters. (Sec. 28, R.A. No. 9344)
279

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Criminal Law

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability
That the offender Is over 70 years of age Is only a generic mitigating
circumstance.
While paragraph 2 of Article 13 covers offenders under 18 years
of age and those over 70 years, Article 68, providing for privileged
mitigating circumstances, does not include the case of offenders over
70 years old.
Prior to the enactment of R.A. No. 9346 prohibiting the
imposition of the death penalty, there were two cases where the fact
that the offender is over 70 years of age had the effect of a privileged
mitigating circumstance, namely: (1) when he committed an offense
punishable by death, that penalty shall not be imposed (Art. 47, par.
1) and (2) when the death sentence is already imposed, it shall be
suspended and commuted. (Art. 83)

the means employed to execute the criminal act and its consequences.
(U.S. ». Reyes, 36 Phil. 904, 907)
Illustrations:
1.

The husband who was quarreling with his wife punched her
in the abdomen, causing the rupture of her hypertrophied
spleen, from which she died. (People v. Rabao, 67 Phil. 255,
257,259)

2.

The accused confined himself to giving a single blow with
a bolo on the right arm of the victim and did not repeat
the blow. The death of the victim was due to neglect and
the lack of medical treatment, h.is death having resulted
from hemorrhage which those who attended to him did
not know how to stop or control in time. (U.S. v. Bertucio,
1 Phil. 47, 49)

3.

The accused, a policeman, boxed the deceased, a detention
prisoner, inside the jail. As a consequence ofthe fistic blows,
the deceased collapsed on the floor. The accused stepped
on the prostrate body and left. After a while, he returned
with a bottle, poured its contents on the recumbent body
of the deceased, ignited it with a match and left the cell
again. As a consequence, the victim later on died.

In any of the above-mentioned two cases, the penalty of death
will have to be lowered to life imprisonment (reclusion perpetua).
The mitigating circumstance of old age applies only when offender
is over 70 years old at the time of the commission of the offense.
The mitigating circumstance of old age under Article 13(2) of
the Revised Penal Code applies only when the offender was over 70
years at the time of the commission of the offense. The petitioner,
being only 63 years old when he committed the offenses charged,
was not entitled to such mitigating circumstance. (Reyes v. People,
G.R. No. 177105, August 12, 2010)
Basis of paragraph 2.

Held: The accused is entitled to the mitigating
circumstance of "no intention to commit so grave a wrong
as that committed." (People v. Ural, No. L-30801, March
27, 1974, 56 SCRA 138, 140-141, 146)

The mitigating circumstances in paragraph 2 of Article 13 are
based on the diminution of intelligence, a condition of voluntariness.

Intention, being an Internal state, must be judged by external
acts.

Par. 3.-- That the offender had no intention to commit so grave
a wrong as that committed.

The intention, as an internal act, is judged not only by the
proportion of the means employed by him to the evil produced by his
act, but also by the fact that the blow was or was not aimed at a vital
part of the body.

Rule for the application of this paragraph.
This circumstance can be taken into account only when the facts
proven show that there is a notable and evident disproportion between
280

(1) It may be deduced from the proven facts that the accused
had no intent to kill the victim, his design being only to maltreat
him, such that when he realized the fearful consequences of his
felonious act, he allowed the victim to secure medical treatment at
281

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

the municipal dispensary. (People v. Ural, No. L-30801, March 27,
1974, 56 SCRA 138, 146)

The weapon used, the part of the body injured, the injury inflicted,
and the manner it is inflicted may show that the accused intended
the wrong committed.

Art. 13

(2) Where the accused fired a loaded revolver at the deceased
and killed him, it must be presumed, taking into consideration
the means employed as being sufficient to produce the evil which
resulted, that he intended the natural consequence of his act and he
is, therefore, not entitled to the benefit of the mitigating circumstance
of lack of intention to commit a wrong as that committed. (U.S. v.
Fitzgerald, 2 Phil. 419, 422)
(3) Where at the time of the commission of the crime, the
accused was 32 years of age, while his victim was 25 years his senior,
and when the latter resisted his attempt to rape her by biting and
scratching him, to subdue her, the accused boxed her and then held
her on the neck and pressed it down, while she was lying on her
back and he was on top of her, these acts were reasonably sufficient
to produce the result that they actually produced - the death of the
victim. (People v. Amit, No. L-29066, March 25, 1970, 32 SCRA 95,
98)
(4) When the assailant, armed with a bolo, inflicted upon
his victim a serious and fatal wound in the abdomen, it is not to
be believed that he had no intention of killing his victim, having
clearly shown, by the location of the wound, that he had a definite
and perverse intention of producing the injury which resulted. (U.S.
• Menda, 31 Phil. 240, 244-245)
(5) Where defendant alleged as mitigating circumstance that
he did not intend to commit so grave an injury, the Court held that
the plea is groundless; he used a knife, six inches long. The fatal
injury was the natural and almost inevitable consequence. Moreover,
he attempted to stab a second time but was prevented from doing so.
(People v. Orongan, et al., 58 Phil. 426, 429)
(6) The accused cannot argue now that he had not intended
to commit so grave a wrong as the actual killing of the deceased as
he knew, or should have known, that the karate chops on the nape of
the neck would have a lethal effect upon the defenseless and drunken
victim. (People v. Centeno, L-33284, April 20, 1989)

1.

Intention must be judged by considering the weapon used,
the injury inflicted, and his attitude of the mind when the
accused attacked the deceased. Thus, when the accused
used a heavy club in attacking the deceased whom he
followed some distance, without giving him an opportunity
to defend himself, it is to be believed that he intended to do
exactly what he did and must be held responsible for the
result, without the benefit of this mitigating circumstance.
(People v. Flores, 50 Phil. 548, 551)

2.

When a person stabs another with a lethal weapon such
as a fan knife (and the same could be said of the butt of a
rifle), upon a part of the body, for example, the head, chest,
or stomach, death could reasonably be anticipated and the
accused must be presumed to have intended the natural
consequence of his wrongful act. (People v. Reyes, 61 Phil.
341, 343)

3.

The weapon used, the force of the blow, the spot where the
blow was directed and landed, and the cold blood in which
it was inflicted, all tend to negative any notion that the
plan was anything less than to finish the intended victim.
The accused in this case struck the victim with a hammer
on the right forehead. (People • Banlos, G.R. No. L-3412,
December 29, 1950)

4.

As to the alleged lack of intent to commit so grave a wrong
as that committed, the same cannot be appreciated. The
clear intention of the accused to kill the deceased may be
inferred from the fact that he used a deadly weapon and
fired at the deceased almost point blank, thereby hitting
him in the abdomen and causing death. (People v. Reyes,
No. L-33154, February 27, 1976, 69 SCRA 474, 482)

5.

Where the evidence shows that, if not all the persons who
attacked the deceased, at least some of them, intended
to cause his death by throwing at him stones of such size
and weight as to cause, as in fact they caused, a fracture of
his skull, and as the act of one or some of them is deemed
283

282

Art. 13

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability
to be the act of the others there being sufficient proof of
conspiracy, the mitigating circumstance of lack of intent
to commit so grave a wrong as the one actually committed
cannot favorably be considered. (People v. Bautista, Nos.
L-23303-04, May 20, 1969, 28 SCRA 184, 190-191; People
v. Espejo, No. L-27708, December 19, 1970, 36 SCRA 400,
424)
6.

The inflicting by the accused of five stab wounds caused
in rapid succession brings forth in bold relief the intention
of the accused to snuff out the life of the deceased, and
definitely negates any pretense oflack of intention to cause
so serious an injury. (People v. Brana, No. L-29210, October
31, 1969, 30 SCRA 307, 316)

Article 13, paragraph 3, is not applicable when the offender
employed brute force.
To prove this circumstance, the accused testified that "my only
intention was to abuse her, but when she tried to shout, I covered her
mouth and choked her and later I found out that because of that she
died." The Supreme Court said: "It is easy enough for the accused
to say that he had no intention to do great harm. But he knew the
girl was very tender in age (six years old), weak in body, helpless
and defenseless. He knew or ought to have known the natural and
inevitable result of the act of strangulation, committed by men of
superior strength, specially on an occasion when she was resisting the
onslaught upon her honor. The brute force employed by the appellant,
completely contradicts the claim that he had no intention to kill the
victim." (People v. Yu, No. L-13780, January 28, 1961, 1 SCRA 199,
204)
It is the intention ofthe offender at the moment when he is committing
the crime which is considered.
The point is raised that the trial court should have considered
the mitigating circumstance of lack of intent to commit so grave a
wrong as that committed. The argument is that the accused planned
only to rob; they never meant to kill.
Held: Article 13, paragraph 3, of the R.P.C. addresses itself to the
intention of the offender at the particular moment when he executes
284

or commits the criminal act; not to his intention during the planning
stage. Therefore, when, as in the case under review, the original plan
was only to rob, but which plan, on account of the resistance offered
by the victim, was compounded into the more serious crime ofrobbery
with homicide, the plea oflack of intention to commit so grave a wrong
cannot be rightly granted. The irrefutable fact remains that when
they ganged up on their victim, they employed deadly weapons and
inflicted on him mortal wounds in his neck. At that precise moment,
they did intend to kill their victim, and that was the moment to which
Article 13, paragraph 3, refers. (People v. Boyles, No. L-15308, May
29, 1964, 11 SCRA 88, 95-96; People v. Arpa, No. L-26789, April 25,
1969, 27 CRA 1037, 1045-1046)
Article 13, paragraph 3 of the R.P.C. "addresses itself to the
intention of the offender at the particular moment when he executes
or commits the criminal act; not to his intention during the planning
stage." Therefore, if the original plan, as alleged by the accused, was
merely to ask for forgiveness from the victim's wife who scolded them
and threatened to report them to the authorities, which led to her
killing, the plea oflack of intention to commit so grave a wrong cannot
be appreciated as a mitigating circumstance. The records show that
the accused held the victim's wife until she fell to the floor, whereupon
they strangled her by means of a piece of rope tied around her neck
till she died. The brute force employed by the accused completely
contradicts the claim that they had no intention to kill the victim.
(People v. Garachico, No. L-30849, March 29, 1982, 113 SCRA 131,
152)
Lack of Intention to commit so grave a wrong, mitigating in robbery
with homicide.
The mitigating circumstance oflack of intent to commit so grave
a wrong may be appreciated favorably in robbery with homicide, where
it has not been satisfactorily established that in forcing entrance
through the door which was then closed, with the use of pieces of wood,
the accused were aware that the deceased was behind the door and
would be hurt, and there is no clear showing that they ever desired
to kill the deceased as they sought to enter the house to retaliate
against the male occupants or commit robbery. (People v. Abueg, No.
L-54901, November 24, 1986, 145 SCRA 622, 634)
285

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Criminal Law
Appreciated in murder qualified by circumstances based on manner
of commission, not on state of mind of accused.

physical injuries on this person. The accused is guilty of
the resulting death of the victim but he is entitled to the
mitigating circumstance ofno intention to commit so grave
a wrong as that committed. (People v. Pugay, No. L-74324,
November 17, 1988, 167 SCRA 439, 449)

Facts: Several accused decided to have a foreman beaten up. The
deed was accomplished but the victim died as a result of hemorrhage.
It was not the intention of the accused to kill the victim.
Held: Murder results from the presence of qualifying circumstances (in this case with premeditation and treachery) based upon
the manner in which the crime was committed and not upon the
state of mind of the accused. The mitigating circumstance that the
offender had no intention to commit so grave a wrong as that committed is based on the state of mind of the offender. Hence, there is no
incompatibility between evident premeditation or treachery, which
refers to the manner of committing the crime, and this mitigating
circumstance. (People v. Enriquez, 58 Phil. 536, 544-545)
Not appreciated in murder qualified by treachery.

Lack of intention to commit so grave a wrong is not appreciated
where the offense committed is characterized by treachery. The five
accused claim that the weapons used are mere pieces of wood, and
the fact that only seven blows were dealt the deceased by the five of
them, only two of which turned out to be fatal, shows that the tragic
and grievous result was far from their minds. The record shows,
however, that the offense committed was characterized by treachery
and the accused left the scene of the crime only after the victim had
fallen down. Hence, the mitigating circumstance of lack of intention
cannot be appreciated in their favor. (People v. Pajenado, No. L-26458,
January 30, 1976, 69 SCRA 172, 180)
Lack of intent to kill, not mitigating In physical Injuries.

In crimes against persons who do not die as a result of the
assault, the absence of the intent to kill reduces the felony to mere
physical injuries, but it does not constitute a mitigating circumstance
under Article 13, paragraph 3.(People v. Galacgac, C.A., 54 O.G.1207)
Mitigating when the victim dies.
(1)

As part of their fun-making, the accused merely intended
to set the deceased's clothes on fire. Burning the clothes
of the victim would cause at the very least some kind of
286

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability

(2)

In this case, petitioner was committing a felony when he
boxed the victim and hit him with a bottle. Hence, the
fact that the victim was previously afflicted with a heart
ailment does not alter petitioner's liability for his death.
Nevertheless, [the Court] must appreciate as mitigating
circumstance in favor of petitioner the fact that the physical
injuries he inflicted on the victim, could not have resulted
naturally and logically, in the actual death of the victim, if
the latter's heart was in good condition. (Garcia v. People,
G.R. No. 171951, August 28, 2009)

Not applicable to felonies by negligence.

. In the case of infidelity in the custody of prisoners through
negligence (Art. 224), this circumstance was not considered. (People
v. Medina, C.A., 40 O.G. 4196)
The reason is that in felonies through negligence, the offender
acts without intent. The intent in intentional felonies is replaced by
negligence, imprudence, lack of foresight or lack of skill in culpable
felonies. Hence, in felonies through negligence, there is no intent on
the part of the offender which may be considered as diminished.
Is Article 13, paragraph 3, applicable to felonies where the intention
of the offender is immaterial?

In unintentional abortion, where the abortion that resulted
is not intended by the offender, the mitigating circumstance that
the offender had no intention to commit so grave a wrong as that
committed is not applicable. (People v. Cristobal, C.A., G.R. No. 8739,
October 31, 1942)
In another case, where the accused pulled the hair of the
complainant who was three months pregnant causing her to fall
on her buttocks on the cement floor, with the result that after
experiencing vaginal hemorrhage the foetus fell from her womb, it
was held that the accused having intended at the most to maltreat
287

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

the complainant only, the mitigating circumstance in Article 13,
paragraph 3, should be considered in his favor. (People v. Flamerio,
C.A., 58 0.G. 4060)
Unintentional abortion is committed by any person who, by
violence, shall cause the killing of the foetus in the uterus or the
violent expulsion of the foetus from the maternal womb, causing its
death, but unintentionally. (Art. 257)
Applicable only to offenses resulting In physical injuries or material
harm.

Thus, the mitigating circumstance that the offender did not
intend to commit so grave a wrong as that committed was not
appreciated in cases of defamation or slander. (People v. Galang de
Bautista, C.A., 40 O.G. 4473)
Applied in malversation of public funds

Petitioner is entitled to the mitigating circumstance of no
intention to commit so grave a wrong.
The records bear out that petitioner misappropriated the
missing funds under his custody and control because he was
impelled by the genuine love for his brother and his family. Per his
admission, petitioner used part of the funds to pay off a debt owed
by his brother. Another portion of the misappropriated funds went
to his medications for his debilitating diabetes.
Further, as shown earlier, petitioner restituted all but P8,000.00
of the funds in less than one month and a half and said small balance
in three months from receipt of demand ofCOA on January 5, 1999.
Evidently, there was no intention to commit so grave a wrong. (Perez
v. People, G.R. No. 164763, February 12, 2008)
Basis of paragraph 3.

In this circumstance, intent, an element of voluntariness in
intentional felony, is diminished.

Par. 4.- That sufficient provocation or threat on the part ofthe
offended party immediately preceded the act.
288

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Crimin al Liability

Art. 13

What Is provocation?

By provocation is understood as any unjust or improper conduct
or act of the offended party, capable of exciting, inciting, or irritating
any one.
Requisites:
1.

That the provocation must be sufficient;

2.

That it must originate from the offended party; and

3.

That the provocation must be immediate to the act, i.e.,to
the commission of the crime by the person who is provoked.

The provocation must be sufficient

Provocation in order to be mitigating must be sufficient and
immecliately preceding the act. (People v. Pagal, No. L-32040, October
25, 1977, 79 SCRA 570, 575-576)
The word "sufficient" means adequate to excite a person to
commit the wrong and must accordingly be proportionate to its
gravity. (People • Nabora, 73 Phil. 434, 435)
As to whether a provocation is sufficient depends upon the
act constituting the provocation, the social standing of the person
provoked, the place and the time when the provocation is made.
Examples of sufficient provocation:
1.

The accused was a foreman in charge of the preservation
of order and for which purpose he provided himself with a
pick handle. The deceased, one of the laborers in the line to
receive their wages, left his place and forced his way into
the file. The accused ordered him out, but he persisted, and
the accused gave him a blow with the stick on the right
side of the head above the ear.
Held: When the aggression is in retaliation for an
insult, injury, or threat, the offender cannot successfully
claim self-defense, but at most, he can be given the benefit
of the mitigating circumstance under the provisions of
paragraph 4 of Article 13. ( U.S. v. Carrero, 9 Phil. 544,
545-546)
289

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability
2.

When the deceased abused and ill-treated the accused by
k.icking and cursing the latter, the accused who killed him
committed the crime with this mitigating circumstance.
(U.S. v. Firm0, 37 Phil. 133, 135)

3.

When in his house, the accused saw an unknown person
jump out of the window and his wife begged for his pardon
on her knees, he killed her. Such conduct on the part of
his wife constitutes a sufficient provocation to the accused.
(People v. Marquez, 53 Phil. 260, 262-263)

4.

7.

The victim's act of kicking the accused on the chest prior
to the stabbing does not constitute unlawful aggression
for purposes of self-defense, but the act may be considered
as sufficient provocation on the victim's part, a mitigating
circumstance that may be considered in favor of the
accused. (People v. Macariola, No. L-40757, January 24,
1983, 120 SCRA 92, 102)

8.

Thrusting his bolo at petitioner, threatening to kill him,
and hacking the bamboo walls of his house are, in our
view, sufficient provocation to enrage any man, or stir
his rage and obfuscate his thinking, more so when the
lives of his wife and children are in danger. Petitioner
stabbed the victim as a result of those provocations, and
while petitioner was still in a fit of rage. In our view,
there was sufficient provocation and the circumstance of
passion or obfuscation attended the commission of the
offense. (Romera v. People, G.R. No. 151978, July 14,
2004)

Although there was no unlawful aggression, because the
challenge was accepted by the accused, and therefore there
was no self-defense, there was however the mitigating
circumstance of immediate provocation. In this case, the
deceased insulted the accused and then challenged the
latter. (U.S. v. Cortes, 36 Phil. 837)
When the defendant sought the deceased, the challenge to
fight by the latter is not provocation.
Thus, if the defendant appeared in front of the house
of the deceased, after they had been separated by other
persons who prevented a fight between them, even if the
deceased challenged him to a fight upon seeing him near
his house, the defendant cannot be given the benefit of the
mitigating circumstance of provocation, because when the
defendant sought the deceased, the former was ready and
willing to fight. (U.S. w. Mendac, 31 Phil. 240)

5.

There was sufficient provocation on the part of the victim
where the latter hit the accused on the eye with his fist
before the fight. (People v. Manansala, Jr., 31 SCRA 401)

6.

The deceased, while intoxicated, found the accused lying
down without having prepared the evening meal. This
angered the deceased and he abused the accused by
kicking and cursing him. A struggle followed and the
accused stabbed him with a pen-knife. The accused was
entitled to the mitigating circumstance that sufficient
provocation or threat immediately preceded the act. (U.S.
v. Firm0, 37 Phil. 133)
290

Provocation held not sufficient.
(a)

When the injured party asked the accused for an
explanation for the latter's derogatory remarks against
certain ladies, the accused cannot properly claim that he
was provoked to kill. (People v. Laude, 58 Phil. 933)

(b)

While the accused was taking a walk at the New Luneta
one evening, the deceased met him and pointing his
finger at the accused, asked the latter what he was doing
there and then said: "Don't you know we are watching for
honeymooners here?" The accused drew out his knife and
stabbed the deceased who died as a consequence.
Held: The provocation made by the deceased was not
sufficient. (People v. Nabora, 73 Phil. 434)

(e)

The fact that the deceased (a public officer) had ordered
the arrest of the accused for misdemeanor is not such a
provocation within the meaning of this paragraph that
will be considered in mitigation of the penalty for the
crime of homicide committed by the accused who killed
291

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

the officer giving such order. (U.S. v. Abijan, I Phil. 83)
The performance of a duty is not a source of provocation.
(d)

Assuming for the sake of argument that the blowing of
horns, cutting of lanes or overtaking can be considered
as acts of provocation, the same were not sufficient. The
word "sufficient" means adequate to excite a person to
commit a wrong and must accordingly be proportionate to
its gravity. Moreover, the deceased's act of asking for an
explanation from the accused was not sufficient provocation
for him to claim that he was provoked to kill or injure
the deceased. (People v. Court of Appeals, et al., G.R. No.
103613, February 23, 2001)

Art. 13

of the person defending himself; while as a mitigating circumstance,
it pertains to its presence on the part of the offended party. (People
v. Court of Appeals, et al., G.R. No. 103613, February 23, 2001)
The provocation by the deceased in the first stage of the fight is not a
mitigating circumstance when the accused killed him after he had fled.
The provocation given by the deceased at the commencement
of the fight is not a mitigating circumstance, where the deceased ran
away and the accused killed him while fleeing, because the deceased
from the moment he fled did not give any provocation for the accused
to pursue and to attack him. (People v. Alconga, 78 Phil. 366, 370)
Provocation must be immediate to the commission of the crime.

Provocation must originate from the offended party.

Where the alleged provocation did not come from the deceased
but from the latter's mother, the same may not be appreciated in favor
of the accused. (People v. Reyes, No. L-33154, February 27, 1976, 69
SCRA 474, 481)
A and B were together. A hit C on the head with a piece of
stone from his sling-shot and ran away. As he could not overtake A,
C faced B and assaulted the latter. In this case, C is not entitled lo
this mitigating circumstance, because B never gave the provocation
or took part in it.
The reason for the requirement is that the law says that the
provocation is "on the part of the offended party."
If during the fight between the accused and another person who
provoked the affair, the deceased merely approached to separate
them and did not give the accused any reason for attacking him, and
in attacking the other person the accused killed the deceased, the
provocation given by the other person cannot be taken as a mitigating
circumstance. (U.S. v. Malabanan, 9 Phil. 262, 264)
Difference between sufficient provocation as requisite of Incomplete
self-defense and as a mitigating circumstance.

Sufficient provocation as a requisite of incomplete self-defense
is different from sufficient provocation as a mitigating circumstance.
As an element of self-defense, it pertains to its absence on the part

Between the provocation by the offended party and the
commission of the crime by the person provoked, there should not be
any interval of time.
The reason for this requirement is that the law states that the
provocation "immediately preceded the act." When there is an interval
of time between the provocation and the commission of the crime, the
conduct of the offended party could not have excited the accused to
the commission of the crime, he having had time to regain his reason
and to exercise self-control.
Provocation given by an adversary at the commencement and
during the first stage of a fight cannot be considered as mitigating
where the accused pursued and killed the former while fleeing, and
the deceased, from the moment he had fled after the first stage of
the fight to the moment he died, did not give any provocation for the
accused to pursue, much less further attack him. (People v. Tan, No.
L-22697, October 5, 1976, 73 SCRA 288, 294)
The provocation did not immediately precede the shooting.
The accused had almost a day to mull over the alleged provocation
before he reacted by shooting the victim. The inevitable conclusion
is that he did not feel sufficiently provoked at the time the alleged
provocation was made, and when he shot the victim the next day,
it was a deliberate act of vengeance and not the natural reaction of
a human being to immediately retaliate when provoked. (People v.
Benito, No. L-32042, February 13, 1975, 62 SCRA 351, 357)
293

292

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

But see the case of People v. Deguia, et al., G.R. No. L-3731,
April 20, 1951, where one of the accused, after the provocation by
the deceased consisting in accusing him of having stolen two jack
fruits from his tree and summarily taking them from the sled of the
accused, went home and later returned fully armed and killed the
deceased. Yet, it was held that the provocation should be considered
in favor of the accused.
There seems to he a misapplication of the rule in this case. This
ruling would be correct if the accusation that the accused stole the
jackfruits be considered as a grave offense instead of provocation,
because an interval of time between the grave offense and the
commission of the crime is allowed in such a case.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Requisites:
1.

That there be a grave offense done to the one committing
the felony, his spouse, ascendants, descendants, legitimate,
natural or adopted brothers or sisters, or relatives by
affinity within the same degrees;

2.

That the felony is committed in vindication of such grave
offense. A lapse of time is allowed between the vindication
and the doing of the grave offense.

Illustrations:
1.

Being accused by the victim that the accused stole
the farmer's rooster which made the latter feel deeply
embarrassed, and the encounter took place in about half
an hour's time. (People v. Pongol, C.A., 66 0.G. 5617, citing
People v. Libria, 95 Phil. 398)

2.

Stabbing to death the son of the accused which most
naturally and logically must have enraged and obfuscated
him that, seized by that feeling of hatred and rancour, he
stabbed indiscriminately the people around. (People v.
Doniego, No. L-17321, November 29, 1963, 9 SCRA 541,
546, 547)

Threat immediately preceded the act.
Thus, if A was threatened by B with bodily harm and because
of the threat, A immediately attacked and injured B, there was a
mitigating circumstance of threat immediately preceding the act.
The threat should not be offensive and positively strong, because,
if it is, the threat to inflict real injury is an unlawful aggression which
may give rise to self-defense. (U.S. v. Guys@yco, 13 Phil. 292, 295-296)
Vague threats not sufficient.
The victim's mere utterance, "If you do not agree, beware,"
without further proof that he was bent upon translating his vague
threats into immediate action, is not sufficient.
But where the victims shouted at the accused, "Follow us ifyou
dare and we will kill you," there is sufficient threat.
Basis of paragraph 4.
The mitigating circumstance in paragraph 4 of Article 13 is
based on the climinution of intelligence and intent.
Par. 5.- That the act was committed in the immediate
vindication ofa grave offense to the one committing the
felony (delito), his spouse, ascendants, descendants,
legitimate, natural or adopted brothers or sisters, or
relatives by affinity within the same degrees.
294

Art.13

Applies to grave offense committed against surviving spouse of
deceased relative.
The relationship by affinity created between the surviving
spouse and the blood relatives of the deceased spouse survives the
death of either party to the marriage which created the affinity.
(Intestate Estate ofManolita Gonzales Vda. de Carungcong v. People,
G.R. No. 181409, February 11, 2010)
Thus, if A (the surviving husband of B) was killed by C,
B's brothers would be entitled to the mitigating circumstance of
vindication of grave offense if they cause serious physical injuries to
C immediately after learning of A's death.
A lapse of time is allowed between the grave offense and the
vindication.
The word "immediate" used in the English text is not the correct
translation. The Spanish text uses "proxima." 'The fact that the
295

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

accused was slapped by the deceased in the presence of many persons
a few hours before the former killed the latter, was considered a
mitigating circumstance that the act was committed in the immediate
vindication of a grave offense. Although the grave offense (slapping
of the accused by the deceased), which engendered perturbation of
mind, was not so immediate, it was held that the influence thereof,
by reason of its gravity and the circumstances under which it was
inflicted, lasted until the moment the crime was committed. (People
v. Parana, 64 Phil. 331, 337)
In the case of People v. Babor, G.R. No. 106875, September
24, 1996, appellant was credited with the mitigating circumstance
of having acted in the immediate vindication of a grave offense
committed by the deceased against his wife, consisting of a libidinous
attempt against her virtue and a cowardly attack against her person.
Parenthetically, while the law speaks of an "immediate" vindication of
a grave offense, the same should be understood to mean "proximate."
In the case ofPeople v. Palaan, G.R. No. 34976, August 15, 1931,
unpublished, the killing of the paramour by the offended husband
one day after the adultery was considered still proximate.

TITLE ONE
Interval of time negating vindication.

1.

Approximately nine months before the killing, the deceased
boxed the accused several times in the face resulting in the
conviction of the deceased for less serious physical injuries. He
appealed, pending which the accused killed him. It cannot be
said that the second incident was an immediate or a proximate
vindication of the first. (People v. Lumayag, No. L-19142, March
31, 1965, 13 SCRA 502, 507-508)

2.

The deceased uttered the following remark at 11:00 in the
morning in the presence of the accused and his officemates:
"Nag-iistambay pala dito ang magnanakaw" or "Hindi ko alam
na itong Civil Service pala ay istambayan ng magnanakaw."
At 5:00 in the afternoon of the same day, the accused killed the
deceased. The mitigating circumstance of vindication of a grave
offense does not avail. (People v. Benito, No. L-32042, December
17, 1976, 74 SCRA 271, 279, 282-283)

3.

Where the accused heard the deceased say that the accused's
daughter is a flirt, and the accused stabbed the victim two
months later, the mitigating circumstance of immediate
vindication of a grave offense cannot be considered in favor of
accused because he had sufficient time to recover his serenity.
The supposed vindication did not immediately or proximately
follow the alleged insulting and provocative remarks. (People v.
Lopez, G.R. No. 136861, November 15, 2000)

In the case of People v. Diokno, 63 Phil. 601, the lapse of time
between the grave offense (abducting the daughter of the accused by
the deceased) and the vindication (killing of the deceased) was two
or three days.
In this case, the Supreme Court said "The presence of the fifth mitigating circumstance of
Article 13 of the R.P.C., that is, immediate vindication of a
grave offense x x x may be taken into consideration in favor of
the two accused, because although the elopement took place
on January 4, 1935, and the aggression on the 7th of said
month and year, the offense did not cease while (the abducted
daughter's) whereabouts remained unknown and her marriage
to the deceased unlegalized. Therefore, there was no interruption
from the time the offense was committed to the vindication
thereof. [The) accused belongs to a family of old customs to whom
the elopement of a daughter with a man constitutes a grave
offense to their honor and causes disturbance of the peace and
tranquility of the home and at the same time spreads uneasiness
and anxiety in the minds of the members thereof."
296

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Distinguish provocation from vindication.

1.

In the case ofprovocation, it is made directly only to the person
committing the felony; in vindication, the grave offense may be
committed also against the offender's relatives mentioned by
the law.

2.

In vindication, the offended party must have done a grave
offense to the offender or his relatives mentioned by the law; in
provocation, the cause that brought about the provocation need
not be a grave offense.

3.

In provocation, it is necessary that the provocation or threat
immediately preceded the act, i.e., that there be no interval of
time between the provocation and the commission of the crime;
297

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

while in vindication, the vindication of the grave offense may
be proximate, which admits of an interval of time between the
grave offense done by the offended party and the commission of
the crime by the accused.
Reason for the difference.

This greater leniency in the case ofvindication is due undoubtedly
to the fact that it concerns the honor of a person, an offense which is
more worthy of consideration than mere spite against the one giving
the provocation or threat.
Killing a relative is a grave offense.

of a joke in the presence of so many guests. The accused was given
the benefit of the mitigating circumstance of vindication of a grave
offense. (U.S. v. Ampar, 37 Phil. 201)
In that case, the age of the accused and the place were considered
in determining the gravity of the offense.
Considered grave offense:

1.

Remark of the injured party before the guests that accused
lived at the expense of his wife. (People v. Rosel, 66 Phil.
323) The place was taken into consideration in that case.

2.

Taking into account that the American forces had just
occupied Manila, it is not strange that the accused should
have considered it then as a grave offense when the
offended party said: "You are a Japanese spy." (People v.
Luna, 76 Phil. 101, 105)

3.

If a person kills another for having found him in the act
of committing an attempt against his (accused's) wife, he
is entitled to the benefits of this circumstance of having
acted in vindication of a grave offense against his and his
wife's honor. (U.S. v. Alcasid, I Phil. 86; See also U.S. v.
Davis, 11 Phil. 96, 99)

4.

Where the injured party had insulted the father of the
accused by contemptuously telling him: "Phse, ichura mong
lalake" (Pshaw, you are but a shrimp), the accused who
attacked the injured party acted in vindication of a grave
offense to his father. (People v. David, 60 Phil. 93, 97, 103)

It was most natural and logical for the appellant to have been
enraged and obfuscated at the sight of his dead son and seized by
that feeling of hatred and rancour, to have stabbed indiscriminately
the people around x x x.
On the other hand, the attenuating circumstance of immediate
vindication of a grave offense - the stabbing of his son to death,
or of having committed the crime upon an impulse so powerful as
naturally to have produced passion or obfuscation, may be deemed
to have attended the commission of the crime alternatively, because
both mitigating circumstances cannot co-exist. (People v. Doniego, 9
SCRA 541)
Basis to determine the gravity of offense in vindication.

The question whether a certain personal offense is grave must
be decided by the court, having in mind the social standing of the
person, the place, and the time when the insult was made. (See People
v. Ruiz, 93 SCRA 739, where the rule was applied.)
During a fiesta, an old man, 70 years of age asked the deceased
for some roast pig. In the presence of many guests, the deceased
insulted the old man, saying: "There is no more. Come here and I will
make roast pig ofyou." A little later, while the deceased was squatting
down, the old man came up behind him and struck him on the head
with an axe.
Held: While it may be mere trifle to an average person, it
evidently was a serious matter to an old man, to be made the butt

The time was taken into consideration in that case.

The provocation should be proportionate to the damage caused by
the act and adequate to stir one to its commission.

Aside from the fact that the provocation should immediately
precede the commission of the offense, it should also be proportionate
to the damage caused by the act and adequate to stir one to its
commission. The remark attributed to the deceased that the daughter
of the accused is a flirt does not warrant and justify the act of accused
in slaying the victim. (People v. Lopez, G.R. No. 136861, November
15, 2000)
299

298

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Basis of paragraph 5.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

Why passion or obfuscation is mitigating.

The mitigating circumstance in paragraph 5 of Article 13 is
based on the diminution of the conditions of voluntariness.
Grave offense must be directed to the accused.

The supposed grave offense done by the victim was an alleged
remark made in the presence of the accused that the Civil Service
Commission is a hangout of thieves. The accused felt alluded to
because he was facing then criminal and administrative charges on
several counts involving his honesty and integrity.
The remark itself was general in nature and not specifically
directed to the accused. If he felt alluded to by a remark which he
personally considered insulting to him, that was his own individual
reaction thereto. Other people in the vicinity who might have heard
the remark could not have possibly known that the victim was
insulting the accused unless they were aware of the background of
the criminal and administrative charges involving moral turpitude
pending against the accused. The remark cannot be considered a grave
offense against the accused. (People v. Benito, No. L-32042, February
13, 1975, 62 SCRA 351, 355-356)
Vindication of a grave offense incompatible with passion or
obfuscation.

Vindication of a grave offense and passion or obfuscation cannot
be counted separately and independently. (People v. Dagatan, 106
Phil. 88, 98)

Par. 6.-- That of having acted upon an impulse so powerful as
naturally to have produced passion or obfuscation.
This paragraph requires that 1.

The accused acted upon an impulse.

2.

The impulse must be so powerful that it naturally produced
passion or obfuscation in him.

300

When there are causes naturally producing in a person powerful
excitement, he loses his reason and self-control, thereby diminishing
the exercise of his will power. (U.S. v. Salandanan, 1 Phil. 464, 465)
Rule for the application of this paragraph.

Passion or obfuscation may constitute a mitigating circumstance
only when the same arose from lawful sentiments.
For this reason, even if there is actually passion or obfuscation
on the part of the offender, there is no mitigating circumstance, when:
(1)

The act is committed in a spirit of lawlessness; or

(2)

The act is committed in a spirit of revenge.

Requisites of the mitigating circumstance of passion or obfuscation:

1.

That there be an act, both unlawful and sufficient to produce
such a condition of mind; and

2.

Thal said act which produced the obfuscation was not far
removed from the commission of the crime by a considerable
length of time, during which the perpetrator might recover
his normal equanimity. (People v. Alanguilang, 52 Phil.
663, 665, citing earlier cases; People v. Ulita, 108 Phil. 730,
743; People v. Gravino, Nos. L-31327-29, May 16, 1983, 122
SCRA 123, 134)

The act of the offended party must be unlawful or unjust.

The crime committed by the accused must be provoked by prior
unjust or improper acts of the injured party. (U.S. • Taylor, 6 Phil.
162, 163)
Thus, a common-law wife, who, having left the common home,
refused to go home with the accused, was acting within her rights,
and the accused (the common-law husband) had no legitimate right
to compel her to go with him. The act of the deceased in refusing
to go home with the accused, while provocative, nevertheless was
insufficient to produce the passion and obfuscation that the law
contemplates. (People v. Quijano, C.A., 50 0.G. 5819)
301

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
But where the accused killed his wife on the occasion when she
visited her aunt's husband, this mitigating circumstance was held
to be applicable, having in mind the jealousy of the accused and her
refusal to return to his house until after the arrival of her uncle. (U.S.
v. Ortencio, 38 Phil. 341, 344-345)
The mitigating circumstance of having acted under an impulse
so powerful as to have produced passion and obfuscation should be
considered in favor of the owner who, upon seeing the person who
stole his carabao, shoots the supposed thief. (People v. Ancheta, et al.,
C.A., 39 0.G. 1288)
The act of the deceased in creating trouble during the wake of
the departed father of defendant-appellant scandalizes the mourners
and offends the sensibilities of the grieving family. Considering that
the trouble created by the deceased was both unlawful and sufficient
to infuriate accused-appellant, his guilt is mitigated by passion or
obfuscation. (People v. Samonte, Jr., No. L-31225, June 11, 1975, 64
SCRA 319, 329-330)
The accused is entitled to the mitigating circumstance of
passion or obfuscation where he hit the deceased upon seeing the
latter box his four-year-old son. The actuation of the accused arose
from a natural instinct that impels a father to rush to the rescue
of a beleaguered son, regardless of whether the latter be right or
wrong. (People v. Castro, No. L-38989, October 29, 1982, 117 SCRA
1014, 1020)
Exercise of a right or fulfillment of duty Is not proper source of
passion or obfuscation.

The accused killed the deceased when the latter was about to
take the carabao of the accused to the barrio lieutenant. Held: The
action of the deceased in taking the carabao of the accused to him
and demanding payment for the sugarcane destroyed by that carabao
and in taking the carabao to the barrio lieutenant when the accused
refused to pay, was perfectly legal and proper and constituted no
reasonable cause for provocation to the accused. The finding that
the accused acted upon an impulse so powerful as naturally to
have produced passion or obfuscation was not justified, because the
deceased was clearly within his rights in what he did. (People v.
Noynay, et al., 58 Phil. 393)
302

Since the mother of the child, killed by the accused, had the
perfect right to reprimand the said accused for indecently converting
the family's bedroom into a rendezvous of herself and her lover, the
said accused cannot properly invoke the mitigating circumstance of
passion or obfuscation to minimize her liability for the murder of the
child. (People v. Caliso, 58 Phil. 283)
Where the accused was making a disturbance on a public street
and a policeman came to arrest him, the anger and indignation of
the accused resulting from the arrest cannot be considered passion
or obfuscation, because the policeman was performing a lawful act.
(U.S. v. Taylor, 6 Phil. 162)
The act must be sufficient to produce such a condition of mind.

If the cause of the loss of self-control was trivial and slight, as
when the victim failed to work on the hacienda of which the accused
was the overseer, or where the accused saw the injured party picking
fruits from the tree claimed by the former, the obfuscation is not
mitigating. (U.S. v. Diaz, 15 Phil. 123; People v. Bakil, CA., 44 0.G.
102)
No passion or obfuscation after 24 hours, or several hours or half
an hour.

There could have been no mitigating circumstance of passion or
obfuscation when more than 24 hours elapsed between the alleged
insult and the commission of the felony (People v. Sarkala, 37 Phil.
486, 490) or if several hours passed between the cause of passion or
obfuscation and the commission of the crime (People v. Aguinaldo, 92
Phil. 583,588), or where at least halfan hour intervened between the
previous fight and subsequent killing of the deceased by the accused.
(People v. Matbagon, 60 Phil. 887, 890)
Although the fact that accused was subjected by the deceased
to a treatment (being slapped and asked to kneel down) offensive to
his dignity could give rise to the feeling of passion or obfuscation,
the same cannot be treated as a mitigating circumstance where the
killing took place one month and five days later. (People v. Mojica,
No. L-30742, April 30, 1976, 70 SCRA 502, 509)
It is error to consider for the accused, passion or obfuscation,
where the newspaper articles written by the victim assailing the
303

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

former's official integrity have been published for an appreciable
period long enough for pause and reflection. (People v. Pareja, No.
L-21937, November 29, 1969, 30 SCRA 693, 716-717)

its execution. (People v. Pagal, No. L-32040, October 25, 1977, 79
SCRA 570, 575)

The circumstance is unavailing where the killing took place four
days after the stabbing of the accused's k.in. (People v. Constantino,
No. L-23558, August 10, 1967, 20 SCRA 940, 949)

There is neither passion and obfuscation nor proximate
vindication of a grave offense where the killing of the decedent was
made four days after the stabbing of the appellant's k.in. Moreover,
vengeance IS not a lawful sentiment. (People v. Constantino, et al.,
G.R. No. L-23558, August 10, 1967)

The reason for these rulings is that the act producing the
obfuscation must not be far removed from the commission of the crime
by a considerable length of time, during which the accused might have
recovered h.is normal equanimity.
The defense must prove that the act which produced passion or
obfuscation took place at a time not far removed from the commission
of the crime.
The accused claimed that he had not been regularly paid his
wages by the victims who, he claimed further, used to scold him
and beat him; but he failed to prove that those acts which produced
passion and obfuscation in him took place at a time not far removed
from the commission of the crime which would justify an inference
that after h.is passion had been aroused, he had no time to reflect
and cool off. Mitigation does not avail him. (People v. Gervacio, No.
L-21965, August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA 960, 977)

Passion and obfuscation may build up and strengthen over time.

Passion and obfuscation as a mitigating circumstance need not
be felt only in the seconds before the commission of the crime. It may
build up and strengthen over time until it can no longer be repressed
and will ultimately motivate the commission of the crime.
Where the victim not only threatened to molest accused's
daughter but also accused h.im in public of having incestuous relations
with his mother, insulting him in full view of his immediate superior,
passion may linger and build up over time as repressed anger enough
to obfuscate reason and self-control. (People v. Oloverio, G.R. No.
211159, March 18, 2015)
Passion or obfuscation must arise from lawful sentiments.

1.

For the circumstance to exist, it is necessary that the act which
gave rise to the obfuscation be not removed from the commission of
the offense by a considerable length of time, during which period the
perpetrator might recover h.is normal equanimity. (People v. Layson,
No. L-25177, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 92, 95-96)

Facts: For about five years, the accused and the
deceased lived illicitly in the manner of husband and wife.
Afterwards, the deceased separated from the accused and
lived with another man. The accused enraged by such
conduct, k.illed the deceased.
Held: Even if it is true that the accused acted
with obfuscation because of jealousy, the mitigating
circumstance cannot be considered in his favor because
the causes which mitigate criminal responsibility for the
loss of self-control are such which originate from legitimate
feelings, and not those wh.ich arise from vicious, unworthy
and immoral passions.

The crime committed must be the result ofa sudden impulse ofnatural
and uncontrollable fury.
Obfuscation cannot be mitigating in a crime which was planned
and calmly meditated or if the impulse upon which the accused acted
was deliberately fomented by him for a considerable period of time.
(People v. Daos, 60 Phil. 143, 155; People v. Hernandez, 43 Phil. 104,
111)
The circumstance of passion and obfuscation cannot be
mitigating in a crime wh.ich is planned and calmly meditated before
304

The case of U.S. v. Hicks, 14 Phil. 217.

2.

But the ruling in the case ofHicks should be distinguished
from the case where the accused, in the heat of passion,
killed his common-law wife upon discovering her
305

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

in flagrante in carnal communication with a common
acquaintance. It was held in such a case that the accused
was entitled to the mitigating circumstance of passion
or obfuscation, because the impulse was caused by the
sudden revelation that she was untrue to him, and his
discovery of her in flagrante in the arms of another. (U.S.
v. De la Cruz, 22 Phil. 429) In U.S. o. Hicks, the cause of
passion and obfuscation of the accused was his vexation,
disappointment and anger engendered by the refusal of
the woman to continue to live in illicit relations with him,
which she had a perfect right to do.
3.

Affect Criminal Liability
treatment which the deceased gave her a short time before
she stabbed him. (People v. Yuman, 61 Phil. 786)
5.

The defense submits that the accused is entitled to the
mitigating circumstance of having acted on a provocation
sufficiently strong to cause passion and obfuscation,
because the deceased's flat rejection of the entreaties of
the accused for her to quit her calling as a hostess and
return to their former relation, aggravated by her sneering
statement that the accused was penniless and invalid,
provoked the accused into losing his head and stabbing
the deceased. It appears that the accused had previously
reproved the deceased for allowing herself to be caressed by
a stranger. Her loose conduct was forcibly driven home to
the accused by the remark of one Marasigan on the very day
of the crime that the accused was the husband "whose wife
was being used by one Maring for purposes of prostitution,"
a remark that so deeply wounded the feelings of the accused
that he was driven to consume a large amount of wine
before visiting Alicia (deceased) to plead with her to leave
her work. Alicia's insulting refusal to renew her liaison with
the accused, therefore, was not motivated by any desire to
lead a chaste life henceforth, but showed her determination
to pursue a lucrative profession that permitted her to
distribute her favors indiscriminately. It was held that
the accused's insistence that she live with him again, and
his rage at her rejection of the proposal cannot be properly
qualified as arising from immoral and unworthy passions.
Even without benefit of wedlock, a monogamous liaison
appears morally of a higher level than gainful promiscuity.
(People v. Bello, No. L-18792, February 28, 1964, 10 SCRA
298, 302-303)

6.

Passion or obfuscation must originate from lawful
sentiments, not from the fact that, for example, the girl's
sweetheart killed the girl's father and brother because the
girl's parents objected to their getting married and the girl
consequently broke off their relationship. Such an act is
actuated more by a spirit of lawlessness and revenge rather
than any sudden and legitimate impulse of natural and
uncontrollable fury. (People v. Gravino, Nos. L-31327-29,
May 16, 1983, 122 CHA 123, 133, 134)

The case of People v. Engay, (C.A.) 47 0.G. 4306.
Facts: The accused, as common-law wife, Jived with
the deceased for 15 years, whose house she helped support.
Later, the deceased married another woman. The accused
killed him.
Held: Although it was held in the Hicks case that "the
causes which produce in the mind loss of reason and selfcontrol and which lessen criminal responsibility are those
which originate from lawful sentiments, not those which
arise from vicious, unworthy and immoral passions," yet
such is not the case here where the fact that the accused
lived for 15 long years as the real wife of the deceased,
whose house she helped to support, could not but arouse
that natural feeling of despair in the woman who saw her
life broken and found herself abandoned by the very man
whom she considered for so long a time as her husband and
for whom she had made so many sacrifices. The mitigating
circumstance of passion or obfuscation was considered in
favor of the accused.

4.

Marciano Martin and Beatriz Yuman, without being joined
in lawful wedlock, Jived as husband and wife for three or
four years until Marciano left their common dwelling.
Beatriz stabbed him with a pen-knife. When asked why
she wounded Marciano, she replied that Marciano "after
having taken advantage of her" abandoned her. It was held
that the mitigating circumstance of obfuscation should be
taken into consideration in favor of the accused, in view
of the peculiar circumstances of the case and the harsh
306

307

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

In spirit of lawlessness.

The finding of the trial court that the appellant acted under
an impulse so powerful as naturally to have produced passion and
obfuscation should be discarded because the accused, in poisoning the
child, was actuated more by a spirit oflawlessness and revenge than
by any sudden impulse of natural and uncontrollable fury (People
v. Hernandez, 43 Phil. 104, 11 1) and because such sudden burst of
passion was not provoked by prior unjust or improper acts of the victim
or of his parents (U.S. v. Taylor, 6 Phil. 162), since Flora Gonzalez
had the perfect right to reprimand the defendant for indecently
converting the family's bedroom into a rendezvous of herself and her
lover. (People v. Cali.so, 58 Phil. 283 (1933))
The circumstance of passion and obfuscation is not mitigating
when the accused acted in a spirit of lawlessness. Besides, the
screams of an eight-year-old child are not provocative enough to
generate a sudden impulse of natural and uncontrolled fury. (People
v. Cabarrubias, Nos. L-94709-10, June 15, 1993)
The accused who raped a woman is not entitled to the mitigating
circumstance of "having acted upon an impulse so powerful as
naturally to have produced passion" just because he finds himself in
a secluded place with that young ravishing woman, almost naked,
and therefore, "liable to succumb to the uncontrollable passion of his
bestial instinct." (People v. Sanico, CA., 46 O.G. 98)
In a spirit of revenge.

A woman taking care of a nine-month-old child, poisoned the
child with acid. She did it, because sometime before the killing of the
child, the mother of the child, having surprised her (accused) with
a man on the bed of the master, had scolded her. She invoked the
mitigating circumstance of passion or obfuscation resulting from that
scolding by the mother of the child.
Held: She cannot be credited with such mitigating circumstance.
She was actuated more by spirit oflawlessness and revenge than by
any sudden impulse of natural and uncontrollable fury. (People v.
Caliso, 58 Phil. 283, 295)
Passion and obfuscation may not be properly appreciated in
favor of appellant. To be considered as a mitigating circumstance,
passion or obfuscation must arise from lawful sentiments and not
308

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
AfTect Criminal Liability

from a spirit oflawlessness or revenge or from anger and resentment.
In the present case, clearly, Marcelo was infuriated upon seeing his
brother, Carlito, shot by Jose. However, a distinction must be made
between the first time that Marcelo hacked Jose and the second time
that the former hacked the latter. When Marcelo hacked Jose right
after seeing the latter shoot at Carlita, and if appellant refrained
from doing anything else after that, he could have validly invoked
the mitigating circumstance of passion and obfuscation. But when,
upon seeing his brother Carlito dead, Marcelo went back to Jose,
who by then was already prostrate on the ground and hardly moving,
hacking Jose again was a clear case of someone acting out of anger
in the spirit of revenge. (People v. Bates, G.R. No. 139907, March 28,
2003)
The offender must act under the impulse of special motives.

Excitement is the natural feeling of all persons engaged in a fight,
especially those who had received a beating, and the impulse in that
state is not considered in law so powerful as to produce obfuscation
sufficient to mitigate liability. (People w. De Guia, C.A., 36 O.G. 1151)
Two individuals had been wrestling together and after being
separated, one of them followed up the other and wounded him with
a knife as he was entering a vehicle.
Held: The aggressor cannot claim in his favor that the previous
struggle produced in him entire loss of reason or self-control, for the
existence of such excitement as is inherent in all who quarrel and
come to blows does not constitute a mitigating circumstance. The
guilty party must have acted under the impulse of special motives.
(U.S. v. Herrera, 13 Phil. 583; U.S. u. Fitzgerald, 2 Phil. 419)
But the ruling is different in the following case:
While the Attorney-General hesitates to accept the conclusion
of the lower court with reference to the attenuating circumstances of
unjust provocation and arrebato y obcecacion, [the Court] is inclined to
accept that theory. The record discloses that each used very insulting
language concerning the other and that they must have been very
greatly excited as a result of the quarrel, or otherwise the other
people present would not have intervened. The acts complained of
were committed by the defendant soon after the quarrel had taken
place. (People v. Flores, 50 Phil. 548)
309

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Illustration of impulse of special motives.
The accused killed P, because the latter did not deliver the letter
of FtoA, on which (letter) the accused had pinned his hopes of settling
the case against him amicably. The failure ofP to deliver the letter is
a prior unjust and improper act sufficient to produce great excitement
and passion in the accused as to confuse his reason and impel him
to kill P. It was a legitimate and natural cause of indignation and
anger. (People v. Mil, 92 SCRA 89)
Obfuscation arising from Jealousy.
The mitigating circumstance of obfuscation arising from jealousy
cannot be invoked in favor of the accused whose relationship with the
woman (his common-law wife) was illegitimate. (People v. Salazar,
105 Phil. 1058, citing U.S. v. Hicks, 14 Phil. 217; People v. Olgado,
et al., L-4406, March 31, 1952)

TITLE ONE
Affect Criminal Liability

immediately killed S. Under this great excitement, the two sons
also proceeded to attack and did kill C who was near the scene at
the time.
Held: Since C had taken no part in the quarrel and had not in
any manner provoked the sons, passion or obfuscation cannot mitigate
their liability with respect to the killing of C. This extenuating
circumstance is applied to reduce the penalty in cases where the
provocation which caused the heated passion was made by the injured
party. (U.S. • Esmedia, et al., 17 Phil. 260)
May passion or obfuscation lawfully arise from causes existing only
In the honest belief of the offender?
Yes.
(1)

Thus, the belief of the defendant that the deceased had
caused his dismissal from his employment is sufficient to
confuse his reason and impel him to commit the crime.
(U.S. u. Ferrer, 1 Phil. 56, 62)

(2)

It has also been held that the belief entertained in good
faith by the defendants that the deceased cast upon their
mother a spell of witchcraft which was the cause of her
serious illness, is so powerful a motive as to naturally
produce passion or obfuscation. (U.S. u. Macalintal, 2 Phil.
448, 451; People u. Zapata, 107 Phil. 103, 109)

(3)

Passion or obfuscation may lawfully arise from causes
existing only in the honest belief of the accused. It is
relevant to mention, too, that in passion or obfuscation,
the offender suffers a diminution of intelligence and
intent. With the accused having acted under the belief
that Jayson and Roldan had thrown stones at his two
minor daughters, and that Jayson had burned Cherrlyn's
hair, the petitioner was entitled to the mitigating
circumstance of passion. (Bongalon v. People, G.R. No.
169533, March 20, 2013)

Where the killing of the deceased by the accused arose out of
rivalry for the hand of a woman, passion or obfuscation is mitigating.
The feeling of resentment resulting from rivalry in amorous
relations with a woman is a powerful instigator ofjealousy and prone
to produce anger and obfuscation. (People v. Marasigan, 70 Phil. 583;
People v. Macabangon, 63 Phil. 1062)
In an early case, it was held that the loss of reason and selfcontrol due to jealousy between rival lovers was not mitigating. (U.S.
v. De la Peria, 12 Phil. 698)
Obfuscation - when relationship ls illegitimate - not mitigating.
The relations of the accused with Rosario Rianzales were
illegitimate. The injured party made indecent propositions to her
which provoked the accused. The accused attacked the injured party.
The obfuscation of the accused is not mitigating, because his relations
with Rosario Rianzales were illegitimate. (People v. Olgado, et al.,
G.R. No. L-4406, March 31, 1952)
The cause producing passion or obfuscation must come from the
offended party.
The two sons, believing that S would inflict other wounds upon
their father, who was already wounded, in defense of their father,

Basis of paragraph 6.
Passion or obfuscation is a mitigating circumstance because the
offender who acts with passion or obfuscation suffers a diminution of
his intelligence and intent.
311

310

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Provocation and obfuscation arising from one and the same cause
should be treated as only one mitigating circumstance.

Since the alleged provocation which caused the obfuscation
of the appellants arose from the same incident, that is, the alleged
maltreatment and/or ill-treatment of the appellants by the deceased,
those two mitigating circumstances cannot be considered as two
distinct and separate circumstances but should be treated as one.
(People v. Pagal, No. L-32040, October 25, 1977, 79 SCRA 570, 575)
Thus, where the accused killed his wife during a quarrel, because
he, who had no work, resented her suggestion to join her brother in
the business of cutting logs, the court erred in considering in favor
of the accused the two mitigating circumstances of provocation and
obfuscation.
Vindication of grave offense cannot co-exist with passion and
obfuscation.

In the case of People o. Yaon, C.A., 43 0.G. 4142, it was held
that if the accused assailed his victim in the proximate vindication of
a grave offense, he cannot successfully allege that he was also, in the
same breath, blinded by passion and obfuscation, because these two
mitigating circumstances cannot both exist and be based on one and
the same fact or motive. At most, only one of them could be considered
in favor of the appellant, but not both simultaneously. Viada, citing
more than one dozen cases, says that it is the constant doctrine of
the Spanish Supreme Court that one single fact cannot be made the
basis of different modifying circumstances.
Exception - When there are other facts, although closely connected.
But where there are other facts, although closely connected
with the fact upon which one circumstance is premised, the other
circumstance may be appreciated as based on the other fact. (People
v. Diokno, 63 Phil. 601)
Thus, where the deceased, a Chinaman, had eloped with the
daughter of the accused, and later when the deceased saw the accused
coming, the deceased ran upstairs in his house, there are two facts
which are closely connected, namely: (1) elopement, which is a grave
offense to a family of old customs and (2) refusal to deal with him, a

TITLE ONE

stimulus strong enough to produce in his mind a fit of passion. Two
mitigating circumstances of (1) vindication and (2) passion were
considered in favor of the accused. The mitigating circumstance of
vindication of a grave offense was based on the fact of elopement and
that of passion on the fact that the deceased, instead of meeting him
and asking for forgiveness, ran away from the accused.
Passion or obfuscation compatible with lack of Intention to commit
so grave a wrong.

So, it has been held in People v. Cabel, 5 CAR (2s) 507, 515.
Passion or obfuscation incompatible with treachery.

Passion cannot co-exist with treachery because in passion, the
offender loses his control and reason, while in treachery the means
employed are consciously adopted and one who loses his reason and
self-control could not deliberately employ a particular means, method
or form of attack in the execution of the crime. (People v. Domingo,
G.R. No. 131817, August 8, 2001, citing People v. Germina, 290 SCRA
146 [1998))
Vindication or obfuscation cannot be considered when the person
attacked is not the one who gave cause therefor.
Vindication and obfuscation cannot be considered, not only
because the elopement of Lucila Dagatan with Eleuterio Yara and her
abandonment by the latter took place long before the commission of
the crime, but also because the deceased was not the one who eloped
with and abandoned her. (People v. Dagatan, et al., 106 Phil. 88)
Passion and obfuscation cannot co-exist with evident premeditation.

The aggravating circumstance of evident premeditation cannot
co-exist with the circumstance of passion and obfuscation. The essence
of premeditation is that the execution of the criminal act must be
preceded by calm thought and reflection upon the resolution to carry
out the criminal intent during the space of time sufficient to arrive
at a composed judgment. (People o. Pagal, et al., G.R. No. L-32040,
October 25, 1977)

313
312

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Passion or obfuscation distinguished from Irresistible force.
1.

While passion or obfuscation is a mitigating circumstance,
irresistible force is an exempting circumstance.

2.

Passion or obfuscation cannot give rise to an irresistible
force because irresistible force requires physical force.

3.

Passion or obfuscation, is in the offender himself, while
irresistible force must come from a third person.

4.

Passion or obfuscation must arise from lawful sentiments;
whereas, the irresistible force is unlawful.

Passion or obfuscation distinguished from provocation.

1.

Provocation comes from the injured party; passion or
obfuscation is produced by an impulse which may be caused
by provocation.

2.

Provocation must immediately precede the commission
of the crime; in passion or obfuscation, the offense which
engenders perturbation of mind need not be immediate. It
is only required that the influence thereof lasts until the
moment the crime is committed.

3.

In both, the effect is the loss of reason and self-control on
the part of the offender.

Par. 7.-- That the offender had voluntarily surrendered himself
to a person in authority or his agents, or that he had
voluntarily confessed his guilt before the court prior
to the presentation of the evidence for the prosecution.
Two mitigating circumstances are provided In this paragraph.
1.

Voluntary surrender to a person in authority or his agents.

2.

Voluntary confession of guilt before the court prior to the
presentation of evidence for the prosecution.

Although these circumstances arc considered mitigating in the
same subsection of Article 13, when both arc present, they should
have the effect of mitigating as two independent circumstances. If any

of them must mitigate the penalty to a certain extent, when both are
present, they should produce this effect to a greater extent. (People
• Fontabla, 61 Phil. 589, 590)
Requisites of voluntary surrender.

a.

That the offender had not been actually arrested.

b.

That the offender surrendered himself to a person in
authority or to the latter's agent.

c.

That the surrender was voluntary. (Estacio v.
Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 75362, March 6, 1990, 183
SCRA 12, 24 citing People v. Canamo, 138 SCRA 141, 145
and People v. Hanasan, No. L-25989, September 30, 1969,
29 SCRA 534, 541-542)

Requisite of voluntariness.
For voluntary surrender to be appreciated, the same must be
spontaneous in such a manner that it shows the interest ofthe accused
to surrender unconditionally to the authorities, either because he
acknowledged his guilt or because he wishes to save them the trouble
and expenses necessarily incurred in his search and capture. (People
v. Gervacio, No. L-21965, August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA 960, 977 citing
People v. Sakam, 61 Phil. 27)
The mitigating circumstance of voluntary surrender cannot be
appreciated in his favor; the records indicate that the appellant did
not intend to assume responsibility for the death of the victim when he
and his mother went with the barangay officials to the police station.
(People v. Nimuan, G.R. No. 182458, March 21, 2011)
Added requisite: There Is no pending warrant or arrest or Information
filed.

In People v. Cagas, G.R. No. 145504, June 30, 2004, 433 SCRA
290, and in People v. Taraya, 398 Phil. 311 (2000), the Court added
a fourth requisite before "voluntary surrender" may be appreciated
in favor of the accused - that there is no pending warrant of arrest
or information filed.
However, De Vera v. De Vera, G.R. No. 172832 (2009), clarified
that the mere filing of an information and/or the issuance of a warrant
315

314

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

of arrest will not automatically make the surrender "involuntary."
In People v. Oc0, 458 Phil. 815, 851 (2003), the Court appreciated the
mitigating circumstance because immediately upon learning that a
warrant for his arrest was issued, and without the same having been
served on him, the accused surrendered to the police. Thus, it is clear
that notwithstanding the pendency of a warrant for his arrest, the
accused may still be entitled to the mitigating circumstance in case
he surrenders, depending on the actual facts surrounding the very
act of giving himself up.

TITLE ONE

he confided to the investigators that he was voluntarily
surrendering and also surrendering the fatal gun used
in the shooting of the victim. These acts of the accused
were held strongly indicative of his intent or desire to
surrender voluntarily to the authorities. (People v. Benito,
No. L-32042, February 13, 1975, 62 SCRA 351, 355)
4.

The two accused left the scene of the crime but made
several attempts to surrender to various local officials
which somehow did not materialize for one reason or
another. It was already a week after when they were
finally able to surrender. Voluntary surrender avails. After
committing the crime, the accused defied no law or agent
of the authority, and when they surrendered, they did so
with meekness and repentance. (People v. Magpantay, No.
L-19133, November 27, 1964, 12 SCRA 389, 392, 393)

5.

The accused did not offer any resistance nor try to hide
when a policeman ordered him to come down his house.
He even brought his bolo used to commit the crime and
voluntarily gave himself up to the authorities before he
could be arrested. These circumstances are sufficient
to consider the mitigating circumstance of voluntary
surrender in his favor. (People v. Radomes, No. L-68421,
March 20, 1986, 141 SCRA 548, 562)

6.

AII that the records reveal is that the accused trooped to
the police headquarters to surrender the firearm used in
committing the crime. It is not clear whether or not he also
sought to submit his very person to the authorities. The
accused is given the benefit of the doubt and his arrival
at the police station is considered as an act of surrender.
(People v. Jereza, G.R. No. 86230, September 18, 1990, 189
SCRA 690, 698-699)

7.

Where there is nothing on record to show that the warrant
for the arrest of the accused had actually been served on
him or that it had been returned unserved for failure of the
server to locate said accused, and there is direct evidence
to show that he voluntarily presented himself to the police
when he was taken into custody. (People v. Brana, No.
L-29210, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 307, 316-317)

Cases of voluntary surrender.
1.

2.

3.

The accused, after plunging a bolo into the victim's
chest, ran toward the municipal building. Upon seeing
a patrolman, he immediately threw away his bolo,
raised his two hands, offered no resistance and said to
the patrolman, "Here is my bolo, I stabbed the victim."
There was intent or desire to surrender voluntarily to
the authorities. (People • Tenorio, No. L-15478, March
30, 1962, 4 SCRA 700, 703)
After the commission of the crime, the accused fled to a
hotel to hide not from the police authorities but from the
companions of the deceased who pursued him to the hotel
but could not get to him because the door was closed after
the accused had entered. Once in the hotel, the accused
dropped his weapon at the door and when the policemen
came to investigate, he readily admitted ownership of the
weapon and then voluntarily went with them. He was
investigated by the fiscal the following day. No warrant
had been issued for his arrest. The accused was granted
the benefit of the mitigating circumstance of voluntary
surrender. (People v. Dayrit, 108 Phil. 100, 103)
Immediately after the shooting, the accused having all the
opportunity to escape, did not do so but instead called up
the police department. When the policemen went to the
scene of the crime to investigate, he voluntarily approached
them and without revealing his identity, told them that
he would help in connection with the case as he knew
the suspect and the latter's motive. When brought to the
police station immediately thereafter as a possible witness,

317
316

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
8.

Where upon learning that the court had finally determined
the presence of probable cause and even before the issuance
and implementation of the warrant of arrest, the accused
already gave himself up, acknowledging his culpability.
(De Vera v. De Vera, supra)

9.

Where immediately after stabbing the deceased, the
accused voluntarily yielded the knife he used to Pilapil, and
approximately nine hours after the stabbing incident, he
voluntarily surrendered himself to the police authorities.
(People v. Ramelo, G.R. No. 224888, November 22, 2017)

Cases not constituting voluntary surrender.

circumstances when they knew they were completely
surrounded and there was no chance of escape. Their
surrender was not spontaneous as it was motivated more
by an intent to insure their safety. (People v. Salvilla,
G.R. No. 86163, April 26, 1990, 184 SCRA 671, 678-679;
People v. Sigayan, No. L-18308, April 30, 1966, 16 SCRA
834, 844)
7.

Where the search for the accused had lasted four years,
which belies the spontaneity of the surrender. (People v.
De la Cruz, No. L-30059, December 19, 1970, 36 SCRA 452,
455)

8.

Where other than the accused's version in court that he
went to a police officer in Dagupan City and asked the
latter to accompany him to Olongapo City after he was
told by someone that his picture was seen posted in the
municipal building, no other evidence was presented to
establish indubitably that he deliberately surrendered to
the police. (People v. Garcia, No. L-32071, July 9, 1981,
105 SCRA 325, 343)

1.

The warrant of arrest showed that the accused was in fact
arrested. (El Pueblo contra Conwi, 71 Phil. 595, 597)

2.

The accused surrendered only after the warrant of arrest
was served upon him. (People v. Roldan, No. L-22030, May
29, 1968, 23 SCRA 907, 910)

3.

Where at the time of his surrender, the accused already
had a pending warrant of arrest, which was issued five days
before his surrender. His arrest by that time was imminent.
(People v. Taraya, G.R. No. 135551, October 27, 2000)

9.

Where the accused was actually arrested by his own
admission or that he yielded because of the warrant of
arrest, there is no voluntary surrender although the police
blotter euphemistically used the word "surrender." (People
v. Velez, No. L-30038, July 18, 1974, 58 SCRA 21, 30)

Where the accused only went to the police station to report
that his wife was stabbed by another person and to seek
protection as he feared that the same assailant would also
stab him. (People v. Trigo, G.R. No. 74515, June 14, 1989,
174 SCRA 93, 99)

10.

Where the accused went to the PC headquarters not to
surrender but merely to report the incident which does not
evince any desire to own the responsibility for the killing
of the deceased. (People v. Rogales, No. L-17531, November
30, 1962, 6 SCRA 830,835)

11.

Where he submitted himself to the police only to clear the
matter and to know the reason why the police were looking
for him and when asked what his involvement was to the
alleged robbery and rape, he answered that he does not
know anything about the crime. (People • Verceles, G.R.
No. 130650, September 10, 2002)

4.

5.

6.

Where it took two years and five months after the issuance
of warrant of arrest against him before he surrendered.
If he finally gave himself up, it was not to save the State
the time and effort of searching for him, but because he
had gotten tired of the life of a fugitive, or seen no other
reasonable alternative to continued absence from his home
and constant evasion of police officers. (People v. Pagsanjan,
G.R. No. 95125, May 12, 1993)
Where the accused were asked to surrender by the police
and military authorities but they refused until only much
later when they could no longer do otherwise by force of

12. Where the Chief of Police placed the accused under arrest
in his employer's home to which that officer was summoned
319

318

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

and it does not appear that it was the idea of the accused
to send for the police for the purpose of giving himself up.
(People v. Canoy, 90 Phil. 633, 643)
13.

Where the accused accompanied the Chief of Police to the
scene of the crimes and he was not yet charged with, or
suspected of having taken any part in, said crimes, and
the authorities were not looking for him, and would not
have looked for him if he had not been present at the
investigation by the Chief of Police. (People v. Canoy, 90
Phil. 633, 644)

14.

Where the accused was arrested in his boarding house and
upon being caught, pretended to say that he was on his way
to the municipal building to surrender to the authorities,
for that is not the nature of voluntary surrender that may
serve to mitigate one's liability in contemplation of law.
(People v. Rubinal, 110 Phil. 119, 127)

Not mitigating when defendant was in fact arrested.

There was no voluntary surrender if the warrant of arrest
showed that the defendant was in fact arrested. (People v. Conwi, 71
Phil. 595)
But where a person, after committing the offense and having
opportunity to escape, voluntarily waited for the agents of the
authorities and voluntarily gave himself up, he is entitled to the
benefit of this circumstance, even ifhe was placed under arrest by a
policeman then and there. (People v. Parana, 64 Phil. 331)
And when the accused helped in carrying his victim to the
hospital where he was disarmed and arrested, it is tantamount
to voluntary surrender. (People v. Babiera, C.A., 45 0.G., Supp. 5,
311)

Affect Criminal Liability
The accused who ran to the municipal building after the commission
of the crime had the intention or desire to surrender.
If the accused wanted to run away or escape, he would not have
run to the municipal building. The fact that on seeing a patrolman,
the accused threw away his bolo, raised his two hands, and admitted
having stabbed the injured party, is indicative of his intent or desire
to surrender voluntarily to the authorities. (People v. Tenorio, G.R.
No. L-15478, March 30, 1962)
The accused who fled and hid himself to avoid reprisals from the
companions ofthe deceased, but upon meeting a policeman voluntarily
went with him to the jail, is entitled to the benefit of the mitigating
circumstance of voluntary surrender.
Thus, when the accused, after the commission of the crime, fled
to the Imperial Hotel for security purposes, as there was no policeman
around and the companions of the deceased were pursuing him to that
place, and once inside he hid himself there, his going voluntarily to
the jail with the policeman who had gone to the hotel to investigate
the incident, was held to be a mitigating circumstance. (People v.
Dayrit, G.R. No. L-14388, May 20, 1960)
When the accused surrendered only after the warrant of arrest had
been served upon him, it is not mitigating.
It appears that appellant surrendered only after the warrant
of arrest was served upon him, which cannot be considered as a
"voluntary surrender." (People v. Roldan, G.R. No. L-22030, May 29,
1968)
When the warrant of arrest had not been served or not returned
unserved because the accused cannot be located, the surrender
Is mitigating.

The facts ofConwi case, supra, should be distinguished from the
facts of the cases of People v. Parana and People v. Babiera, supra,
where the arrest of the offender was after his voluntary surrender
or after his doing an act amounting to a voluntary surrender to the
agent of a person in authority.

While it is true that the warrant for the arrest of the accused
was dated March 7, 1967, and the police authorities were able to take
custody of the accused only on March 31, 1967, there is nothing in the
record to show that the warrant had actually been served on him, or
that it had been returned unserved for failure of the server to locate
said accused. Upon the other hand, there is direct evidence that the
accused voluntarily presented himself to the police on March 31,

320

321

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

1967. And the fact that it was effected sometime after the warrant of
arrest had been issued does not in the least detract from the voluntary
character of the surrender in the absence of proof to the contrary.
(People v. Brana, 30 SCRA 308)
The law does not require that the surrender be prior to the order
of arrest.
In People v. Yeda, 68 Phil. 740 (1939) and People v. Turalba,
G.R. No. L-29118, February 28, 1974, it was held that when after the
commission of the crime and the issuance of the warrant of arrest,
the accused presented himself in the municipal building to post the
bond for his temporary release, voluntary surrender is mitigating. The
fact that the order of arrest had already been issued is no bar to the
consideration of the circumstance because the law does not require
that the surrender be prior to the order of arrest. (Rivera v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 125867, May 31, 2000)
The mere filing of an information and/or the issuance of a warrant
of arrest will not automatically make the surrender "involuntary." In
People v. Oco, 458 Phil. 815, 851 (2003), the Court appreciated the
mitigating circumstance because immediately upon learning that a
warrant for his arrest was issued, and without the same having been
served on him, the accused surrendered to the police. Thus, it is clear
that notwithstanding the pendency of a warrant for his arrest, the
accused may still be entitled to the mitigating circumstance in case
he surrenders, depending on the actual facts surrounding the very
act of giving himself up. (De Vera v. De Vera, G.R. No. 172832, April
7, 2009)
"Voluntarily surrendered himself."
1.
Surrender of weapons cannot be equated with voluntary
surrender. (People v. Verges, No. L-36882-84,July 24, 1981, 105 SCRA
744, 756)
2.
Where the accused merely surrendered the gun used in the
killing, without surrendering his own person to the authorities, such
act of the accused does not constitute voluntary surrender. (People
v. Palo, 101 Phil. 963, 968)

TITLE ONE

chief of police to the scene of the crime without however surrendering
to him and admitting complicity in the killing did not amount to
voluntary surrender to the authorities and th.is circumstance would
not be extenuating in that case. (People v. Canoy, 90 Phil. 633; People
v. Rubinal, G.R. No. L-12275, November 29, 1960)
4.
Appellant did not go to the PC headquarters after the
shooting to surrender but merely to report the incident. Indeed, he
never evinced any desire to own the responsibility for the killing of
the deceased. (People v. Rogales, 6 SCRA 830)
The surrender must be made to a person in authority or his
agent.
A"person in authority" is one directly vested with jurisdiction,
that is, a public officer who has the power to govern and execute
the laws whether as an individual or as a member of some court or
governmental corporation, board or commission. A barrio captain and
a barangay chairman are also persons in authority. (Art. 152, R.P.C.,
as amended by P.D. No. 299)
An "agent of a person in authority" is a person, who, by direct
provision of the law, or by election or by appointment by competent
authority, is charged with the maintenance of public order and the
protection and security oflife and property and any person who comes
to the aid of persons in authority. (Art. 152, as amended by R.A. No.
1978)
Voluntary surrender to commanding officer of the accused is
mitigating, because the commanding officer is an agent of a person
in authority.
Voluntary surrender to the chief clerk ofa district engineer is not
mitigating, because such chief clerk is neither a person in authority
nor his agent.
An accused who surrendered first to the Justice of the Peace
(now Municipal Court), with whom he posted a bond, and then to
the Constabulary headquarters of the province, is entitled to the
mitigation of voluntary surrender. (People v. Casa/me, No. L-18033,
July 26, 1966, 17 SCRA 717, 720-721)

3.
The fact that the accused did not escape or go into hiding
after the commission of the murder and in fact he accompanied the
323
322

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Voluntary surrender does not simply mean non-flight.

Voluntary surrender does not simply mean non-flight. As a
matter of law, it does not matter if the accused never avoided arrest
and never hid or fled. What the law considers as mitigating is the
voluntary surrender of an accused before his arrest, showing either
acknowledgment of his guilt or an intention to save the authorities
from the trouble and expense that his search and capture would
require. (Quial v. Court ofAppeals, No. L-63564, November 28, 1983,
126 SCRA 28, 30; People v. Radomes, No. L-68421, March 20, 1986,
141 SCRA 548, 560)
The fact that the accused did not escape or go into hiding after
the commission of the murder and in fact he accompanied the chief of
police to the scene of the crime without however surrendering to him
and admitting complicity in the killing did not amount to voluntary
surrender to the authorities and this circumstance would not be
extenuating in that case. (People v. Canoy and People v. Rubina/,
supra)
Time and place of surrender.

The R.P.C. does not make any distinction among the various
moments when the surrender may occur.
Five days after the commission of the crime of homicide and
two days after the issuance of the order for his arrest, the accused
presented himself in the municipal building to post the bond for his
temporary release.
Held: This is a voluntary surrender constituting a mitigating
circumstance. The law does not require that the surrender be prior
to the issuance of the order of arrest. Moreover, the surrender
of the accused to post a bond for his temporary release was in
obedience to the order of arrest and was tantamount to the delivery
of his person to the authorities to answer for the crime for which
his arrest was ordered. (People v. Yecla, 68 Phil. 740, 741; People
v. Brana, No. L-29210, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 307, 316-317;
People v. Turalba, No. L-29118, February 28, 1974, 55 CRA 697,
704-705)
Note:

In these cases, there is nothing in the record to show that
the warrant had actually been served on the accused,
or that it had been returned unserved for failure of the
324

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art.13

server to locate the accused. The implication is that if the
accused cannot be located by the server of the warrant,
the ruling should be different.
In the case ofPeople v. Coronel, G.R. No. L-19091, June 30, 1966,
the accused committed robbery with homicide on September 7, 1947,
and surrendered on June 2, 1954. It was held that the surrender was
voluntary and a mitigating circumstance.
Ifthe appellants surrendered because, after having been fugitives
from justice for more than seven years, they found it impossible to
live in hostility and resistance to the authorities, martial law having
been declared, the surrender was not spontaneous. (People v. Sabater,
81 SCRA564J
Likewise, an accused was held entitled to the mitigating
circumstance of voluntary surrender where it appeared that he posted
the bond for his provisional liberty 18 days after the commission
of the crime and 14 and 16 days, respectively, after the first and
second warrants for his arrest were issued, the court declaring that
the fact that the warrant for his arrest had already been issued is
no bar to the consideration of this mitigating circumstance because
the law does not require that the surrender be prior to the order
of arrest. (People v. Valera, et al., L-15662, August 30, 1962) By
parity of reasoning, therefore, appellant Maximo Diva's voluntary
surrender to the chief of police of the municipality of Poro should
be considered to mitigate his criminal liability because the law does
not require him to surrender to the authorities of the municipality
of San Francisco where the offense was committed. (People v. Diva,
et al., 23 SCRA 332)
The surrender must be by reason of the commission of the crime
for which defendant Is prosecuted.

Defendant cannot claim the circumstance of voluntary
surrender because he did not surrender to the authority or its
agents by reason of the commission of the crime for which he was
prosecuted, but for being a Huk who wanted to come within the
pale of the law. (People v. Semanada, etc., G.R. No. L-11361, May
26, 1958)

325

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Thus, if the defendant surrendered as a Huk to take advantage
of the amnesty, but the crime for which he was prosecuted was
distinct and separate from rebellion, his surrender is not mitigating.
Surrender through an intermediary.
The accused surrendered through the mediation of his father
before any warrant of arrest had been issued. His surrender was
appreciated as mitigating. (People v. De la Cruz, No. L-45485,
September 19, 1978, 85 SCRA 285, 292)
When is surrender voluntary?

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

2.
The circumstance that the accused did not resist arrest
or struggle to free himself after he was taken to custody by the
authorities cannot amount to voluntary surrender. (People v. Siojo,
61 Phil. 307, 318; People w. Yuman, 61 Phil. 786, 787, 791) And while
it is claimed that the accused intended to surrender, the fact is that
he did not, despite several opportunities to do so, and was in fact
arrested. (People v. Dimdiman, 106 Phil. 391, 397)
3.
Voluntary surrender cannot be appreciated in favor of an
accused who surrenders only after a warrant of arrest is issued and
he finds it futile to continue being a fugitive from justice. (People v.
Rodriguez, No. L-41263, December 15, 1982, 119 SCRA 254,258)

A surrender to be voluntary must be spontaneous, showing
the intent of the accused to submit himself unconditionally to the
authorities, either (1) because he acknowledges his guilt, or (2) because
he wishes to save them the trouble and expenses necessarily incurred
in his search and capture. (Quoted in People v. Lagrana, No. L-68790,
January 23, 1987, 147 SCRA 281, 285)

4.
For voluntary surrender to be appreciated, it is necessary
that the same be spontaneous in such manner that it shows the
intent of the accused to surrender unconditionally to the authorities,
either because he acknowledges his guilt or because he wishes to save
them the trouble and expense necessarily incurred in his search and
capture. (People v. Lingatong, G.R. No. 34019, January 29, 1990, 181
SCRA 424, 430, citing earlier cases)

If none of these two reasons impelled the accused to surrender,
because his surrender was obviously motivated more by an intention
to insure his safety, his arrest being inevitable, the surrender is not
spontaneous and therefore not voluntary. (People v. Laurel, C.A., 59
0.G. 7618)

5.
The surrender is not spontaneous where the accused
took almost nine months after the issuance of the warrant of arrest
against him before he presented himself to the police authorities.
(People v. Mabuyo, No. L-29129, May 8, 1975, 63 SCRA 532, 542)

The surrender must be spontaneous.
The word "spontaneous" emphasizes the idea of an inner impulse,
acting without external stimulus. The conduct of the accused, not his
intention alone, after the commission of the offense, determines the
spontaneity of the surrender.
1.
The circumstances surrounding the surrender of Simplicio
Gervacio do not meet this standard, because immediately after
the commission of the robbery-slaying attributed to him and
Atanacio Mocorro, they fled together to the province ofLeyte which
necessitated the authorities of Quezon City to go to the place and
search for them. In fact, Simplicio Gervacio surrendered to the Mayor
ofBiliran 12 days after the commission of the crime, and only after
Luzviminda had been discovered in a far away sitio which led to
the arrest of Atanacio Mocorro. (People v. Gervacio, No. L-21965,
August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA 960, 977)

6.
Neither is voluntary surrender spontaneous where the
accused had gone into hiding for 2 1/2 years before surrendering.
(People v. Ablao, G.R. No. 69184, March 26, 1990, 183 SCRA 658,
669)
Intention to surrender, without actually surrendering, is not
mitigating.
The mitigating circumstance of voluntary surrender cannot be
appreciated in favor of the accused who claims to have intended to
surrender but did not, despite several opportunities to do so, and was
in fact arrested. (People v. Dimdiman, supra)
There is spontaneity even if the surrender is induced by fear of
retaliation by the victim's relatives.
The fact that the accused gave himself up to the police
immediately after the incident was not considered in his favor, because
327

326

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

during the trial, he declared that he did so out of fear of retaliatory
action from the relatives of the deceased. This, according to the trial
Judge, is not the kind of surrender that entitles the accused to the
benefit of voluntary surrender.
Held: That the surrender was induced by his fear ofretaliation
by the victim's relatives does not gainsay the spontaneity of the
surrender, nor alter the fact that by giving himself up, this accused
saved the State the time and trouble of searching for him until
arrested. (People v. Clemente, No. L-23463, September 28, 1967, 21
SCRA 261, 268-269)
When the offender imposed a condition or acted with external stimulus,
his surrender is not voluntary.
There could have been no voluntary surrender because the
accused went into hiding after having committed the crimes and
refused to surrender without having first conferred with the town
councilor. (People • Mutya, G.R. Nos. L-11255-56, September 30,
1959)

A surrender is not voluntary when forced by circumstances, as
when the culprits "considered it impossible to live in hostility and
resistance to the constituted authorities and their agents in view of
the fact that the said authorities had neither given them rest nor left
them in peace for a moment." (People v. Sakam, 61 Phil. 27, 34)
When they started negotiations for their surrender, the roads
through which their escape could be attempted were blocked and the
house where they were hiding was surrounded by the Constabulary
forces. They surrendered, because of their belief that their escape
was impossible under the circumstances. The surrender was not
voluntary. (People v. Timbol, G.R. Nos. L-47471-47473, August 4,
1944)
Requisites of plea of guilty.

In order that the plea of guilty may be mitigating, the three
requisites must be present:
1.

That the offender spontaneously confessed his guilt;

2.

That the confession of guilt was made in open court, that
is, before the competent court that is to try the case; and

TITLE ONE

3.

That the confession of guilt was made prior to the
presentation of evidence for the prosecution. (See People v.
Crisostomo, G.R. No. L-32243, April 15, 1988, 160 SCRA
47, 56, citing earlier cases. Also, People v. Bueza, G.R. No.
79619, August 20, 1990, 188 SCRA 683, 689)

The plea must be made before trial begins.
The trial on the merits had commenced and the prosecution had
already presented evidence proving the guilt of the accused when he
manifested that he would change his plea of not guilty to a plea of
guilty. He was properly re-arraigned. As ruled in People v. Kayanan,
83 SCRA 437, a pica of guilty made after arraignment and after trial
had begun does not entitle the accused to have such plea considered
as a mitigating circumstance. (People v. Lungbos, No. L-57293, June
21, 1988, 162 8CRA 383, 388-389; People v. Verano, Jr., No. L-45589,
July 28, 1988, 163 SCRA 614, 621)
The confession ofguilt must be made prior to the presentation of the
evidence for the prosecution.
Plea of guilty after the fiscal had presented evidence is not
mitigating because the third requisite is lacking. (People v. Co Chang,
60 Phil. 293)
The benefit of plea of guilty is not deserved by the accused who
submits to the law only after the presentation of some evidence for
the prosecution, believing that in the end the trial will result in his
conviction by virtue thereof. (People v. De la Cruz, 63 Phil. 874; People
v. Lambino, 103 Phil. 504)
It is not necessary that all the evidence of the prosecution have
been presented. Even ifthe first witness presented by the prosecution
had not finished testifying during the direct examination when the
accused withdrew his former plea of "not guilty" and substituted it
with the plea of "guilty," the plea of guilty is not mitigating. (People
v. Lambino, 103 Phil. 504)
Withdrawal of plea of not guilty and pleading guilty before
presentation of evidence by prosecution is still mitigating.
All that the law requires is voluntary plea of guilty prior to the
presentation of the evidence by the prosecution. Thus, even if during
329

328

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

the arraignment, the accused pleaded not guilty, he is entitled to
this mitigating circumstance as long as he withdraws his plea of not
guilty and thereafter pleads guilty to the charge before the fiscal could
present his evidence.
Plea ofguilty on appeal, not mitigating.
Plea of guilty in the Court of First Instance (now RTC) in a case
appealed from the Municipal Court is not mitigating, because the
plea of guilty must be made at the first opportunity, that is, in the
Municipal Court. (People v. Hermino, 64 Phil. 403, 407-408; People
v. De la Pera, 66 Phil. 451,453)
It cannot be properly stated that the appeal taken by the accused
from the Municipal Court to the Court of First Instance again restored
the case to its original state for the reason that the law requires a
trial de nova, because a trial de novo necessarily implies the existence
of a previous trial where evidence was presented by the prosecution.
Philosophy behind the rule.
Ifan accused, charged with an offense cognizable by the municipal
court, pleads not guilty therein, and on appeal to the court of first
instance, changes his plea to that of guilty upon re-arraignment, he
should not be entitled to the mitigating circumstance of confession of
guilt. The philosophy behind this rule is obvious. For the spontaneous
willingness of the accused to admit the commission of the offense
charged, which is rewarded by the mitigating circumstance, is
absent. (People v. Fortuno, 73 Phil. 597) Indeed, if the rule were
otherwise, an accused, who naturally nourishes the hope of acquittal,
could deliberately plead not guilty in the municipal court, and upon
conviction and on appeal to the court of first instance, plead guilty
just so he can avail himself of the benefit of a mitigating circumstance.
This cannot be countenanced. The accused should not be allowed to
speculate. (People v. Oandasan, 25 SCRA 277)

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

pleads guilty upon arraignment before this latter court, the plea of
not guilty upon arraignment at the preliminary investigation in the
municipal court is no plea at all. Hence, the accused could claim his
plea of guilty in the court of first instance as mitigating circumstance
pursuant to Article 13(7) of the R.P.C. (People v. Oandasan, supra)
The confession of guilt must be made in open court.

The extrajudicial confession made by the accused is not the
voluntary confession which the Code contemplates. Such confession
was made outside of the court. The confession of guilt must be made
in open court. (People v. Pardo, et al., 79 Phil. 568)
A conditional plea ofguilty is not a mitigating circumstance.
The pica of guilty was conditioned upon the allegation that
the killing was done when the appellant surprised his wife in the
act of sexual intercourse with the deceased Moro Lario. [The Court]
already pointed out that "an accused may not enter a conditional
pica of guilty in the sense that he admits his guilt provided that a
certain penalty be imposed upon him." [The Court] [is], therefore,
constrained to hold that the appellant in this case must be considered
as having entered a plea of not guilty. (People u. Moro Sabilul, 89
Phil. 283, 285)
Death penalty changed to life imprisonment because of plea of
guilty, even if done during the presentation of evidence.

While the accused entered a plea of guilty, he did it only during
the continuation of the trial so that this circumstance may not,
under the law, be considered to mitigate the liability of the accused.
However, such an admission of guilt indicates his submission to the
law and a moral disposition on his part to reform, hence, the death
penalty imposed is changed to life imprisonment. (People v. Coronel,
No. L19091, June 30, 1966, 17 SCRA 509, 513)

Plea of not guilty at the preliminary investigation Is no plea at all.

Plea of guilty to amended Information.

If an accused is charged with an offense cognizable by the court
of first instance, and pleads not guilty before the municipal court at
its preliminary investigation, and after the elevation of the case to
the court of frst instance the court of competent jurisdiction he

Trial had already begun on the original information for murder
and frustrated murder. However, in view of the willingness of the
accused to plead guilty for a lesser offense, the prosecution, with leave
of court, amended said information to make it one for homicide and

330

331

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

frustrated homicide, and the accused pleaded guilty thereto. That
was an entirely new information and no evidence was presented
in connection with the charges made therein before the accused
entered his plea of guilty. The accused is entitled to the mitigating
circumstance of plea of guilty. (People v. Ortiz, No. L-19585, November
29, 1965, 15 SCRA 352, 354)

with that of guilty to the lesser crime of double homicide. The
prosecution moved to amend the information so as to change the crime
from double murder to double homicide. Both motions were granted
by the court.

Art. 13

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability

Held: The plea of guilty to the lesser offense charged in the
amended information is mitigating. (People v. Intal, 101 Phil. 306,
307-308)

Plea of guilty to lesser offense than that charged, not mitigating.

Plea of guilty to a lesser offense is not a mitigating circumstance,
because to be voluntary, the plea of guilty must be to the offense
charged. (People v. Noble, 77 Phil. 93)
For voluntary confession to be appreciated as an extenuating
circumstance, the same must not only be made unconditionally but
the accused must admit to the offense charged, i.e., robbery with
homicide in the present case, and not to either robbery or homicide
only. Hence, if the voluntary confession is conditional or qualified, it
is not mitigating. (People v. Gano, et al., G.R. No. 134373, February
28, 2001)
Plea of guilty with qualification on aggravating and mitigating
circumstances.

But when the defendant pleaded guilty, only manifesting that
evident premeditation alleged in the information did not attend the
commission of the crime, and when the court required the presentation
of evidence on premeditation the prosecution failed to prove it, the plea
of guilty is mitigating, because although the confession was qualified
and introduction of evidence became necessary, the qualification did
not deny the defendant's guilt and, what is more, was subsequently
justified. It was not the defendant's fault that aggravating
circumstances were erroneously alleged in the information. (People
v. Yturriaga, 86 Phil. 534, 539; People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January
30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174, 216)
Plea of guilty to the offense charged In the amended information,
lesser than that charged in the original Information, Is mitigating.

Charged with double murder, the accused moved the Court to
permit him to withdraw his former plea of not guilty to be substituted
332

When the accused is charged with a grave offense, the court should
take his testimony in spite of his plea ofguilty.
The trial court should "determine whether the accused really and
truly comprehended the meaning, full significance and consequences
of his plea and that the same was voluntarily and intelligently entered
or given by the accused." (People v. Lacson, No. L-33060, February
25, 1974, 55 SCRA 589, 593)
Because there is no law prohibiting the taking of testimony
after a plea of guilty, where a grave offense is charged, th[e) Court
has deemed such taking of testimony the prudent and proper course
to follow for the purpose of establishing the guilt and the precise
degree ofculpability of the defendant. (People v. Saligan, No. L-35792,
November 29, 1973, 54 SCRA 190, 195; People v. Domingo, Nos.
L-30464-5, January 21, 1974, 55 SCRA 237, 243-245)
Mandatory presentation of evidence in plea of guilty to capital
offense.

The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure (Rule 116, Sec. 3)
provides that where the accused pleads guilty to a capital offense, that
court shall conduct a searching inquiry into the voluntariness and
full comprehension of the consequences of his plea and shall require
the prosecution to prove his guilt and the precise degree ofculpability.
The accused may present evidence in his behalf.
Searching Inquiry.

The guidelines in the conduct of a searching inquiry are as
follows:
(1)

Ascertain from the accused himself (a) how he was
brought into the custody of the law; (b) whether he had
the assistance of a competent counsel during the custodial
333

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
and preliminary investigations; and (c) under what
conditions he was detained and interrogated during the
investigations. This is intended to rule out the possibility
that the accused has been coerced or placed under a state
of duress either by actual threats of physical harm coming
from malevolent quarters or simply because of the judge's
intimidating robes.

TITLE ONE

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
required to narrate the tragedy or re-enact the crime or
furnish its missing details. (People v. Gumimba, G.R. No.
174056, February 27, 2007)
Reasons why plea of guilty Is mitigating.
It is an act of repentance and respect for the law; it indicates a
moral disposition in the accused, favorable to his reform. (People v.
De la Cruz, 63 Phil. 874, 876)

(2)

Ask the defense counsel a series of questions as to whether
he had conferred with, and completely explained to, the
accused the meaning and consequences of a plea of guilty.

(3)

Elicit information about the personality profile of the
accused, such as his age, socio-economic status, and
educational background, which may serve as a trustworthy
index of his capacity to give a free and informed plea of
guilty.

The basis of the mitigating circumstances of voluntary surrender
and plea of guilty is the lesser perversity of the offender.

Inform the accused of the exact length of imprisonment
or nature of the penalty under the law and the certainty
that he will serve such sentence. For not infrequently, an
accused pleads guilty in the hope of a lenient treatment or
upon bad advice or because of promises of the authorities
or parties of a lighter penalty should he admit guilt or
express remorse. It is the duty of the judge to ensure
that the accused does not labor under these mistaken
impressions because a plea of guilty carries with it not only
the admission of authorship of the crime proper but also of
the aggravating circumstances attending it, that increase
punishment.

Article 365, paragraph 5, of the R.P.C., which prescribes the
penalties for culpable felonies, provides that "in the imposition of these
penalties, the courts shall exercise their sound discretion, without
regard to the rules prescribed in Article 64." This last mentioned
article states, among other rules, that when there is a mitigating
circumstance without any aggravating circumstance, the penalty to
be imposed is the minimum period of the divisible penalty. (People
v. Agito, 103 Phil. 526, 529)

(4)

(5)

Inquire if the accused knows the crime with which he
is charged and to fully explain to him the elements of
the crime which is the basis of his indictment. Failure
of the court to do so would constitute a violation of his
fundamental right to be informed of the precise nature of
the accusation against him and a denial of his right to due
process.

Basis of paragraph 7.

Plea of guilty is not mitigating In culpable felonies and In crimes
punished by special laws.

When the crime is punished by a special law, the court shall
also exercise its sound discretion, as Article 64 is not applicable. The
penalty prescribed by special laws is usually not divisible into three
periods. Article 64 is applicable only when the penalty has three
periods.

Par. 8.- That the offender is deafand dumb, blind or otherwise
suffering from some physical defect which thus restricts
his means of action, defense, or communication with
his fellow beings.

(6)

All questions posed to the accused should be in a language
known and understood by the latter.

Deaf and dumb.

(7)

The trial judge must satisfy himself that the accused,
in pleading guilty, is truly guilty. The accused must be

In a criminal case charging robbery in an inhabited house, the
accused is deaf and dumb.

334

335

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Art. 13

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Held: He is entitled to the mitigating circumstance of being deaf
and dumb under Article 13, paragraph 8. (People v. Nazario, 97 Phil.
990)
Physical defect must restrict means of action, defense, or
communication with fellow beings.
Physical defect referred to in this paragraph is such as being
armless, cripple, or a stutterer, whereby his means to act, defend
himself or communicate with his fellow beings are limited. (Albert)
Question: Does this paragraph apply when the deaf-mute or the
blind is educated?
This paragraph does not distinguish between educated and
uneducated deaf-mute or blind persons.
The Code considers them as being on equal footing.
The fact that appellant suffers from a physical defect, a severed
left hand, does not mean that he should automatically be credited
with the mitigating circumstance contained in paragraph 8, Article
13 of the R.P.C. In order for this condition to be appreciated, it must
be shown that such physical defect limited his means to act, defend
himself or communicate with his fellow beings to such an extent that
he did not have complete freedom of action, consequently resulting
in diminution of the element of voluntariness. Such cannot be
appreciated where the appellant's physical condition clearly did not
limit his means of action, defense or communication, nor affect his free
will. In fact, despite his handicap, appellant nevertheless managed
to attack, overcome and fatally stab his victim. (People v. Deopante,
G.R. No. 102772, October 30, 1996)
Basis of paragraph 8.
Paragraph 8 of Article 13 considers the fact that one suffering
from physical defect, which restricts one's means of action, defense,
or communication with one's fellow beings, does not have complete
freedom of action and, therefore, there is a diminution of that element
of voluntariness.

336

Par.9.- Such illness of the offender as would diminish the
exercise of the willpower of the offender without
however depriving him of consciousness of his acts.
Requisites:
1.

That the illness of the offender must diminish the exercise
of his will-power.

2.

That such illness should not deprive the offender of
consciousness of his acts.

When the offender completely lost the exercise of will-power, It may
be an exempting circumstance.
When a person becomes affected either by dementia praecox or
by manic depressive psychosis, during the period of excitement, he
has no control whatsoever of his acts. (Opinion ofDr. Elias Domingo,
cited in the case of People v. Bonoan, 64 Phil. 95)
In such case, the person affected, acted upon an irresistible
homicidal impulse.
In the Bonoan case, the Supreme Court found the accused
demented at the time he perpetrated the crime of murder and
acquitted the accused.
Does this circumstance include illness of the mind?
Question: Does this paragraph refer to the mental condition
more or less disturbed?
It is said that the foregoing legal provision refers only to
diseases of pathological state that trouble the conscience or will.
(Albert)
Thus, this paragraph was applied to a mother who, under the
influence of a puerperal fever, killed her child the day following
her delivery. (December Supreme Court of Spain, September 28,
1897)
But in the case of People v. Francisco, 78 Phil. 694, it was held
that this paragraph applies to defendant who committed the crime
while suffering from some illness (of the body, the mind, the nerves,
or the moral faculty).
337

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Note that in accordance with the ruling in the above-mentioned
case, illness of the mind is included. It would seem that a diseased
mind, not amounting to insanity, may give place to mitigation.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

Basis of paragraph 9.
The circumstance in paragraph 9 of Article 13 is mitigating
because there is a diminution of intelligence and intent.

Illness of the offender considered mitigating.
1.

2.

The mistaken beliefofthe accused that the killing of a witch
was for the public good may be considered a mitigating
circumstance for the reason that those who have obsession
that witches are to be eliminated are in the same condition
as one who, attacked with a morbid infirmity but still
retaining consciousness of his acts, does not have real
control over his will. (People v. Balneg, et al., 79 Phil. 805)
Example of illness of the nerves or moral faculty.
"Although she is mentally sane, we, however, are
inclined to extend our sympathy to the appellant because
of her misfortunes and weak character. According to the
report she is suffering from a mild behaviour disorder as a
consequence of the illness she had in early life. [The Court]
[is] willing to regard this as a mitigating circumstance
under Art[icle] 13, R.P.C., either in paragraph 9 or in
paragraph 10." (People v. Amit, 82 Phil. 820)

3.

The fact that the accused is feeble-minded warrants the
finding in his favor of the mitigating circumstance either
under paragraph 8 or under paragraph 9 of Article 13.
(People v. Formigones, 87 Phil. 658)

4.

The evidence of accused-appellant shows that while there
was some impairment of his mental faculties, since he was
shown to suffer from the chronic mental disease called
schizo-affective disorder or psychosis, such impairment
was not so complete as to deprive him of his intelligence or
the consciousness of his acts. The schizo-affective disorder
or psychosis of accused-appellant may be classified as an
illness which diminishes the exercise of his willpower but
without depriving him of the consciousness of his acts. He
may thus be credited with this mitigating circumstance but
will not exempt him from his criminal liability. (People v.
Antonio, Jr., G.R. No. 144266, November 27, 2002)
338

Par. 10.- And, finally, any other circumstance of a similar
nature and analogous to those abovementioned.
Must be of similar nature and analogous to those mentioned In
paragraphs 1 to 9 of Article 13.
This paragraph authorizes the court to consider in favor of the
accused "any other circumstance of a similar nature and analogous
to those mentioned" in paragraphs 1 to 9 of Article 13.
Over 60 years old with failing sight, similar to over 70 years of age
mentioned in paragraph 2.
The fact that the defendant was over 60 years old and with
failing sight, is analogous to circumstance No. 2 of Article 13, as
similar to the case of one over 70 years of age. (People v. Reantillo
and Ruiz, C.A., G.R. No. 301, July 27, 1938)
Outraged feeling of owner of animal taken for ransom analogous
to vindication of a grave offense.
The accused is entitled to the mitigating circumstance of
analogous to, if not the same as, vindication of a grave offense
committed by the deceased where the latter took away the carabao
of the accused and held it for ransom, and thereafter failed to fulfill
his promise to pay its value after the carabao had died. (People v.
Monaga, No. L-38528, November 19, 1982, 118 SCRA 466, 476)
Outraged feeling of creditor, similar to passion and obfuscation
mentioned in paragraph 6.
A person who killed his debtor, who had tried to escape and
refused to pay his debt, is entitled to mitigating circumstance
similar to passion and obfuscation. (People v. Merenillo, C.A., 36
0.G. 2283)
339

Art.13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Impulse of jealous feeling, similar to passion and obfuscation.
The fact that the accused committed slander by charging
the offended party with being the concubine of the husband of
the accused under the impulse of a jealous feeling apparently
justified, though later discovered to be unfounded, because the
complainant, as verified by physical examination, was a virgin, may
be taken, under Article 13, paragraph 10, of the R.P.C. mitigating
circumstance similar to passion and obfuscation. (People v. Ubengen,
C.A., 36 O.G. 763)
It is not difficult to see that Idloy's boxing appellant during a
dance and in the presence of so many people, and he, an ex-soldier
and ex-member of a military organization and unit, well-known and
respected, undoubtedly produced rancour in the breast ofLibria who
must have felt deeply insulted; and to vindicate himself and appease
his self-respect, he committed the crime. The mitigation may well be
found under paragraph 10 of the same article. (People v. Libria, 95
Phil. 389)
Manifestations of Battered Wife Syndrome, analogous to an illness
that diminishes the exercise of will power.
The cyclical nature and the severity of the violence inflicted
upon appellant resulted in "cumulative provocation which broke
down her psychological resistance and natural self-control,"
"psychological paralysis," and "difficulty in concentrating or
impairment of memory."
Based on the explanations of the expert witnesses, such
manifestations were analogous to an illness that diminished the
exercise by appellant ofher will power without, however, depriving her
ofconsciousness ofher acts. There was, thus, a resulting diminution of
her freedom of action, intelligence or intent. Pursuant to paragraphs
9 and 10 ofArticle 13 of the R.P.C., this circumstance should be taken
in her favor and considered as a mitigating factor. (People v. Genosa,
G.R. No. 135981, January 14, 2004)
Esprit de corps, similar to passion and obfuscation.

Mass psychology and appeal to esprit de corps is similar to
passion or obfuscation. In this case, many of the soldiers who took
part in the killing of the deceased responded to the call and appeal
340

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 13

of their lieutenant who urged them to avenge the outrage committed
by the deceased who had summarily ejected certain soldiers from the
dance hall. They considered the act of the deceased a grave insult
against their organization. (People v. Villamora, 86 Phil. 287)
Voluntary restitution of stolen property, similar to voluntary
surrender mentioned in paragraph 7.
On the other hand, voluntary restitution of the property stolen
by the accused or immediately reimbursing the amount malversed
(People v. Luntao, C.A., 50 O.G. 1182) is a mitigating circumstance
as analogous to voluntary surrender.
Extreme poverty and necessity, similar to incomplete justification
based on state of necessity.
The accused, on account of extreme poverty and of the economic
difficulties then prevailing, was forced to pilfer two sacks of paper
valued at 1'10.00 from the Customhouse. He sold the two sacks of
paper for P2.50.
Held: The right to life is more sacred than a mere property right.
That is not to encourage or even countenance theft, but merely to dull
somewhat the keen and pain-producing edges of the stark realities
of life. (People v. Macbul, 74 Phil. 436, 438-439)
State of necessity is a justifying circumstance under Article 11,
paragraph 4. Incomplete justification is a mitigating circumstance
under paragraph 1 of Article 13.
Extreme poverty may mitigate a crime against property, such
as theft, but not a crime of violence such as murder. (People v. Ong,
L-34497, January 30, 1975; People v. Agustin, No. L-18368, March
31, 1966, 16 SCRA 467, 474-475)
But it is not mitigating where the accused had impoverished
himself and lost his gainful occupation by committing crimes and
not driven to crime due to want and poverty. (People v. Pujinio, No.
L-21690, April 29, 1969, 27 SCRA 1185, 1189-1190)
Testifying for the prosecution, analogous to plea of guilty.
The act of the accused of testifying for the prosecution, without
previous discharge, is a mitigating circumstance analogous to a plea
341

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

of guilty. (People v. Navasca, No. L-28107, March 15, 1977, 76 SCRA
70, 81)

in nature and analogous to those expressly prescribed as mitigating
circumstances. (People v. Dy Pol, 64 Phil. 563, 565)

Restitution In malversatlon case Is only a mitigating circumstance.

Not resisting arrest, not analogous to voluntary surrender.

Payment or reimbursement is not a defense for exoneration in
malversation; it may only be considered as a mitigating circumstance.
This is because damage is not an element of malversation.

Yielding to arrest without the slightest attempt to resist is not
analogous to voluntary surrender. (People v. Rabuya, No. L-30518,
November 7, 1979, 94 SCRA 123, 138)

Art.13

It bears stressing that the full restitution of the amount
malversed will not in any way exonerate an accused, as payment
is not one of the elements of extinction of criminal liability. Under
the law, the refund of the sum misappropriated, even before the
commencement of the criminal prosecution, does not exempt the
guilty person from liability for the crime. (U.S. v. Reyes, 14 Phil. 718
[I910)) AL most, then, payment of the amount malversed will only
serve as a mitigating circumstance akin to voluntary surrender, as
provided for in paragraph 7 of Article 13 in relation to paragraph 10
of the same Article of the R.P.C. (Perez v. People, G.R. No. 164763,
February 12, 2008)
Killing the wrong man is not mitigating.

Neither do[es] [the Court] believe that the fact that he made a
mistake in killing the wrong man should be considered as a mitigating
circumstance. (People v. Gona, 54 Phil. 605, 606-607)
Not analogous mitigating circumstance.

In parricide, the fact that the husband of the accused was
unworthy or was a rascal and a bully and was bad (People v. Canja,
86 Phil. 518, 521), or that the victim was a bad or quarrelsome
person (People v. Fajardo, C.A., 36 0.G. 2256) is not a circumstance
of a similar nature and analogous to any of those mentioned in the
preceding paragraphs of Article 13.
The accused, who was charged with the crime of falsification,
pleaded guilty and invoked as mitigating circumstance the lack of
irreparable material damage.

Art. 13

The condition of running amuck Is not mitigating.

The R.P.C. enumerates the circumstances which mitigate
criminal liability, and the condition of running amuck is not one of
them, or one by analogy. The defense contended that running amuck
is a cult among the Moros that is age-old and deeply rooted. Insofar
as they are applicable, mitigating circumstances must be applied
alike to all criminals be they Christians, Moros or Pagans. (People v.
Salazar, 105 Phil. 1058)
Mitigating circumstances which are personal to the offenders.

Mitigating circumstances which arise (1) from the moral
attributes of the offender, or (2) from his private relations with
the offended party, or (3) from any other personal cause, shall only
serve to mitigate the liability of the principals, accomplices, and
accessories as to whom such circumstances are attendant. (Art. 62,
par. 3)
Mitigating circumstances which arise from the moral attributes of
the offender.
A and B killed C, A acting under an impulse which produced
obfuscation. The circumstance of obfuscation arose from the moral
attribute of A and it shall mitigate the liability of A only. It shall not
mitigate the liability of B.
Mitigating circumstances which arise from the private relations ofthe
offender with the offended party.

Held: This is not recognized as a mitigating circumstance in the
R.P.C. Neither is it among those which may be considered as similar

A, son of B, committed robbery against the latter, while C, a
stranger, bought the property taken by A from B, knowing that the
property was the effect of the crime of robbery. The circumstance
of relationship (Art. 15) arose from the private relation of A with B

342

343

Art. 13

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Crimi nal Law

and it shall mitigate the liability of A only. It shall not mitigate the
liability of C, an accessory. (Art. 19)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

IV. Aggravating circumstances.
1.

Mitigating circumstances which arise from any other personal cause.
A, 16 years old and acting with discernment, inflicted serious
physical injuries on C. B, seeing what A had done to C, kicked the
latter, thereby concurring in the criminal purpose ofA and cooperating
with him by simultaneous act. (Art. 18) The circumstance of minority
arose from other personal cause and it shall mitigate the liability of
A only. It shall not mitigate the liability of B, an accomplice.
Note:

2.

2.

Entrapment of the accused.

4.

The accused is over 18 years of age. If the offender is over
18 years old, his age is neither exempting nor mitigating.
(People v. Marasigan, 70 Phil. 583)

5.

Four kinds of aggravating circumstances.

1.

In Article 14, the circumstances in paragraphs l,
2, 3 (dwelling), 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 14, 18, 19, and 20, except
"by means of motor vehicles," are generic aggravating
circumstances.
2.

344

Specific - Those that apply only to particular crimes.
Example
Ignominy in crimes against chastity or
cruelty and treachery in crimes against persons.

Performance of righteous action.
The performance of righteous action, no matter how
meritorious it may be, is not justifying, exempting, or
mitigating circumstance in the commission of wrongs, and
although the accused had saved the lives of a thousand
and one persons, ifhe caused the killing of a single human
being, he is, nonetheless, criminally liable. (People v.
Victoria, 78 Phil. 122)

Generic - Those that can generally apply to all crimes.
Example - Dwelling, nighttime, or recidivism.

Mistake in the identity of the victim, for under Article 4,
paragraph 1, the accused is criminally liable even if the
wrong done is different from that which is intended. See
Article 49 as to its effect on the penalty.

3.

Basis
They are based on the greater perversity ofthe offender
manifested in the commission of the felony as shown by:
(1) the motivating power itself; (2) the place of commission;
(3) the means and ways employed; (4) the time; or (5) the
personal circumstances of the offender, or of the offended
party.

It seems that all mitigating circumstances are personal
to the offenders.

Mistake in the blow or aberratio ictus, for under Article 48,
there is a complex crime committed. The penalty is even
higher.

Definition
Aggravating circumstances are those which, if
attendant in the commission of the crime, serve to increase
the penalty without, however, exceeding the maximum of
the penalty provided by law for the offense.

Circumstances which are neither exempting nor mitigating.
1.

Art.13

In Article 14, the circumstances in paragraphs (except
dwelling) 15, 16, 17, and 21 are specific aggravating
circumstances.
3.

Qualifying - Those that change the nature of the crime.
Example -Alevosia (treachery) or evident premeditation qualifies the killing of a person to murder.
Article 248 enumerates the qualifying aggravating
circumstances which qualify the killing of person to
murder.
345

Art. 13

4.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 13

Inherent
Those that must of necessity accompany the
commission of the crime. (Art. 62, par. 2)

Aggravating circumstances which do not have the effect of
increasing the penalty.

Example - Evident premeditation is inherent in
robbery, theft, estafa, adultery, and concubinage.

1.

Qualifying aggravating circumstance distinguished from generic
aggravating circumstance.

Aggravating circumstances (a) which in themselves constitute a
crime specially punishable by law, or (b) which are included by
the law in defining a crime and prescribing the penalty therefor
shall not be taken into account for the purpose of increasing the
penalty. (Art. 62, par. 1)

1.

Examples:

The effect of a generic aggravating circumstance, not offset by
any mitigating circumstance, is to increase the penalty which
should be imposed upon the accused to the maximum period,
but without exceeding the limit prescribed by law; while that of
a qualifying circumstance is not only to give the crime its proper
and exclusive name but also to place the author thereof in such
a situation as to deserve no other penalty than that specially
prescribed by law for said crime. (People v. Bayot, 64 Phil. 269,
273)

2.

A qualifying aggravating circumstance cannot be offset by a
mitigating circumstance; a generic aggravating circumstance
may be compensated by a mitigating circumstance.

3.

A qualifying aggravating circumstance to be such must be alleged
in the information. !fit is not alleged, it is a generic aggravating
circumstance only.

Qualifying circumstances need not be preceded by the words "aggravating/qualifying," "qualifying," or "qualified by" to be considered as
qualifying circumstances.
Qualifying circumstances need not be preceded by the words
aggravating/qualifying," "qualifying," or "qualified by" to be
considered as qualifying circumstances. It is sufficient that these
circumstances be specified in the Information to apprise the accused of
the charges against him to enable him to prepare fully for his defense,
thus precluding surprises during the trial. When the prosecution
specifically alleges in the Information the circumstances mentioned in
the law as qualifying the crime, and succeeds in proving them beyond
reasonable doubt, the Court is constrained to impose the higher
penalty mandated by law. (People u. Aquino, G.R. Nos. 144340-42,
August 6, 2002)
346

2.

a.

"That the crime be committed by means of xx xfire, xxx
explosion" (Art. 14, par. 12) is in itself a crime of arson
(Art. 321) or crime involving destruction. (Art. 324) It
is not to be considered to increase the penalty for the
crime of arson or for the crime involving destruction.

b.

"That the act x xx be committed in the dwelling of the
offended party" (Art. 14, par. 3) or "that the crime be
committed after an unlawful entry" (Art. 14, par. 18),
or "that as a means to the commission of a crime a wall,
roof, floor, door, or window be broken (Art. 14, par. 19) is
included by Article 299 in defining robbery in an inhabited
house. It shall not be taken into account for the purpose
of increasing the penalty for that kind of robbery.

The same rule shall apply with respect to any aggravating
circumstance inherent in the crime to such a degree that it
must of necessity accompany the commission thereof. (Art. 62,
par. 2)
Examples:
a.

Evident premeditation is inherent in theft, robbery, estafa,
adultery, and concubinage.

b.

Taking advantage of public position is inherent in crimes
where the offenders, who are public officers, committed the
crime in the exercise of their functions, such as in bribery,
malversation, etc.

Aggravating circumstances which are personal to the offenders.
Aggravating circumstances which arise: (al from the moral
attributes of the offender; or (b) from his private relations with
347

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 13

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 13

Affect Criminal Liability
the offended party; or (c) from any other personal cause, shall only
serve to aggravate the liability of the principals, accomplices, and
accessories as to whom such circumstances are attendant. (Art. 62,
par. 3)

of treachery consists in the material execution of the
act. Since A had no knowledge of it, treachery shall only
aggravate the liability of B.
2.

Examples:
1.

A, with evident premeditation, gave BP1,000.00 to kill
C. B immediately killed C. Evident premeditation is an
aggravating circumstance which arises from the moral
attribute ofA. It shall serve to aggravate only the liability
of A, but not that of B.

2.

A, stepson ofB, killed the latter. C, knowing that A killed B
without justification, buried the dead body of B to prevent
the discovery of the crime. The private relation ofA with B
shall serve to aggravate only the liability ofA. It shall not
serve to aggravate the liability of C, the accessory. (Art.
19, par. 2)

3.

A ordered B and C to kill D, instructing them to wait
until nighttime so that the crime could be committed with
impunity.Band C killed D at nighttime. Although A did
not take direct part in the commission of the crime, the
aggravating circumstance ofnighttime shall also aggravate
his liability, because he had knowledge ofit at the time of
the execution of the act by B and C.

Aggravating circumstances not presumed.

An aggravating circumstance should be proved as fully as the
crime itself in order to increase the penalty. (People v. Barrios, No.
L-34785, July 30, 1979, 92 SCRA 189, 196, citing People v. Marcina,
77 SCRA 238, 246; People v. Almario, G.R. No. 69374, March 16,
1989, 171 SCRA 291,302)

A, who was previously convicted by final judgment of theft
and served sentence therefor, and B committed robbery.
Both were prosecuted and found guilty after trial. Upon
his conviction for robbery, A was a recidivist. Recidivism
is an aggravating circumstance which arises from personal
cause. It shall serve to aggravate only the liability ofA, but
not that of B.

Aggravating circumstances which depend for their application upon
the knowledge of the offenders.

The circumstances which consist (1) in the material execution
of the act, or (2) in the means employed to accomplish it, shall serve
to aggravate the liability of those persons only who had knowledge
of them at the time of the execution of the act or their cooperation
therein. (Art. 62, par. 4)
Illustrations:
1.

In his house, A ordered B to kill C. A and B did not talk
about the manner C would be killed. B left the house of
A and looked for C. B found C and killed the latter with
treachery. (Art. 14, par. 16) The aggravating circumstance
348

349

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art.14

Affect Criminal Liability

9.

Chapter Four
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH AGGRAVATE
CRIMINAL LIABILITY
Art. 14. Aggravating circumstances. -- 'The following are
aggravating circumstances:
1. That advantage be taken by the offender of his public
position.
2.
That the crime be committed in contempt of or with
insult to the public authorities.
8.
That the act be committed with insult or in disregard
of the respect due the offended party on account of his rank,
age, or sex, or that it be committed in the dwelling of the
offended party, if the latter has not given provocation.
4.
That the act be committed with abuse of confidence
or obvious ungratefulness.
5.
That the crime be committed in the palace of
the Chief Executive, or in his presence, or where public
authorities are engaged in the discharge of their duties or in
a place dedicated to religious worship.
6.
THat the crime be committed in the nighttime
or in an uninhabited place, or by a band, whenever such
circumstances may facilitate the commission of the offense.
Whenever more than three armed malefactors shall have
acted together in the commission of an offense, it shall be
deemed to have been committed by a band.
7.
That the crime be committed on the occasion of a
conflagration, shipwreck, earthquake, epidemic, or other
calamity or misfortune.
8.
That the crime be committed with the aid of armed
men or persons who insure or afford impunity.
350

That the accused is a recidivist.

A recidivist is one who, at the time of his trial for one
crime, shall have been previously convicted by final judgment
of another crime embraced in the same title of this Code.
IO. That the offender has been previously punished
for an offense to which the law attaches an equal or greater
penalty or for two or more crimes to which it attaches a lighter
penalty.
11. That the crime be committed in consideration of a
price, reward, or promise.
12. That the crime be committed by means of inundation,
fire, poison, explosion, stranding of a vessel or intentional
damage thereto, derailment of a locomotive, or by the use of
any other artifice involving great waste and ruin.
13. That the act be committed with evident premeditation.
14. That craft, fraud, or disguise be employed.
15. That advantage be taken of superior strength, or
means be employed to weaken the defense.
16. That the act be committed with treachery (alevosia).
There is treachery when the offender commits any of the
crimes against the person, employing means, methods or forms
in the execution thereof which tend directly and specially to
insure its execution, without risk to himself arising from the
defense which the offended party might make.
17. That means be employed or circumstances brought
about which add ignominy to the natural effects of the act.
18. That the crime be committed after an unlawful entry.
There is an unlawful entry when an entrance is effected
by a way not intended for the purpose.
19. That as a means to the commission of a crime a wall,
roof, floor, door, or window be broken.

351

Art. 14

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

20. That the crime be committed with the aid of persons
under fifteen years of age, or by means of motor vehicle,
airships, or other similar means.
21. That the wrong done in the commission of the
crime be deliberately augmented by causing other wrong not
necessary for its commission.

To be appreciated, qualifying and aggravating circumstances must
be alleged in the Information.
Section 8, Rule 110, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure
requires that qualifying and aggravating circumstances be alleged.
It states:
Sec. 8. Designation of the offense. - The complaint or
information shall state the designation of the offense given by
the statute, aver the acts or omissions constituting the offense,
and specify its qualifying and aggravating circumstances. If
there is no designation of the offense, reference shall be made
to the section or subsection of the statute punishing it.
Pursuant to the 2000 Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure,
every Complaint or Information must state not only the qualifying
but also the aggravating circumstances. This rule may be given
retroactive effect in the light of the well-established rule that statutes
regulating the procedure of the courts will be construed as applicable
to actions pending and undetermined at the time of their passage.
The aggravating circumstances of evident premeditation, dwelling
and unlawful entry, not having been alleged in the Information, may
not now be appreciated to enhance the liability of accused-appellant.
(People v. Antonio, G.R. No. 144266, November 27, 2002)
Due to such requirement being pro reo, the Court has authorized
its retroactive application in favor of even those charged with felonies
committed prior to December 1, 2000,i.e., the date of the effectivity of
the 2000 revision of the Rules of Criminal Procedure that embodied
the requirement. (People v. Mondijar, G.R. No. 141914, November 21,
2002, 392 SCRA 356; People v. Marquez, G.R. No. 136736, April II,
2002, 380 SCRA 561)
352

Art. 14

If not alleged, they may still be considered In the award of damages.
Although the aggravating circumstances in question cannot
be appreciated for the purpose of fixing a heavier penalty in this
case, they should, however, be considered as bases for the award of
exemplary damages, conformably to current jurisprudence. (People
v. Evina, G.R. Nos. 124830-31, June 27, 2003)

Par. 1. -- That advantage be taken by the offender of his public
position.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.
This is based on the greater perversity of the offender, as shown
by the personal circumstance of the offender and also by the means
used to secure the commission of the crime.
Applicable only when the offender Is a public officer.
The aggravating circumstance that advantage be taken by
the offender of his public position applies only when the person
committing the crime is a public officer who takes advantage of his
public position.
Meaning of "advantage be taken by the offender of his public
position."
The public officer must use the influence, prestige or ascendancy
which his office gives him as the means by which he realizes his
purpose. The essence of the matter is presented in the inquiry, "Did
the accused abuse his office in order to commit the crime?" (U.S. v.
Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 156-157)
Examples:
a.

The accused took advantage of his public position. He could
not have maltreated the victim if he was not a policeman
on guard duty. Because of his position, he had access to
the cell where the victim was confined. The prisoner was
under his custody. (People v. Ural, No. L-30801, March 27,
1974, 56 SCRA 138, 145)
353

Art. 14

b.

c.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

There is abuse of public position where a police officer in
the course of investigation of a charge against him for grave
threats shot the complainant in a treacherous manner.
(People v. Reyes, No. L-33154, February 27, 1976, 69 SCRA
474, 480-481)
Advantage of public position is present where the accused
used their authority as members of the police and
constabulary to disarm the victim before shooting him.
(People v. Asuncion, G.R. No. 83870, November 14, 1989,
179 SCRA 396, 402)

This aggravating circumstance is not present when a Congressman
offered resistance to a peace officer.

In the case of a Congressman who offered resistance to his
captor upon being surprised in a gambling house, this aggravating
circumstance is not present. (People v. Veloso, 48 Phil. 169, 183) The
reason for this ruling is that the Congressman did not take advantage
of the influence or reputation of his office.
This aggravating circumstance is present when a councilor collects
fines and misappropriates them.

U.S. v. Torrida
(23 Phil. 189)
Facts: 'The accused, shortly after entering upon his duties as councilor of
the town of Aparri, ordered that deaths of all large animals must be reported
to him as councilman. As a result of this instruction, the owners of several
such animals were induced to pay the accused supposed fines on the belief
that such were required by a municipal ordinance. He spent the money paid
to, and received by him as fines.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Note: The crime committed by Torrida is estafa by means of deceit.

(Art. 315, par. 2)
When the public officer did not take advantage of the influence of
his position, this aggravating circumstance is not present.

U.S. w. Dacuycuy
(9 Phil. 84)
Facts: 39 persons requested the accused, then a councilor, to purchase
cedulas for them giving him P39.00. He took only 16 cedulas, and spent the
rest of the money.
Held: When a public officer commits a common crime independent of his
official functions and does acts that are not connected with the duties of his
office, he should be punished as a private individual without this aggravating
circumstance.
Note: In this case, Dacuycuy did not avail himself of the influence,
prestige or ascendancy which his position carried with it, when he committed
the crime of estafa with abuse of confidence. (Art. 315, par. 1) He received
the money in his private capacity. He was requested by the people to buy
cedula certificates for them.

Likewise, the mere fact that the defendant, a justice of the peace,
misappropriated the money he received from the debtor in an extrajudicial agreement under obligation to turn it over to the creditor,
does not aggravate his liability, inasmuch as no legal proceedings were
pending at the time of this agreement and the debt was not reduced
to judgment. He did not take advantage of his official position in the
commission of the crime of estafa. (U.S. v. Estabaya, 36 Phil. 64, 67)
There must be proof that the accused took advantage of his public
position.

that the accused did, by taking advantage of his public position, deceive and
defraud the injured parties out of the money they paid him.

It is not shown that accused-appellant took advantage of his
position as confidential agent of Mayor Claudio in shooting the victim,
or that he used his "influence, prestige or ascendancy" in killing the
deceased. Accused-appellant could have been shot by Bayona without
having occupied the said position. Thus, in the absence of proof that
advantage was taken by accused-appellant of his being a confidential
agent, the aggravating circumstance of abuse of public position could
not be properly appreciated against him. (People v. Ordiales, No.
L-30956, November 23, 1971, 42 8CRA 238, 245-246)

354

355

Held: The fact that the accused was councilor at the time placed him
in a position to commit these crimes. If he were not a councilor he could not
have induced the injured parties to pay these alleged fines. It was on account

of his being councilor that the parties believed that he had the right to collect
fines and it was for this reason that they made the payments. It is true that he
hod no right to either impose or collect any fine whatsoever and it is likewise
true that a municipal councilor is not an official designated by law to collect
public fines, but these facts do not destroy or disprove the important fact

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Peace officers taking advantage of their public positions.

A policeman in uniform who abducted a girl by availing himself
of his position (U.S. w. Yumul, 34 Phil. 169, 175), or the chiefofpolice
who, during the search of a boat by means of intimidation, obtained
money from the crew (People • Cerdeia, 51 Phil. 393, 394-395), or
a special agent of the military police who committed robbery with
homicide with the gun which he bad been authorized to carry as a
peace officer (People v. Madrid, 88 Phil. 1, 15), committed the crime
by taking advantage of his public position.
In the case of Fortuna v. People, G.R. No. 135784, December 4,
2000, it was held that"[ t]he mere fact that the three accused were all
police officers at the time of the robbery placed them in a position to
perpetrate the offense. If they were not police officers, they could not
have terrified the Montecillos into boarding the mobile patrol car and
forced them to hand over their money. Precisely, it was on account of
their authority that the Montecillos believed that Mario had in fact
committed a crime and would be brought to the police station for
investigation unless they gave them what they demanded."
Wearing uniform is immaterial in certain cases.
Although be was off-duty and there is evidence that he was in
civilian clothes at the time, it is nonetheless obvious that knowing that
the offended party was aware of his being a policeman, and sought to
impose, illegally, his authority as such, the penalty provided by law
must be meted out in its maximum period. (People • Tongco, 3 CA.
Rep.1071)
The mere fact that he was in fatigue uniform and had army rifle
at the time is not sufficient to establish that he misused his public
position in the commission of the crimes. (People v. Pantoja, No.
L-18793, October 11, 1968, 25 SCRA 468, 471-472)
Failure In official duties is tantamount to abusing of office.

But even if defendant did not abuse his office, ifit is proven that
he has failed in his duties as such public officer, this circumstance
would warrant the aggravation of his penalty.
Thus, the fact that defendant was the vice-president of a town
at the time he voluntarily joined a band of brigands made his liability
greater. (U.S. v. Cagayan, 4 Phil. 424, 426)
366

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Not aggravating when It is an integral element of, or Inherent in,
the offense.

This circumstance, taking advantage of public position, cannot
be taken into consideration in offenses where taking advantage of
official-position is made by law an integral element of the crime, such
as in malversation under Article 217, or in falsification of document
committed by public officers under Article 171. (People v. Teuez, 44
Phil. 275, 277)
Taking advantage of public position is inherent in the case of
accessories under Article 19, paragraph 3, and in crimes committed
by public officers. (Arts. 204 to 245)
Not aggravating if accused could have perpetrated the crime without
occupying police position.

In this case, there was no showing that accused-appellant
took advantage of his being a policeman to shoot Jelord Velez or
that he used his "influence, prestige or ascendancy" in killing the
victim. Accused-appellant could have shot Velez even without being
a policeman. In other words, if the accused could have perpetrated
the crime even without occupying his position, there is no abuse of
public position. In People v. Herrera, the Court emphatically said
that the mere fact that accused-appellant is a policeman and used
his government issued .38 caliber revolver to kill is not sufficient to
establish that he misused his public position in the commission of the
crime. (People • Villamor, G.R. Nos. 140407-08, January 15, 2002)

Par. 2.- That the crime be committed in contempt of or with
insult to the public authorities.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

This is based on the greater perversity of the offender, as shown
by his lack of respect for the public authorities.
Requisites of this circumstance:

1.

That the public authority is engaged in the exercise of his
functions.
367

Art. 14

2.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

That he who is thus engaged in the exercise of said
functions is not the person against whom the crime is
committed. (U.S. v. Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 156; People
v. Siojo, 61 Phil. 307, 317)

3.

The offender knows him to be a public authority.

4.

His presence has not prevented the offender from
committing the criminal act.

Example of this aggravating circumstance:
A and B are quarreling on a street and the municipal mayor,
upon passing by, attempts to separate them to stop the quarrel.
Notwithstanding the intervention and the presence of the mayor, A
and B continued to quarrel until A succeeds in killing B. In this case,
A commits the crime of homicide with the aggravating circumstance
of "in contempt of or with insult to the public authority."

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

A teacher Is not a public authority.
While a teacher or professor of a public or recognized private
school is deemed to be a "person in authority" in the last paragraph of
Article 152, such teacher or professor is so deemed only for purposes of
application of Articles 148 (direct assault upon a person in authority),
and 151 (resistance and disobedience to a person in authority or the
agents of such person) of the R.P.C. In marked contrast, the first
paragraph of Article 152 does not identify specific articles of the
Revised Penal Code for the application of which any person "directly
vested with jurisdiction, etc." is deemed "a person in authority."
Because a penal statute is not to be given a longer reach and broader
scope than is called for by the ordinary meaning of the ordinary words
used by such statute, to the disadvantage of an accused, the Court
held that it does not believe that a teacher or professor of a public
or recognized private school may be regarded as a "public authority"
within the meaning of paragraph 2 of Article 14 of the Revised Penal
Code. (People v. Tac-an, G.R. No. 76338, February 26, 1990)

Meaning of "public authority."
A public authority, sometimes also called a person in authority,
is a public officer who is directly vested with jurisdiction, that is, a
public officer who has the power to govern and execute the laws. The
councilor, the mayor, the governor, etc., are persons in authority.
The barangay captain and barangay chairman are also persons in
authority. (Art. 152, as amended by P.D. No. 1232, November 7, 1977)

The crime should not be committed against the public authority.

Not applicable when crime is committed in the presence of an
agent only.

This rule was not followed in the case of People v. Santok,
G.R. No. L-18226, May 30, 1963, where it was held that the crime
committed was homicide with the aggravating circumstance of
commission of the offense in contempt of the public authority, since
the deceased was shot while in the performance of his official duty
as barrio lieutenant.

Paragraph 2 of Article 14 was not applied in a case where the
crime was committed in the presence of the chief of police of a town,
because he is not a public authority, but an agent of the authorities.
(People v. Siojo, 61 Phil. 307, 311, 317; People vw. Verzo, No. L-22517,
December 26, 1967, 21 SCRA 1403, 1410)
An agent of a person in authority is "any person who, by direct
provision of law or by election or by appointment by competent
authority, is charged with the maintenance of public order and the
protection and security oflife and property, such as barrio councilman,
barrio policeman and barangay leader, and any person who comes to
the aid of persons in authority." (Art. 152, as amended by B.P. Big.
873)
358

If the crime is committed against a public authority while he is
in the performance of his official duty, the offender commits direct
assault (Art. 148) without this aggravating circumstance, because it
is not a crime committed "in contempt of or with insult" to him, but
a crime directly committed against him.

The accused should have been prosecuted for and convicted ofa
complex crime of homicide with direct assault (Art. 249, in relation to
Art. 48 and Art. 148, R.P.C.), without the aggravating circumstance.
Knowledge that a public authority ls present is essential.
Lack of knowledge on the part of the offender that a public
authority is present indicates lack of intention to insult the public
authority.
359

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Thus, if A killed B in the presence of the town mayor, but A did
not know of the presence of the mayor, this aggravating circumstance
should not be considered against A.
Presence of public authority has not prevented offender from
committing the crime.
An offense may be said to have been committed in contempt of
a public authority when his presence, made known to the offender,
has not prevented the latter from committing the criminal act.

Par. 3.-- That the act be committed ( 1) with insult or in
disregard of the respect due the offended party on
account of his (a) rank, (b) age, or (c) sex, or (2) that
it be committed in the dwelling of the offended party,
if the latter has not given provocation.
When all the four aggravating circumstances are present, must they
be considered as one?
Four circumstances are enumerated in this paragraph, which
can be considered single or together. If all the four circumstances are
present, they have the weight of one aggravating circumstance only.
(Albert) But see the case of People v. Santos, 91 Phil. 320, cited under
paragraph 6, Article 14.
The aggravating circumstances of sex and age of the injured
party as well as those of dwelling place and nighttime must also be
taken into account. (People v. Taga, 53 Phil. 273)
Basis of these aggravating circumstances.
These circumstances are based on the greater perversity of the
offender, as shown by the personal circumstances of the offended
party and the place of the commission of the crime.
Applicable only to crimes against persons or honor.
This circumstance (rank, age, or sex) may be taken into account
only in crimes against persons or honor.
Thus, in the case of the robbery of a thing belonging to the
President, the aggravating circumstance of disregard of respect due
360

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

the offended party cannot be taken into account, because the mere
fact that the thing belongs to the President does not make it more
valuable than the things belonging to a private person.
Disregard of the respect due the offended party on account of
his rank, age or sex may be taken into account only in crimes against
persons or honor, when in the commission of the crime, there is some
insult or disrespect to rank, age or sex. It is not proper to consider
this aggravating circumstance in crimes against property. Robbery
with homicide is primarily a crime against property and not against
persons. Homicide is a mere incident of the robbery, the latter being
the main purpose and object of the criminal. (People v. Pagal, No.
L-32040, October 25, 1977, 79 SCRA 570, 576-577)
Meaning of "with insult or in disregard."
It is necessary to prove the specific fact or circumstance, other
than that the victim is a woman (or an old man or one of high rank),
showing insult or disregard of sex (or age or rank) in order that it
may be considered as aggravating circumstance. (People v. Valencia,
CA., 43 0.G. 3740) There must be evidence that in the com.mission
of the crime, the accused deliberately intended to offend or insult the
sex or age of the offended party. (People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548,
550-551)
The circumstance of old age cannot be considered aggravating.
There was no evidence that the accused deliberately intended to offend
or insult the age of the victim. (People v. Diaz, 70 O.G. 4173, citing
People v. Gervacio, 24 SCRA 960; People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548;
People v. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35, 44)
With insult or in disregard of the respect due the offended party
on account1.

of the rank of the offended party.
There must be a difference in the social condition of
the offender and the offended party.
For example, a private citizen who attacked and
injured a person in authority, or a pupil who attacked and
injured his teacher (U.S. v. Cabiling, 7 Phil. 469,474), the
act not constituting direct assault under Article 148 of the
R.P.C.
361

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
Killing a judge because he was strict or because
of resentment which the accused harbored against him
as a judge, constitutes the aggravating circumstance of
disregard of the respect due the offended party on account
of his rank. (People v. Valeriano, 90 Phil. 15, 34-35)

scale of comparison within a position. (People v. Rodil,
supra, at 330)
Proof of fact of disregard and deliberate intent to insult
required.

An attempt upon the life ofa general of the Philippine
Army is committed in disregard of his rank. (People v.
Torres, G.R. No. L-4642, May 29, 1953)
Rank was aggravating in the following cases: the
killing of a staff sergeant by his corporal; the killing of
the Assistant Chief of Personnel Transaction of the Civil
Service Commission by a clerk therein; the murder by a
pupil of his teacher; the murder of a municipal mayor; the
murder of a city chief of police by the chief of the secret
service division; assault upon a 66-year-old CFI(now RTC)
judge by a justice of the peace (now municipal judge); the
killing of a consul by a mere chancellor; and the killing of
an army general. (People v. Rodil, No. L-35156, November
20, 1981, 109 SCRA 308, 330-331)
The fact that the appellant shot the barangay captain
while still in the session hall immediately after the meeting
and with the other Sanggunian members still around
indubitably prove that the appellant deliberately intended
to disregard or insult his rank. (People v. Ablao, G.R. No.
69184, March 26, 1990)
Meaning of rank.
"Rank" refers to a high social position or standing
as a grade in the armed forces; or to a graded official
standing or social position or station; or to the order or
place in which said officers are placed in the army and
navy in relation to others; or to the designation or title
of distinction conferred upon an officer in order to fix his
relative position in reference to other officers in matters
of privileges, precedence, and sometimes of command or
by which to determine his pay and emoluments as in the
case of army staff officers; or to a grade or official standing,
relative position in civil or social life, or in any scale of
comparison, status, grade, including its grade, status or
362

Disregard of the rank of the victim who was a
barangay captain cannot be appreciated as an aggravating
circumstance there being no proof of the specific fact or
circumstance that the accused disregarded the respect due
to the offended party, nor does it appear that the accused
deliberately intended to insult the rank of the victim as
barrio captain. (People v. Talay, No. L-24852, November 28,
1980, 101 SCRA 332,347) Note: In this case, the barangay
captain was shot by the accused when he opened the door
to his house.
2.

of the age of the offended party.
This circumstance is present when the offended
person, by reason of his age, could he the father of the
offender. (Viada, 1 Cod. Pen. 326; U.S. v. Esmedia, 17 Phil.
260, 264-265; U.S. • Reguera, 41 Phil. 506, 517-518)
This aggravating circumstance applies to an aggressor,
45 years old, while the victim was an octogenarian. (People
v. Orbill0, G.R. No. L-2444, April 29, 1950)
This aggravating circumstance was applied also in
the case where the person killed was 80 years old and very
weak. (People v. Gummuac, 93 Phil. 657)
The aggravating circumstance of disregard of age
attended the commission of the crime when the deceased
was 65 while the offenders were 32 and 27 years of age,
respectively. (People v. Zapata, G.R. No. L-11074, February
27, 1960, 107 Phil. 103, 108)
The crime was committed in disregard of the respect
due to the victim on account of age and relationship,
the accused being a grandson of the deceased. (People v.
Curatchia, No. L-31771, May 16, 1980, 97 SCRA 549, 556)
The circumstance oflack ofrespect due to age applies
in cases where the victim is of tender age as well as of old
363

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

age. This circumstance was applied in a case where one of
the victims in a murder case was a 12-year-old boy. Here,
the victim was only three years old. (People v. Lora, No.
L-49430, March 30, 1982, 113 SCRA 366, 375, citing U.S.
v. Butag, 38 Phil. 746. Also, People v. Enot, No. L-17530,
October 30, 1962, 6 SCRA 325, 329-330, where one of the
victims was only five years old, another, a minor, and the
third, a seven-month-old baby)
But when the injuries inflicted upon a nine-year-old
girl were "without any thought or intention xxxof heaping
contumely or insult upon the child because of her sex or
her tender age," this circumstance was not considered
aggravating. (U.S. v. Dacquel, 781, 782-783)
Deliberate intent to offend or insult required.

aggravating circumstance of disrespect to sex is
committed. (U.S. v. Quevengco, 2 Phil. 412, 413)
b.

The accused who, upon knowing the death of their
relative, and not being able to take revenge on the
killers, because of their imprisonment, selected and
killed a female relative of the killers in retaliation,
committed the act with this aggravating circumstance.
(People v. Dayug, 49 Phil. 423, 427)

c.

Direct assault upon a lady teacher. (Sarcepuedes v.
People, 90 Phil. 230)

No disregard of respect due to sex.
A and B (a woman) were sweethearts. B told A that she no longer
cared for him and that she loved another man. A stabbed B to death.

The circumstance of old age cannot be considered
aggravating in the absence of evidence that the accused
deliberately intended to offend or insult the age of the
victim. (People v. Diaz, No. L-24002, January 21, 1974, 55
SCRA 178, 187)

Held: It was not proved or admitted by the accused that when
he committed the crime, he had the intention to offend or disregard
the sex of the victim. (People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548, 550)

Disregard of old age not aggravating in robbery with
homicide.

Killing a woman is not attended by this aggravating circumstance if
the offender did not manifest any specific insult or disrespect towards
her sex.

It is not proper to consider disregard of old age
in crimes against property. Robbery with homicide is
primarily a crime against property and not against persons.
Homicide is a mere incident of the robbery, the latter being
the main purpose and object of the criminal. (People v.
Nabaluna, No. L-60087, July 7, 1986, 142 SCRA 446,458)
This circumstance applies to tender age as well as to
old age. This circumstance was applied in a murder case
where one of the victims was a boy 12 years of age. (U.S.
v. Butag, 38 Phil. 746)
3.

Art. 14

of the sex of the offended party.
This refers to the female sex, not to the male sex.
Examples:
a.

When a person compels a woman to go to his house
against her will, the crime of coercion with the
364

Disregard of sex is not aggravating in the absence of evidence
that the accused deliberately intended to offend or insult the sex of
the victim or showed manifest disrespect to her womanhood. (People
v. Puno, No. L-33211, June 29, 1981, 105 SCRA 151, 160, citing People
v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548; People v. Mori, L-23511-2, January 31,
1974, 55 SCRA 382; People w. Jaula, 90 Phil. 379; U.S. v. De Jesus,
14 Phil. 190)
Not applicable in certain cases.

This aggravating circumstance is not to be considered in the
following cases:
1.

When the offender acted with passion and obfuscation.
When a man is blinded with passion or obfuscation,
this being the condition of the mind, he could not have
been conscious that his act was done with disrespect to the
365

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

offended party. (People v. Ibanez, CA.-G.R. No. 1137-R,
March 20, 1948)
2.

When there exists a relationship between the offended party
and the offender.
Facts: After a decree of divorce, the wife was given
the custody of their baby girl. Thereafter, the accused
meeting his former wife, asked her to allow him to visit
their daughter, but she turned down his request. The
accused became infuriated and pointed his gun at her as
she boarded a carretela. 'The gun went off and she was
injured.
Held: Notwithstanding the divorce decree, there still
existed some relationship between the accused and his
divorced wife, which had direct bearing with their only
child, for which reason, the accused was asking his former
wife to allow him to visit their daughter entrusted to her
by order of the court. The accused had to deal with no
other person but with his former wife to visit his daughter.
(People v. Valencia, C.A., 43 0.G. 3740)
The record does not show that the commission of
the crime in question was attended by any offense to or
disregard of the age of the offended party, about 75 or 65
years old, taking into account the circumstances under
which the act in question developed and the pre-existing
relations between the accused and the deceased. (People
v. Akanatsu, 51 Phil. 963, 965)
There existed in this case a relation of employer and
laborer, because the deceased was a laborer of the offender.

3.

When the condition of being a woman is indispensable in
the commission of the crime.

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Disregard of sex absorbed in treachery.

There was disregard of sex because the blouse of the victim was
needlessly removed, but the circumstance is absorbed in treachery
which is attendant. (People v. Clementer, No. L-33490, August 30,
1974, 58 SCRA 742, 749, citing People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548;
People v. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35)
But see People v. Lapaz, G.R. No. 68898, March 31, 1989,
171 SCRA 539, at 550, where it was held that the aggravating
circumstances of disregard of sex and age are not absorbed in
treachery because treachery refers to the manner of the commission of
the crime, while disregard of sex and age pertains to the relationship
of the victim.
That the crime be committed In the dwelling of the offended party.

Dwelling must be a building or structure, exclusively used for
rest and comfort. A "combination house and store" (People v. Magnaye,
89 Phil. 233, 239), or a market stall where the victim slept is not a
dwelling,
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.
This is based on the greater perversity of the offender, as shown
by the place of the commission of the offense.
Dwelling is considered an aggravating circumstance primarily
because of the sanctity of privacy the law accords to human abode.
According to one commentator, one's dwelling place is a "sanctuary
worthy of respect" and that one who slanders another in the latter's
house is more guilty than he who offends him elsewhere. (People v.
Balansi, G.R. No. 77284, July 19, 1990, 187 SCRA 566, 575)
What aggravates the commission of the crime In one's dwelling:

Thus, in (a) parricide, (b) rape, (c) abduction, or (d)
seduction, sex is not aggravating.

1.

The abuse of confidence which the offended party reposed
in the offender by opening the door to him; or

Rape being a sex crime or one committed against
a woman, the trial court erred in considering sex as an
aggravating circumstance in imposing the penalty, it being
inherent in the crime of rape. (People v. Lopez, 107 Phil.
1039, 1042)

2.

The violation of the sanctity of the home by trespassing
therein with violence or against the will of the owner.
(Dissenting opinion of Justice Villareal, People v. Ambis,
68 Phil. 635, 637)

366

367

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

"The home is a sort of sacred place for its owner. He who goes
to another's house to slander him, hurt him or do him wrong, is more
guilty than he who offends him elsewhere." (Viada, 5th Ed., Vol. II,
pp. 323-324)

crime in the dwelling of the person from whom the provocation came.
(People v. Dequina, 60 Phil. 279, 288)

The evidence must show clearly that the defendant entered the
house of the deceased to attack him. (People v. Lumasag, 56 Phil. 19,
22; People v. Manuel, Nos. L-23786-7, August 29, 1969, 29 SCRA 337,
345)

The defendant learned that the deceased and the former's wife
were maintaining illicit relations. One night, he went to the house of
the deceased and killed him then and there. During the trial of the
case, the defense contended that the deceased provoked the crime by
his illicit relations with the defendant's wife.

Offended party must not give provocation.

Held: The provocation (the illicit relations) was not given
immediately prior to the commission of the crime. Dwelling is still
aggravating. (People v. Dequina, 60 Phil. 279, 288-289)

Art. 14

As may be seen, a condition sine qua non of this circumstance,
is that the offended party "has not given provocation" to the offender.
When it is the offended party who has provoked the incident, he loses
his right to the respect and consideration due him in his own house.
(People v. Ambis, supra)
Meaning of provocation in the aggravating circumstance of dwelling.

The provocation must be:
( 1)

Given by the owner of the dwelling,

(2)

Sufficient, and

(3)

Immediate to the commission of the crime.

If all these conditions are present, the offended party is deemed
to have given provocation, and the fact that the crime is committed in
the dwelling of the offended party is not an aggravating circumstance.
On the other hand, if any of those conditions is not present, the
offended party is deemed not to have given provocation, and the fact
that the crime is committed in the dwelling of the offended party is
an aggravating circumstance.
There must be close relation between provocation and commission
of crime In the dwelling.

Although the Code provides that the aggravating circumstance
of dwelling cannot be properly taken into account if the provocation
was given by the offended party, this is true only when there exists
a close relation between the provocation and the commission of the
368

Art. 14

Because the provocation ls not immediate, dwelling is aggravating.

Even if the defendant came to know of the illicit relations
immediately before he went to the house of the deceased, the
aggravating circumstance of dwelling may still be considered against
the defendant because the provocation (the illicit relations) did not
take place in that house.
If the defendant surprised the deceased and the wife of the
defendant in the act of adultery in the house of the deceased, the
aggravating circumstance of dwelling would not exist. (People v.
Dequina, supra)
Owner of dwelling gave Immediate provocation
aggravating.

dwelling is not

Dwelling is not aggravating, although the incident happened in
the house of the victim, where the stabbing was triggered off by his
provocative and insulting acts, for having given sufficient provocation
before the commission of the crime, he has lost his right to the respect
and consideration due him in his own house. (People v. Atienza, No.
L-39777, August 31, 1982, 116 SCRA 379, 385)
While in her house, the offended party began to abuse the
daughter of the accused and to call her vile names. The accused
heard the insulting words and appeared in front of the offended
party's house and demanded an explanation. A quarrel ensued, and
the accused, becoming very angry and excited, entered the house
of the offended party and struck her with a bolo. In that case, the
invasion of the privacy of the offended party's home was the direct
369

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art.14

Affect Criminal Liability
and immediate consequence of the provocation given by her. No
aggravating circumstance of dwelling. (U.S. w. Licarte, 23 Phil. 10, 12)

Dwelling is aggravating in abduction or illegal detention.

Prosecution must prove that no provocation was given by the
offended party.

In abduction or illegal detention where the victim was taken
from her or his house and carried away to another place, dwelling is
aggravating. (U.S. v. Banila, 19 Phil. 130, 133; U.S. w. Velasquez, 8
Phil. 321, 324; People v. Masilungan, 104 Phil. 621,635)

That the offended party has not given provocation in his house
is a fact that must be shown by the evidence of the prosecution, as
it cannot be assumed. It is an essential element of the aggravating
circumstance of dwelling./People v. Pakah, 81 Phil. 426, 429)
Even if the offender did not enter the dwelling, this circumstance
applies.

But dwelling was not aggravating in a case where the deceased
was called down from his house and he was murdered in the vicinity
of the house. (U.S. v. Ramos, 1 Phil. 192, 193; People v. Lumasag, 56
Phil. 19, 22-23)
What dwelling includes.

The aggravating circumstance of dwelling should be taken into
account. Although the triggerman fired the shot from outside the
house, his victim was inside. For this circumstance to be considered,
it is not necessary that the accused should have actually entered the
dwelling of the victim to commit the offense; it is enough that the
victim was attacked inside his own house, although the assailant may
have devised means to perpetrate the assault from without. /People
v. Ompaid, No. L-23513, January 31, 1969, 26 SCRA 750, 760, citing
People w. Albar, 86 Phil. 36)

Dwelling includes dependencies, the fool of the staircase and
enclosure under the house (U.S. v. Tapan, 20 Phil. 211, 213; People
v. Alcala, 46 Phil. 739, 744) and its terrace. (People v. Rios, G.R. No.
132632, June 19, 2000)

Thus, dwelling was held aggravating where the victim who
was asleep in his house was shot as he opened the door of his house
upon being called and awakened by the accused People v. Talay,
No. L-24852, November 28, 1980, 101 SCRA 332, 346) or where the
attack was made not from inside the house but from below the floor
of the house and the victim was hit inside his own house. (People v.
Dacibar, G.R. No. 111286, February 17, 2000)

If the deceased was only about to step on the first rung of the
ladder when he was assaulted, the aggravating circumstance of
dwelling will not be applicable. (People v. Sespeiie, 102 Phil. 199, 210)

Even if the killing took place outside the dwelling, it is aggravating
provided that the commission of the crime began in the dwelling.
Thus, where the accused began the aggression upon the person
of the deceased in the latter's dwelling by binding his hands or by
dragging him from his house and after taking him to a place near the
house he killed him, dwelling is aggravating, since the act performed
cannot be divided or the unity resulting from its details be broken up.
(U.S. v. Lastimosa, 27 Phil. 432, 438; People v. Mendova, 100 Phil.
811, 818)
370

But, in People v. Diamonon, L-38094, November 7, 1979, 94
SCRA 227, 239, 240, where the victim was stabbed at the foot of
their stairs, dwelling was not aggravating. Aquino, J., concurring
and dissenting, said that dwelling is aggravating because the killing
took place at the foot of the stairs of the victim's house.

When the deceased had two houses where he used to live,
the commission of the crime in any of them is attended by the
aggravating circumstance of dwelling.
In a case, it was held that the aggravating circumstance of
dwelling was present, because the deceased was murdered in the
house at Franco Street in Tondo, which was one of the two houses
(the other being at Constancia, Sampaloc) where the deceased used
to live and have his place of abode during his stay in Manila. (People
v. Rodriguez, 103 Phil. 1015)
Dwelling is not aggravating in the following cases:
1.

When both offender and offended party are occupants of
the same house (U.S. v. Rodriguez, 9 Phil. 136, 139-140),
371

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

and this is true even if offender is a servant in the house.
(People v. Caliso, 58 Phil. 283, 294-295)

upon hearing that their sister was dead, went to her house,
and then and there, upon seeing their sister lying on the
floor with her head resting on the lap of her paramour, and
thinking that the latter had killed her, attacked and killed
him, the aggravating circumstance of dwelling cannot be
considered against the accused. The dwelling did not belong
to the paramour, the person whom they killed. (People v.
Guhiting, 88 Phil. 672, 675)

Thus, dwelling is not aggravating in rape where the
accused and the offended party are domiciled in the same
house. (People v. Nuguid, G.R. No. 148991, January 21,
2004; People • Morales, No. L-35413, November 7, 1979,
94 SCRA 191, 201)
2.

When the robbery is committed by the use of force upon
things, dwelling is not aggravating because it is inherent.
To commit robbery by the use of force upon things, the
offender must enter the dwelling house, or other building,
of the offended party. (U.S. v. Cas, 14 PhiL. 21, 22)
But dwelling is aggravating in robbery with violence
against or intimidation of persons because this class
of robbery can be committed without the necessity of
trespassing the sanctity of the offended party's house.
Entrance into the dwelling house of the offended party
is not an clement of the offense. (People v. Cabato, No.
L-37400, April 15, 1988, 160 SCRA 98, 110; People v.
Apduhan, Jr., No. L-19491, August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA
798,815; People v. Valdez, 64 Phil. 860,867)

6.

There are two kinds of robbery: 1) robbery with violence
against or intimidation of persons; and (2) robbery with
force upon things in inhabited house. (Arts. 294 and 299)

3.

In the crime of trespass to dwelling, it is inherent or
included by law in defining the crime. This crime can be
committed only in the dwelling of another.

4.

When the owner of the dwelling gave sufficient and
immediate provocation.

5.

When the dwelling where the crime was committed did
not belong to the offended party. Thus, when the accused,
372

When the rape was committed in the ground floor of a
two-storey structure, the lower floor being used as a video
rental store and not as a private place of abode or residence.
(People v. Taro, G.R. No. 133872, May 5, 2000)

Dwelling was found aggravating in the following cases although the
crimes were committed not in the dwelling of the victims.

1.

The victim was raped in the boarding house where she was
a bedspacer. Her room constituted a "dwelling" as the term
is used in Article 14(3) of the R.P.C. (People v. Daniel, No.
L-40330, November 20, 1978, 86 SCRA 511, 531)

2.

The victims were raped in their paternal home where they
were guests at the time and did not reside there. (2 CAR
[2s) 675)

Dwelling is not inherent, hence, aggravating, in
robbery with homicide since the author thereof could have
accomplished the heinous deed without having to violate
the domicile of the victim. (People v. Mesias, G.R. No. 67823,
July 9, 1991, 199 SCRA 20, 27, citing earlier cases)
Note:

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

But in People v. Ramolete, No. L-28108, March
27, 1974, 56 SCRA 66, 81, dwelling was not considered
aggravating because the victim was a mere visitor in the
house where he was killed.
3.

The victim was killed in the house of her aunt where
she was living with her niece. Dwelling was considered
aggravating because dwelling may mean temporary
dwelling. (People v. Badilla, G.R. No. 69317, May 21, 1990,
185 SCRA 554, 570)

4.

The victims, while sleeping as guests in the house of
another person, were shot to death in that house. Dwelling
was held aggravating. The Code speaks of "dwelling," not
domicile. (People v. Basa, 83 Phil. 622, 624)

373

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Dwelling Is aggravating when the husband killed his estranged wife
in the house solely occupied by her.

The aggravating circumstance of dwelling is present when the
husband killed his estranged wife in the house occupied by her, other
than the conjugal home. (People v. Galapia, Nos. L-39303-05, August
1, 1978, 84 SCRA 526, 532)

There are two aggravating circumstances in this paragraph.
Basis of these aggravating circumstances.

They are based on the greater perversity of the offender, as
shown by the means and ways employed.

In case of adultery.

When adultery is committed in the dwelling of the husband, even
ifit is also the dwelling of the unfaithful wife, it is aggravating because
besides the latter's breach of the fidelity she owes her husband, she
and her paramour violated the respect due to the conjugal home and
they both thereby injured and committed a very grave offense against
the head of the house. (U.S. v. Ibanez, 33 Phil. 611, 613)
Note:

Par. 4.-- That the act be committed with (1) abuse ofconfidence,
or (2) obvious ungratefulness.

Adultery is committed by a married woman who shall
have sexual intercourse with a man not her husband and
by the man who has carnal knowledge of her, knowing
her to be married. (Art. 333, R.P.C.)

Abuse of confidence.

This circumstance exists only when the offended party has
trusted the offender who later abuses such trust by committing the
crime. The abuse of confidence must be a means of facilitating the
commission of the crime, the culprit taking advantage of the offended
party's belief that the former would not abuse said confidence.
Requisites:
1.

That the offended party had trusted the offender.

Dwelling not aggravating in adultery when paramour also lives there.

2.

But the rule is different if both the defendants (the wife and
her paramour) and the offended party were living in the same house
because the defendants had a right to be in the house.

That the offender abused such trust by committing a crime
against the offended party.

3.

That the abuse of confidence facilitated the commission of
the crime. (People v. Luchico, 49 Phil. 689, 697; People v.
Zea, No. L-23109, June 29, 1984, 130 SCRA 77, 90)

The aggravating circumstance of abuse of confidence was
properly applied, when the offended husband took the paramour into
his home, furnished him with food and lodging without charge, and
treated him like a son. (U.S. v. Destrito, 23 Phil. 28, 33)
The aggravating circumstance present in such case is abuse of
confidence, if the offender availed himselfofthe favorable position in
which he was placed by the very act of the injured party, thus grossly
abusing the confidence of the latter in admitting him into his dwelling.
(U.S. v. Baricho, 13 Phil. 616, 620-621)
Dwelling Is not included In treachery.

Although nocturnity and abuse of superior strength are always
included in the qualifying circumstance of treachery, dwelling cannot
be included therein. (People v. Ruzol, 100 Phil. 537, 544)

374

Example: A jealous lover, who had already determined
to kill his sweetheart, invited her to a ride in the country. The
girl, unsuspecting of his plans, went with him. While they were
in the car, the jealous lover stabbed her. It was held that this
aggravating circumstance was present. (People v. Marasigan,
70 Phil. 583, 594)
Confidence does not exist.
Facts: After preliminary advances of the master, the female
servant refused and fled. The master followed and after catching up
with her, threw her on the ground and committed the crime of rape.
When the master raped the offended party, she had already lost her
confidence in him from the moment he made an indecent proposal
and offended her with a kiss.
375

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Held: The confidence must facilitate the commission ofthe crime,
the culprit taking advantage of offended party's belief that the former
would not abuse said confidence. No aggravating circumstance in this
case. (People v. Luchico, 49 Phil. 689, 697)

Compare this case with the Crumb case. In the Crumb case, the
confidence reposed by the parents of the girl in the offender could not
have facilitated the commission of the crime, because the offended girl
could resist, although unsuccessfully, the commission of the crime.

There is no abuse of confidence in attempted rape where on the
day of the crime, the accused was in the company of the offended girl,
not because of her confidence in him, but because they were partners
in a certain business. (People v. Brocal, C.A., 46 0.G. 6163)

In the Caliso case, the victim, being a nine-month-old child,
could not resist the commission of the crime. The confidence reposed
by the parents of the child in the offender facilitated the commission
of the crime.

Special relation of confidence between accused and victim.

The confidence between the offender and the offended party must
be Immediate and personal.

There is no abuse of confidence where the deceased and the
accused happened to be together because the former invited the latter
nightclubbing and to bring with him the money the latter owed the
former. (People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174,
213-214)

In the case of U.S. v. Torrida, 23 Phil. 189, 192, it was held that
the mere fact that the voters had reposed confidence in the defendant
by electing him to a public office does not mean that he abused their
confidence when he committed estafa against them.

Betrayal of confidence is not aggravating.

Abuse of confidence inherent in some felonies.

Facts: The offended party was living in the house of the accused,
her parents having entrusted her to the care of said accused. One day,
at about 6:30 in the evening, while the offended party was standing
in front of a store watching some children who were playing, the
accused approached her, took her by the arm and forcibly led her to
an isolated toilet, hidden from public view by some tall grasses, and
once in the spot, he intimidated her with a knife and through the use
of force and violence succeeded in having sexual intercourse with her.

It is inherent in malversation (Art. 217), qualified theft (Art.
310), estafa by conversion or misappropriation (Art. 315), and qualified
seduction. (Art. 337)

Held: There is no showing that the accused was able to commit
the crime by abusing the confidence reposed in him by the offended
party. The accused betrayed the confidence reposed in him by the
parents of the girl. But this is not an aggravating circumstance. It
must be an abuse of confidence that facilitated the commission of the
crime which is aggravating. (People v. Arthur Crumb, C.A., 46 O.G.
6163)
Killing of child by an amah is aggravated by abuse of confidence.
When the killer of the child is the domestic servant of the
family and is sometimes the deceased child's amah, the aggravating
circumstance ofgrave abuse of confidence is present. (People • Caliso,
58 Phil. 283, 294)
376

Ungratefulness must be obvious, i.e., manifest and clear.

The other aggravating circumstance in paragraph 4 of Article
14 is that the act be committed with obvious ungratefulness.
This aggravating circumstance was present in the case of the
accused who killed his father-in-law in whose house he lived and who
partially supported him. (People • Floresca, G.R. Nos. L-8614-15,
May 31, 1956, 99 Phil. 1044)
The circumstance was present where the accused was living
in the house of the victim who employed him as an overseer and in
charge of carpentry work, and had free access to the house of the
victim who was very kind to him, his family, and who helped him
solve his problems. (People v. Lupango, No. L-32633, November 12,
1981, 109 SCRA 109, 126)
The circumstance was present where a security guard killed a
bank officer and robbed the bank. (People v. Nsmal, No. L-51257,
June 25, 1982, 114 SCRA 487, 494-495)
377

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
The circumstance was present where the victim was suddenly
attacked while in the act of giving the assailants their bread and
coffee for breakfast. Instead of being grateful to the victim, at least
by doing him no harm, they took advantage of his helplessness when
his two arms were used for carrying their food, thus preventing him
from defending himself from the sudden attack. (People v. Bautista,
No. L-38624, July 25, 1975, 65 SCRA 460, 470)
The circumstance exists when a visitor commits robbery or theft
in the house of his host.
But in the case of Mariano v. People, 68 Phil. 724, 726, the act
of stealing the property of the host is considered as committed with
abuse of confidence.
The mere fact, however, that the accused and the offended party
live in the same house is not in itself enough to hold that there was
present abuse of confidence where the house was not the property of
the offended party. (People v. Alqueza, 51 Phil. 817, 819-820)

Par.5.- That the crime be committed in the palace of the
Chief Executive, or in his presence, or where public
authorities are engaged in the discharge of their
duties, or in a place dedicated to religious worship.
Basis of the aggravating circumstances.
They are based on the greater perversity of the offender, as
shown by the place of the commission of the crime, which must be
respected.
Place where public authorities are engaged In the discharge of
their duties (par. 5), distinguished from contempt or insult to public
authorities. (par. 2)
1.

In both, the public authorities are in the performance of
their duties.

2.

Under paragraph 5, the public authorities who are in the
performance of their duties must be in their office; while
in paragraph 2, the public authorities are performing their
duties outside of their office.
378

3.

Under paragraph 2, the public authority should not be the
offended party; while under paragraph 5, he may be the
offended party. (U.S. v. Baluyot, 40 Phil. 385, 395)

Official or religious functions, not necessary.
The place of the commission of the felony (par. 5), if it is
Malacanang palace or a church, is aggravating, regardless of whether
State or official or religious functions are being held.
The Chief Executive need not be in Malacanang palace. His
presence alone in any place where the crime is committed is enough
to constitute the aggravating circumstance. This aggravating
circumstance is present even ifhe is not engaged in the discharge of
his duties in the place where the crime is committed.
Other public authorities must be actually engaged In the
performance of duty.
But as regards the place where the public authorities are engaged
in the discharge of their duties, there must be some performance of
public functions.
Thus, where the accused and the deceased who were respectively
plaintiff and defendant in a civil case in the court of a justice of the
peace, having gotten into some trouble, left the courtroom and went
into an adjoining room, where the accused, without any warning,
attacked the deceased with a knife and killed him on the spot, it
has been held that it was Ian] error to consider the aggravating
circumstance of having committed the offense in the place where the
public authority was exercising his functions. (U.S. v. Punsalan, 3
Phil. 260, 261)
Undoubtedly, the reason for not applying the circumstance was
that the court had already adjourned when the crime was committed,
and the attack was made in the adjoining room, not in the very place
where the justice of the peace was engaged in the discharge of his
duties.
An electoral precinct during election day is a place "where public
authorities are engaged in the discharge of their duties."
Thus, the aggravating circumstance "that the crime be committed
xx x where public authorities are engaged in the discharge of their
379

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

duties" was appreciated in the murder of a person in an electoral
precinct or polling place during election day. (People v. Canoy, G.R.
No. L-6037, September 30, 1954 [Unrep.))

Art. 14

Par. 6. - That the crime be committed (1) in the nighttime, or
(2) in an uninhabited place, or(3) by a band, whenever
such circumstance may facilitate the commission of
the offense.

Place dedicated to religious worship.
Cemeteries are not such a place, however respectable they may
be, as they are not dedicated to the worship of God. The church is a
place dedicated to religious worship.
The aggravating circumstance "that the crime be committed
xxxin a place dedicated to religious worship" was appreciated in a
case where the accused shot the victims inside the church or in a case
of unjust vexation where the accused kissed a girl inside a church
when a religious service was being solemnized. (People v. Anionuevo,
C.A., 36 0.G. 2018; People v. Dumol, CA-G.R. No. 5164-R, April 4,
1951)
Where violation of the child Brigida took place in the Sta. Cruz
Chapel in Sta. Maria, Bulacan, a building dedicated to and actively
used for religious worship, the generic aggravating circumstance of
commission of the offense in a place dedicated to religious worship is
present. (People v. de la Cruz, G.R. No. 75267, September 10, 1990)
Offender must have Intention to commit a crime when he entered
the place.
Facts: At the time of the commission of the crime, both the
deceased and defendant were inside a chapel. The deceased placed
his hand on the right thigh of defendant girl, who pulled out with her
right hand a fan knife and stabbed him.
Held: The aggravating circumstance that the killing was done
in a place dedicated to religious worship cannot be legally considered,
where there is no evidence to show that the defendant had murder
in her heart when she entered the chapel on the fatal night. (People
u. Jaurigue, 76 Phil. 174, 182)
This ruling seems to be applicable also in case a crime is
committed in Malacanang palace or where public authorities are
engaged in the discharge of their duties.

Basis of the aggravating circumstances.
They are based on the time and place of the commission of the
crime and means and ways employed.
Should these circumstances be considered as one only or three
separately?
In its decision of April 5, 1884, the Supreme Court of Spain held
that they constitute only one aggravating circumstance if they concur
in the commission of felony. But in its decision of April 27, 1897, the
same court held that its former decision did not declare an absolute
and general rule which would exclude the possibility of their being
considered separately when their elements are distinctly perceived and
can subsist independently, revealing a greater degree of perversity.
(People v. Santos, 91 Phil. 320, 327-328)
Thus, in People v. Cunanan, 110 Phil. 313, 318, nighttime and
band were considered separately.
When aggravating.
Nighttime, uninhabited place or band is aggravating (1)

When it facilitated the commission of the crime; or

(2)

When especially sought for by the offender to insure the
commission of the crime or for the purpose of impunity
(People v. Pardo, 79 Phil. 568, 578) or

(3)

When the offender took advantage thereof for the purpose
of impunity. (U.S. v. Billed0, 32 Phil. 574, 579; People w.
Matbagon, 60 Phil. 887, 893)

Although nocturnity should not be estimated as an aggravating
circumstance, since the time for the commission of the crime was not
deliberately chosen by the accused; yet, ifit appears that the accused
took advantage ofthe darkness for the more successful consummation
of his plans, to prevent his being recognized, and that the crime
381

380

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

might be perpetrated unmolested, the aggravating circumstance of
nocturnity should be applied.

The offender especially sought for nighttime, when he sought
for it in order to realize the crime with more ease. (People v. Aquino,
68 Phil. 615, 618)

Art. 14

To take advantage of a fact or circumstance in committing a
crime clearly implies an intention to do so, and one does not avail
oneself of the darkness unless one intended to do so. (People v.
Matbagon, 60 Phil. 887, 893; People v. Apduhan, Jr., No. L-19491,
August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA 798, 816)
Illustration of taking advantage of nighttime.
A, with intent to kill B, had hidden behind a tree and availed
himself of the darkness to prevent his being recognized or to escape
more readily. As soon as B came, A stabbed him to death.
"Whenever such circumstances may facilitate the commission of
the offense."
Paragraph 6 of Article 14 requires only that nighttime,
uninhabited place, or band "may facilitate the commission of the
offense." The test fixed by the statute is an objective one. (Dissenting
opinion in People v. Matbagon, 60 Phil. 887, 894)
Nighttime may facilitate the commission of the crime, when
because of the darkness of the night the crime can be perpetrated
unmolested, or interference can be avoided, or there would be greater
certainty in attaining the ends of the offender. (People v. Matbagon,
supra)
Nighttime facilitated the commission of the crime to such an
extent that the defendant was able to consummate it with all its
dastardly details without anyone of the persons living in the same
premises becoming aware of what was going on. (People v. Villas, No.
L-20953, April 21, 1969, 27 SCRA 947, 952-953)
Meaning of "especially sought for," "for the purpose of impunity,"
and "took advantage thereof."

Art. 14

Nighttime is not especially sought for, when the notion to commit
the crime was conceived only shortly before its commission (People v.
Pardo, 79 Phil. 568, 578-579), or when the crime was committed at
night upon a mere casual encounter. (People u. Cayabyab, 274 SCRA
387)
But where the accused waited for the night before committing
robbery with homicide, nighttime is especially sought for. (People v.
Barredo, 87 Phil. 800)
Nighttime was appreciated against the accused who was living
only 150 meters away from the victim's house and evidently waited
for nightfall to hide his identity and facilitate his escape, knowing
that most barrio folks are already asleep, or getting ready to sleep,
at 9:00 p.m. (People u. Baring, G.R. No. 87017, July 20, 1990, 187
SCRA 629, 636)
Nighttime was sought for where the accused lingered for almost
three hours in the evening at the restaurant before carrying out their
plan to rob it. (People v. Lungbos, No. L-57293, June 21, 1988, 162
CRA 383, 388)
There is sufficient proof that the offenders purposely sought
nighttime to commit the crime. Consider the facts that the accused
tried to ascertain whether the occupants of the house were asleep,
thereby indicating the desire to carry out the plot with the least
detection or to insure its consummation with a minimum of resistance
from the inmates of the house. (People v. Atencio, No. L-22518,
January 17, 1968, 22 SCRA 88, 102-103)
The circumstance of nighttime was aggravating where it is selfevident that it was sought to facilitate the commission of the offense,
when all the members of the household were asleep. (People v. Berbal,
G.R. No. 71527, August 10, 1989, 176 SCRA 202, 216)

The Supreme Court considered other tests for the application
of the aggravating circumstances under this paragraph. They are
aggravating when they are "especially sought for" or when the offender
"took advantage thereof."

While the bedroom where the crimes occurred was well-lit,
the evidence shows that, in furtherance of their murderous intent,
appellants deliberately took advantage of nighttime, as well as the
fact that the household members were asleep, in order to gain entry
into the victims' residence. Indeed, their own testimony indicates that

382

383

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

while they were already outside the victims' house at around 11:00
p.m., they purposely waited until 2:00 a.m. before breaking into the
residence so as not to call the attention of the victims and/or their
neighbors. It is thus clear that appellants deliberately took advantage
of the darkness of the night, not to mention the fact that the victims
were fast asleep, to conceal their actions and to facilitate and insure
that their entry into the victims' home would be undetected. (People
vu. Ventura, G.R. Nos. 148145-46, July 5, 2004)
Nighttime need not be specifically soughtfor when (1) ltfacllltated
the commission of the offense, or (2) the offender took advantage
of the same to commit the crime.

It is the constant jurisprudence in this jurisdiction that the
circumstance of nocturnity, although not specifically sought for by
the culprit, shall aggravate his criminal liability if it facilitated the
commission of the offense or the offender took advantage of the same
to commit the crime. (People v. Corpus, C.A., 43 0.G.2249, citing U.S.
• Perez, 32 Phil. 163; People v. Pineda, 56 Phil. 688)
There are two tests for nocturnity as an aggravating circumstance: the objective test, under which nocturnity is aggravating because it facilitates the commission of the offense; and the subjective
test, under which nocturnity is aggravating because it was purposely
sought by the offender. These two tests should be applied in the alternative. (People v. Garcia, No. L-30449, October 31, 1979)
Nocturnity, even though not specially sought, ifit facilitated the
commission of the crime and the accused took advantage thereof to
commit it, may be considered as an aggravating circumstance. (People
v. Lungbos, supra, citing People v. Galapia, 84 SCRA 530)
"For the purpose ofimpunity" means to prevent his (accused's)
being recognized, or to secure himself against detection and
punishment. (People v. Matbagon, 60 Phil. 887, 891-892, 893)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Crimin al Liability

Art.14

The offender took advantage of any of the circumstances of
nighttime, uninhabited place, or by a band when he availed himself
thereof at the time of the commission of the crime for the purpose of
impunity or for the more successful consummation of his plans.
(a)

Nighttime.

By the word nighttime" should be understood, according to
Viada, that period of darkness beginning at end of dusk and ending
at dawn. Nights are from sunset to sunrise. (Art. 13, Civil Code)
Nighttime by and of itself is not an aggravating circumstance.
The lower court appreciated noctumity against appellants solely
on the basis of the fact on record that the crime was committed at
about 5:00 in the morning. This particular finding stands correction.
By and of itself, nighttime is not an aggravating circumstance. It
becomes so only when it is especially sought by the offender, or taken
advantage of by him to facilitate the commission of the crime or to
insure his immunity from capture. In the instant case, other than
the time of the crime, nothing else whatsoever suggests that the
aggravating circumstance of nighttime was deliberately availed of
by appellants. In view of this deficiency, said circumstance should be
disallowed even as, technically, it may have been accepted by them
when they pleaded guilty on arraignment. (People v. Boyles, No.
L-15308, May 29, 1964, 11 SCRA 88, 94)
Where the darkness of the night was merely incidental to the
collision between two vehicles which caused the heated argument and
the eventual stabbing of the victim, nighttime is not aggravating. To
be aggravating, the prosecution must show that the accused purposely
sought to commit the crime at nighttime in order to facilitate the
achievement of his objectives, prevent discovery or evade capture.
(People v. Velaga, Jr., G.R. No. 87202, July 23, 1991, 199 SCRA 518,
523-524)

Thus, it was held that the commission of the crime was attended
by the aggravating circumstance of nighttime, because of the silence
and darkness of the night which enabled the offender to take away the
girl with impunity
a thing which undoubtedly the offender could
not have done in the daytime and in sight of people. (U.S. v. Yumul,
34 Phil. 169, 175)

The jurisprudence on this subject is to the effect that noctumity
must have been sought or taken advantage ofto improve the chances
of success in the commission of the crime or to provide impunity for the

384

385

The Information must allege that nighttime was soughtfor or taken
advantage of by the accused or that it facilitated the commission
of the crime.

Art. 14

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

offenders. The bare statement in the information that the crime was
committed in the darkness of the night fails to satisfy the criterion.
(People u. Fernandez, No. L-32623, June 29, 1972, 45 CRA 535, 537)

Nocturnity is not aggravating where there is no evidence that
the accused had purposely sought the cover of the darkness of the
night to commit the crime; nor is there evidence that nighttime
facilitated the commission of the crime, aside from the fact that the
scene of the crime was illuminated. People v. Moral, No. L-31139,
October 12, 1984, 132 SCRA 474, 487. Also, People v. Toring, G.R.
No. 56358, October 26, 1990, 191 SCRA 38, 47; People v. Aspili, G.R.
Nos. 89418-19, November 21, 1990, 191 SCRA 530, 543)

Not aggravating when crime began at daytime.

When the crime was the result of a succession of acts which
took place within the period of two hours, commencing at 5:00 p.m.
and ending at 7:00 p.m., without a moment's interruption in which it
can be said that the thought of nighttime, being the most favorable
occasion for committing the crime, occurred to the accused, there is
no aggravating circumstance of nighttime. (People v. Luchico, 49 Phil.
689, 697)
The commission of the crime must begin and be accomplished in the
nighttime.
Thus, although the safe was thrown into the hay at night, but the
money, the taking of which constituted the offense, was withdrawn
from the treasury during the daytime, the crime of malversation was
not attended by the aggravating circumstance of nighttime. (U.S. u.
Dowdell, 11 Phil. 4, 7)
The offense must be actually committed in the darkness of the night.
Thus, when the defendants did not intentionally seek the cover
of darkness for the purpose of committing murder and they were
carrying a light of sufficient brilliance which made it easy for the
people nearby to recognize them (U.S. w. Paraiso, 17 Phil. 142, 146147), or when the crime of robbery with homicide was committed at
daybreak when the defendants could be recognized (U.S. w. Tampacan,
19 Phil. 185, 188), nighttime is not aggravating.
When the place of the crime is illuminated by light, nighttime is not
aggravating.
Although the offense was committed at nighttime, the record
does not show that appellant had sought it purposely or taken
advantage thereof to facilitate the perpetration of the offense. In fact,
the place from which he fired at Laguna seemed to be sufficiently
lighted for him to be clearly visible to, as well as recognized by, all of
those who happened to be nearby. (People v. Bato, G.R. No. L-23405,
December 29, 1967, 21 SCRA 1445, 1448)

The lighting of a matchstick or use of flashlights does not negate
the aggravating circumstance of nighttime.

It is self-evident that nighttime was sought by appellant to
facilitate the commission of the offense, when all the members of the
household were asleep. The fact that Restituto Juanita hit a matchstick does not negate the presence of said aggravating circumstance.
Thus, in People v. Rogeliow Soriano, et al., G.R. No. L-32244, June
24, 1983, 122 SCRA 740, this Court rejected the contention that
nocturnity could not be appreciated because flashlights were used.
(People v. Berbal, et al., G.R. No. 71527, August 10, 1989)
(b)

Uninhabited place.

That the place is uninhabited is determined, not by the distance
of the nearest house to the scene of the crime, but whether or not
in the place of its commission, there was reasonable possibility of
the victim receiving some help. Thus, the crime is committed in an
uninhabited place where the killing was done during nighttime, in a
sugarcane plantation about a hundred meters from the nearest house,
and the sugarcane in the field was tall enough to obstruct the view
of neighbors and passersby. (People u. Fausto Damas0, 75 0.G. 4979,
No. 25, June 18, 1979)
Appellant precisely sought the solitude of the basketball court
to ensure that private complainant would not be able to call for,
and receive, any help. Aside from being cloaked by the darkness
of the night, the basketball court was a relatively isolated place,
shielded from the public view by the high walls of the surrounding
houses. Private complainant could have screamed at the top of her
lungs and nobody still would have heard her. (People u. Dizon, G.R.
No. 134802, October 26, 2001)
387

386

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Crimin al Law

The purely accidental circumstance that on the day in question
another banca, namely, that of the witnesses for the prosecution,
was also at sea, is not an argument against the consideration of such
aggravating circumstance. It was difficult for the victim to receive
any help and it was easy for the assailants to escape punishment.
(People v. Rubia, 52 Phil. 172, 175-176; People v. Arpa, No. L-26789,
April 25, 1969, 27 SCRA 1037, 1044)
Uninhabited place is aggravating where the felony was
perpetrated in the open sea, where no help could be expected by
the victim from other persons and the offenders could easily escape
punishment. (People v. Nulla, No. L-69346, August 31, 1987, 153
SCRA 471, 483)
The fact that persons occasionally passed in the uninhabited
place and that on the night of the murder another hunting party was
not a great distance away, does not matter. It is the nature of the
place which is decisive. (People v. Bangug, 52 Phil. 87, 92)
A place about a kilometer from the nearest house or other
inhabited place is considered an uninhabited place. (People v.
Aguinaldo, 55 Phil. 610, 616; People v. Mendova, 100 Phil. 811, 818)
The killing was done in Barrio Makatipo, Novaliches, Caloocan
City, an isolated place that resembled that of an abandoned
subdivision. The place was ideal not merely for burying the victim
but also for killing him for it was a place where the possibility of the
victim receiving some help from third persons was completely absent.
The accused sought the solitude of the place in order to better attain
their purpose without interference, and to secure themselves against
detection and punishment. (People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30,
1975, 62 SCRA 174,212-213)
When the victims are the occupants of the only house in the place, the
crime is committed in an uninhabited place.
In the case of People v. Piring, 63 Phil. 546, where the accused
attacked and killed a couple in their house, the circumstance of
uninhabited place was not taken into consideration as aggravating
circumstance, because it was not proven that there were no houses
near the house of the deceased. The implication is that, if it was
shown that there were no houses there, it would be considered an
uninhabited place, even if there was a house there and the victims
were living in that house.
388

Art. 14

Solitude must be sought to better attain the criminal purpose.
It must appear that the accused sought the solitude of the place
where the crime was committed, in order to better attain his purpose.
(People v. Aguinaldo, 55 Phil. 610, 616) The offenders must choose the
place as an aid either (1) to an easy and uninterrupted accomplishment
of their criminal designs, or (2) to insure concealment of the offense,
that he might thereby be better secured against detection and
punishment. (U.S. v. Vitug, 17 Phil. 1, 20; People v. Andaya, No.
L-63862, July 31, 1987, 152 SCRA 570, 578)
Hence, this aggravating circumstance is not present even if the
crime was committed in an uninhabited place, if the offended party
was casually encountered by the accused and the latter did not take
advantage of the place or there is no showing that it facilitated the
commission of the crime. (People v. Luneta, 79 Phil. 815, 818)
The aggravating circumstance of uninhabited place cannot
be considered against the defendants, although the house nearest
to the dwelling of the victim was about a kilometer away, if the
defendants did not select the place either to better attain their object
without interference or to secure themselves against detection and
punishment. (People v. Deguia, 88 Phil. 520, 526)
(c)

By a band.

What ls a band?

Whenever more than three armed malefactors shall have acted
together in the commission of an offense, it shall be deemed to have
been committed by a band.
The armed men must act together in the commission of the crime.
The mere fact that there are more than three armed men at
the scene of the crime does not prove the existence of a band, if only
one of them committed the crime while the others were not aware of
the commission of the crime. The definition of "by a band" says that
the armed men "shall have acted together in the commission of the
offense."
The band must be composed of more than three armed persons.
Hence, even if there are 20 persons, but only three are armed, this
aggravating circumstance by a band cannot be considered. (U.S. v.
389

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Mendigoren, 1 Phil. 658, 659; see also U.S. o. Melegrito, 11 PHL. 229,
231; People v. Pakah, 81 Phil. 426, 429; People v. Ga, G.R. No. 49831,
June 27, 1990, 186 SCRA 790, 797; People v. Lungbos, No. L-57293,
June 21, 1988, 162 SCRA 383, 388)
"Stone" is included in the term "arms."
[The Court] held in the case of People v. Bautista, 28 SCRA
184, that there is an intention to cause death if the accused throws
a stone at the victims, thus including stone under the term arms in
the phrase "more than 3 armed malefactors acted tdgether." (People
v. Manlolo, G.R. No. 40778, January 26, 1989)
If one of the four armed persons is a principal by inducement, they
do not form a band.

What is more, the supposed participation of the petitioner herein,
Modesto Gamara, as defined in the same information, was that of
principal by inducement, which undoubtedly connotes that he has no
direct participation in the perpetration thereof. (Gamara v. Valero,
No. L-36210, June 25, 1973, 51 SCRA 322, 326)
Note:

All the armed men, at least four in number, must take
direct part in the execution of the act constituting the
crime. (Art. 17, par. l, R.P.C.)

When nighttime, uninhabited place, or by a band did not facilitate
the commission of the crime, was not especially sought for, or was
not taken advantage of.

When four armed persons, who casually met another group of
three armed persons in an uninhabited place at nighttime, quarreled
with the latter and, in the heat ofanger, the two groups fought against
each other, resulting in the death of one of the three which formed
the other group, nighttime, uninhabited place, and by a band are not
aggravating circumstances.
Reason: When the meeting between the offenders and the
group of the deceased was casual, the offenders could not have
sought for the circumstances of nighttime, uninhabited place and
their forming a band. When the offenders attacked the group of the
deceased in the heat of anger, they could not have taken advantage
of such circumstances. And since they did not afford the offenders
390

any advantage, such circumstances could not have facilitated the
commission of the crime.
"By a band" is aggravating in crimes against property or against
persons or in the crime of illegal detention or treason.

The aggravating circumstance of by a band is considered in
crimes against property (People v. Corpus, CA., 43 O.G. 2249) and
in crimes against persons. (People v. Laoto, 52 Phil. 401,408; People
v. Alcaraz, 103 Phil. 533, 549; People v. Aspili, G.R. Nos. 89418-19,
November 21, 1990, 191 SCRA 530,543) It was taken into account
also in illegal detention (U.S. v. Santiago, 2 Phil. 6, 8), and in treason.
(People v. Manayao, 44 O.G. 4868)
Not applicable to crimes against chastity.

Thus, in the crime of rape committed by four armed persons,
this circumstance was not considered. (People v. Corpus, C.A., 43 O.G.
2249)
Abuse of superior strength and use of firearms, absorbed in
aggravating circumstance of "by a band."

The aggravating circumstance of taking advantage of their
superior strength and with the use of firearms is absorbed by the
generic aggravating circumstance of the commission of the offense
by a band. (People v. Escabarte, G.R. No. 42964, March 14, 1988)
"By a band" ls inherent In brigandage.

In the crime of brigandage, which is committed by more than
three armed persons forming a band of robbers (Art. 306), the
circumstance that the crime was committed by a band should not be
considered as aggravating, because it is inherent in or is necessarily
included in defining the crime.
"By a band" is aggravating in robbery with homicide.

In the cases of People v. Sawajan, 53 Phil. 689, 693, and People
v. Uday, 85 Phil. 498,503, it was held that in the imposition of the
penalty for the crime of robbery with homicide, the aggravating
circumstance that the crime was committed by a band should be
taken into consideration.
391

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
There is no crime of robbery with homicide committed by a
band. Ifrobbery with homicide is committed by a band, the indictable
offense would still be denominated as robbery with homicide under
Article 294(1) of the Revised Penal Code. The element of band would
be appreciated as an ordinary aggravating circumstance. (People v.
Sugan, G.R. No. 192789, March 23, 2011)

Par. 7.-- That the crime be committed on the occasion of a
conflagration, shipwreck, earthquake, epidemic or
other calamity or misfortune.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis of this aggravating circumstance has reference to the
time of the commission of the crime.

conditions after liberation is not included under this paragraph.
(People v. Corpus, CA., 43 0.G. 2249)
But in the case ofPeople v. Penjan, C.A., 44 0.G. 3349, the chaotic
condition resulting from the liberation of San Pablo was considered
a calamity.
The development of engine trouble at sea is a misfortune, but
it does not come with.in the context of the phrase "other calamity or
misfortune," as used in Article 14, paragraph 7 of the R.P.C., wh.ich
refers to other conditions of distress similar to those precedingly
enumerated therein, namely, "conflagration, shipwreck, earthquake
or epidemic," such as the chaotic conditions resulting from war or
the liberation of the Philippines during the last World War. Clearly,
no condition of great calamity or misfortune existed when the motor
banca developed engine trouble. (People v. Arpa, No. L-26789, April
25, 1969, 27 SCRA 1037, 1045)

Reason for the aggravation.

The reason for the existence of this circumstance is found in
the debased form of criminality met in one who, in the midst of a
great calamity, instead of lending aid to the afflicted, adds to their
suffering by taking advantage of their misfortune to despoil them.
(U.S. v. Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 157)
Example: An example of this circumstance is the case of a
fireman who commits robbery in a burned house, or that ofa thief
who immediately after a destructive typhoon steals personal
property from the demolished houses.
The offender must take advantage of the calamity or misfortune.

Thus, if the accused was provoked by the offended party to
commit the crime during the calamity or misfortune, this aggravating
circumstance may not be taken into consideration for the purpose of
increasing the penalty because the accused did not take advantage
ofit.

Par. 8.-- That the crime be committed with the aid of(1) armed
men, or (2) persons who insure or afford impunity.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

It is based on the means and ways of committing the crime.
Requisites of this aggravating circumstance.

1.

That armed men or persons took part in the commission
of the crime, directly or indirectly.

2.

'That the accused availed himself of their aid or relied upon
them when the crime was committed.

Rule for the application of this circumstance.

The casual presence of armed men near the place where the crime
was committed does not constitute an aggravating circumstance when
it appears that the accused did not avail himself of their aid or rely
upon them to commit the crime.

"Chaotic condition" as an aggravating circumstance.

The phrase "or other calamity or misfortune" refers to other
conditions of distress similar to those precedingly enumerated, that
is, "conflagration, shipwreck, earthquake or epidemic." Hence, chaotic
392

Armed men must act as accomplices only.

In "aid of armed men," the men act as accomplices only. They
must not be acting in the commission of the crime under the same
393

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability

purpose as the principal accused, otherwise they are to be regarded
as co-principals or co-conspirators. (People w. Enojas, G.R. No. 204894,
March 10, 2014)

is present even if one of the offenders merely relied on their aid, for
actual aid is not necessary.

The armed men must take part directly or Indirectly.

"Aid of armed men" Is absorbed by "employment of a band."

The accused stabbed the deceased to death.
"The testimony of the accused, corroborated by that of the
witness for the prosecution, is that the crime was committed by him
(accused) alone, without assistance from any one. It is true that in the
house near the place where the crime was committed there were ten
men armed with daggers, and five without arms, but these men took
no part, directly or indirectly, in the commission of the crime, and it
does not appear that they heard the conversation which caused the
sudden determination on the part of the accused to kill the deceased.
The accused, therefore, did not avail himself of their aid or rely upon
them to commit the crime." (U.S. v. Abaigar, 2 Phil. 417, 418)

Thus, it is improper to separately take into account against the
accused the aggravating circumstances of(l) the aid of armed men,
and (2) employment of a band in appraising the gravity of the offense,
in view of the definition of band which includes any group of armed
men, provided they are at least four in number. (People v. Manayao,
78 Phil. 721, 728)
Note:

If there are four armed men, aid of armed men is
absorbed in employment of a band. If there are three
armed men or less, aid of armed men may be the
aggravating circumstance.

Examples of "with the aid of armed men."

"Aid of armed men" includes "armed women."

0 and L were prosecuted for robbery with rape. It appeared from
their written confessions that they had companions who were armed
when they committed the crime. It was held that they were guilty of
robbery with rape with the aggravating circumstance of aid of armed
men. (People v. Ortiz, 103 Phil. 944, 949)

Aid of armed women is aggravating in kidnapping and serious
illegal detention. (People v. Licop, 94 Phil. 839, 846)

Exceptions:
(1)

This aggravating circumstance shall not be considered
when both the attacking party and the party attacked were
equally armed. (Albert)

(2)

This aggravating circumstance is not present when the
accused as well as those who cooperated with him in the
commission of the crime acted under the same plan and
for the same purpose. (People o. Pring, 63 Phil. 546, 553;
People v. Candado, No. L-34089, August 1, 1978, 84 SCRA
508, 524)

But see People v. Villanueva, 98 Phil. 327, where it was opined
that some use of arms or show of armed strength is necessary to guard
a kidnap victim to prevent or discourage escape and so in a sense,
it may be justly regarded as included in or absorbed by the offense
itself. (p. 340)

Par.9.- That the accused is a recidivist.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.
This is based on the greater perversity of the offender, as shown
by his inclination to crimes.
Who Is a recidivist?

"With the aid of armed men" (Par. 8), distinguished from "by a
band." (Par. 6)
By a band requires that more than three armed malefactors shall
have acted together in the commission of an offense. Aid of armed men

A recidivist is one who, at the time of his trial for one crime, shall
have been previously convicted by final judgment of another crime
embraced in the same title of the R.P.C. (People v. Lagarto, G.R. No.
65833, May 6, 1991, 196 SCRA 611, 619)

394

395

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

Requisites:
1.

That the offender is on trial for an offense;

2.

That he was previously convicted by final judgment of
another crime;

3.

That both the first and the second offenses are embraced
in the same title of the Code;

4.

That the offender is convicted of the new offense.

"At the time of his trial for one crime."
What is controlling is the time of trial, not the time of the
commission of the crime. It is not required that at the time of the
commission of the crime, the accused should have been previously
convicted by final judgment of another crime.
Meaning of "at the time of his trial for one crime."
The phrase "at the time of his trial" should not be restrictively
construed as to mean the date of arraignment. It is employed in its
general sense, including the rendering of the judgment. It is meant
to include everything that is done in the course of the trial, from
arraignment until after sentence is announced by the judge in open
court. (People v. Lagarto, supra)
No recidivism if the subsequent conviction is for an offense committed
before the offense involved in the prior conviction.
The accused was convicted ofrobbery with homicide committed
on December 23, 1947. He was previously convicted of theft committed
on December 30, 1947.
Held: The accused was not a recidivist. (People v. Baldera, 86
Phil. 189)
"Previously convicted by final judgment."

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Section 7 of Rule 120 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure
provides that except where the death penalty is imposed, a judgment
in a criminal case becomes final (1) after the lapse of the penod for
perfecting an appeal, or (2) when the sentence has been partially or
totally satisfied or served, or (3) the accused has waived in writing his
right to appeal, or (4) the accused has applied for probation. Section
6 of Rule 122 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure provides
that "[a]n appeal must be taken within 15 days from promulgation
or notice of the judgment or order appealed from."
The present crime and the previous crime must be "embraced in
the same title of this Code."
Thus, if the accused had been twice convicted of violation of
Section 824 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Manila and
subsequently he was prosecuted for violation of Article 195 of the
R.P.C. concerning gambling, he is not a recidivist. (People v. Lauleco,
C.A., 36 0.G. 956) When one offense is punishable by an ordinance
or special law and the other by the R.P.C., the two offenses are not
embraced in the same title of the Code.
But recidivism was considered aggravating in a usury case where
the accused was previously convicted of the same offense. Under its
Article 10, the R.P.C. should be deemed as supplementing special
laws of a penal character. (People v. Hodges, 68 Phil. 178, 188)
Examples of crimes embraced In the same title of the Revised
Penal Code.
Robbery and theft are embraced in Title Ten, referring to crimes
against property. Homicide and physical injuries are embraced in
Title Eight, referring to crimes against persons. The felonies defined
and penalized in Book II of the R.P.C. are grouped in different titles.
Title Eight and Title Ten are among them.
There Is recidivism even If the lapse of time between two felonies
Is more than ten years.

The accused was prosecuted and tried for theft, estafa and
robbery. Judgments for three offenses were read on the same day.
ls he a recidivist? No, because the judgment in any of the first two
offenses was not yet final when he was tried for the third offense.

Recidivism must be taken into account as an aggravating
circumstance no matter how many years have intervened between
the first and second felonies. (People v. Colocar, 60 Phil. 878, 884; see
also People v. Jaranilla, No. L-28547, February 22, 1974, 55 SCRA
563, 575, where the accused admitted their previous convictions.)

396

397

TITLE ONE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

Pardon does not obliterate the fact that the accused was a recidivist;
but amnesty extinguishes the penalty and its effects.

This is the ruling in the case of U.S. v. Sotelo, 28 Phil. 147, 160.
According to Article 89, amnesty extinguishes the penalty and all its
effects. There is no such provision with respect to pardon.
Therefore, pardon does not prevent a former conviction from
being considered as an aggravating circumstance.
The accused-appellant admitted during the trial that he was once
convicted of the crime of homicide but he was granted an absolute
pardon therefor. The lower court properly considered recidivism since
a pardon for a preceding offense does not obliterate the fact that the
accused is a recidivist upon his conviction of a second offense embraced
in the same title of the R.P.C. (People v. Lacao, Sr., G.R. No. 95320,
September 4, 1991, 201 SCRA 317, 330)
Par. 10.- That the offender has been previously punished for an
offense to which the law attaches an equal or greater
penalty or for two or more crimes to which it attaches
a lighter penalty.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis is the same as that of recidivism, i.e., the greater
perversity of the offender as shown by his inclination to crimes.

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
was likewise charged for physical injuries but said case was amicably
settled; (3) on January 15, 1973, he was likewise charged for the crime
of theft and was convicted of said offense; (4) he was likewise charged
and convicted in another criminal case; (5) he was also charged for
theft but said case was settled amicably; and (6) he was charged and
convicted for theft on October 30, 1982. In reiteracion or habituality,
it is essential that the offender be previously punished, that is, he
has served sentence, for an offense in which the law attaches, or
provides for an equal or greater penalty than that attached by law
to the second offense, or for two or more offenses, in which the law
attaches a lighter penalty. The records did not disclose that the
accused has been so previously punished. Reiteracion or habituality
is not attendant. (People v. Villapando, G.R. No. 73656, October 5,
1989, 178 SCRA 341,355)
"Has been previously punished."

This phrase in paragraph 10 means that the accused previously
served sentence for another offense or sentences for other offenses
before his trial for the new offense. (See People v. Abella, No. L-32205,
August 31, 1979, 93 SCRA 25, 48, where the rule was applied.)
The second requisite is present: (1) when the penalty provided
by law for the previous offense is equal to that for the new offense;
or (2) when the penalty provided by law for the previous offense is
greater; or (3) when the accused served at least two sentences, even if
the penalties provided by law for the crimes arc lighter.
"Punished for an offense to which the law attaches an equal xx x

Requisites:
1.

That the accused is on trial for an offense;

2.

That he previously served sentence for another offense to
which the law attaches an equal or greater penalty, or for
two or more crimes to which it attaches lighter penalty
than that for the new offense; and

3.

That he is convicted of the new offense.

penalty."

A served sentence for forcible abduction (Art. 342) punishable
by reclusion temporal, that is from 12 years and one day to 20 years.
Later, after A was released from prison, he committed homicide (Art.
249) punishable also by reclusion temporal. In fixing the penalty for
homicide, the court will have to consider the aggravating circumstance
of habituality against A.

The accused was convicted of homicide, less serious physical
injuries, and slight physical injuries, all committed on January 14,
1979. He was found by the trial court to have committed offenses prior
to and after that date, as follows: (1) prior to January, 1979, he was
arrested and accused of the crime of theft; (2) on May 15, 1973, he

The accused once served sentence for homicide punishable by
a penalty ranging from 12 years and one day to 20 years. Now, he is

398

399

"Punished for an offense to which the law attaches x x x greater
penalty."

Art . 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Crimi nal Law

convicted of falsification punishable by a penalty ranging from six
years and one day to 12years. Is there reiteracion or habituality in
this case? Yes. The penalty for homicide for which he served sentence
is greater than that for the new offense (falsification).
Suppose it was falsification first and homicide now? Then, there
is no habituality, because the penalty for the first offense is less than
that for the second offense. The penalty for the first offense must at
least be equal to that for the second offense.
Suppose it was homicide before and homicide now? Then, there
is recidivism, because the first and the second offenses are embraced
in the same title of the Code. Although the law requires only final
judgment in recidivism, even if the convict served sentence for one
offense, there is still recidivism, provided the first and the second
offenses are embraced in the same title of the Code.
"Punished xx x for two or more crimes to which it attaches a lighter
penalty."
A served 30 days imprisonment for theft; later, he served two
months for estafa; now he is tried for homicide which is punishable
with reclusion temporal, that is, 12 years and one day to 20 years. Note
that for the previous two offenses, the law provides lesser penalties.
It Is the penalty attached to the offense, not the penalty actually
imposed.

Paragraph No. 10 of Article 14 speaks of penalty attached to the
offense, which may have several periods. Hence, even if the accused
served the penalty of prision mayor in its minimum period and is
now convicted of an offense for which the penalty of prision mayor
maximum is imposed, there is still habituality, provided that the
penalty attached to the two offenses is prision mayor in its full extent.
Reiteracion or habituality, not always aggravating.

If, as a result of taking this circumstance into account, the
penalty for the crime of murder would be death and the offenses
for which the offender has been previously convicted are against
property and not directly against persons, the court should exercise
its discretion in favor of the accused by not taking this aggravating
circumstance into account. (1 Viada, 310)
400

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Crim inal Liability

Art. 14

Recidivism and reiteracion, distinguished.

The circumstance of reiteracion may be distinguished from that
of recidivism as follows:
(a)

In reiteracion, it is necessary that the offender shall have
served out his sentence for the first offense; whereas, in
recidivism, it is enough that a final judgment has been
rendered in the first offense.

(b)

In reiteracion, the previous and subsequent offenses mu.st
not be embraced in the same title of the Code; whereas,
recidivism, requires that the offenses be included in the
same title of the Code.

(c)

Reiteracion is not always an aggravating circumstance;
whereas, recidivism is always to be taken into consideration
in fixing the penalty to be imposed upon the accused.

The four forms of repetition are:

1.
2.

Recidivism. (Art. 14, par. 9)
Reiteracion or habituality. (Art. 14, par. 10)

3.
4.

Multi-recidivism or habitual delinquency. (Art. 62, par. 5)
Quasi-recidivism. (Art. 160)

The first two are generic aggravating circumstances, while the
third is an extraordinary aggravating circumstance. The fourth is a
special aggravating circumstance.
Habitual delinquency.

There is habitual delinquency when a person, within a period of
ten years from the date of his release or last conviction of the crimes
of serious or less serious physical injuries, robbery, theft, estafa or
falsification, is found guilty of any of said crimes a third time or
oftener. (Art. 62, last par.) In habitual delinquency, the offender is
either a recidivist or one who has been previously punished for two
or more offenses (habituality). He shall suffer an additional penalty
for being a habitual delinquent.
Quasi-recidivism.

Any person who shall commit a felony after having been
convicted by final judgment, before beginning to serve such sentence,
401

Art. 14

Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

or while serving the same, shall be punished by the maximum period
of the penalty prescribed by law for the new felony. (Art. 160)

Held: Murder by inducement of a price is committed. (U.S. v.
Parro, supra)

Defendant, while serving sentence in Bilibid for one crime, struck
and stabbed the foreman of the brigade of prisoners. Under Article
160 of the Code, he shall be punished with the maximum period of the
penalty prescribed by the law for the new felony. (People v. Durante,
53 Phil. 363, 372)

In the case of U.S. v. Parro, price was a qualifying aggravating
circumstance.

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Par. 11.-- That the crime be committed in consideration of a
price, reward or promise.
Basis:
This is based on the great.er perversity of the offender, as shown
by the motivating power itself.
This aggravating circumstance presupposes the concurrence of
two or more offenders.
When this aggravating circumstance is present, there must be
two or more principals, the one who gives or offers the price or promise
and the one who accepts it, both of whom are principals - to the
former, because he directly induces the latter to commit the crime,
and the latter because he commits it. (1 Viada, 262)
Is this paragraph applicable to the one who gave the price or
reward?
When this aggravating circumstance is present, it afTects not
only the person who received the price or the reward, but also the
person who gave it. (U.S. w. Parr0, 36 Phil. 923, 924; U.S. v. Maharaja
Alim, 38 Phil. 1, 7)
The established rule in Spanish jurisprudence is to the effect
that the aggravating circumstance of price, reward or promise thereof
affects equally the offeror and the acceptor. (People v. Alincastre, No.
L-29891, August 30, 1971, 40 SCRA 391, 408; People w. Canete, No.
L-37945, May 28, 1984, 129 SCRA 451, 459)
P procured an ignorant man to kill the brother and grandniece of
P for a reward of P60.00. The ignorant man, following the instruction

of P, killed them.
402

Affect Criminal Liability

The aggravating circumstance that the crime was committed
for hire or reward can be applied to the instigator of the crime. (U.S.
v. Gamao, 23 Phil. 81)
But in the case of People v. Talledo and Timbreza, 85 Phil. 539,
it was held that the aggravating circumstance of price or reward
cannot be considered against the other accused for the reason that it
was not she who committed the crime in consideration of said price
or reward.
If the price, reward or promise is alleged in the information as a
qualifying aggravating circumstance, it shall be considered against all
the accused, it being an element of the crime of murder. In the case of
Talledo and Timbreza, price was considered as a generic aggravating
circumstance only, because it was not alleged to qualify the crime to
murder.
Price, reward or promise must be for the purpose of inducing
another to perform the deed.
The evidence must show that one of the accused used money or
other valuable consideration for the purpose of inducing another to
perform the deed. (U.S. v. Gama0, 23 Phil. 81)
If without previous promise it was given voluntarily after the
crime had been committed as an expression of his appreciation for
the sympathy and aid shown by other accused, it should not be taken
into consideration for the purpose of increasing the penalty. (U.S. v.
Flores, 28 Phil. 29, 34)
The evidence shows that there was an offer of a reward by
appellant Pascual Bartolome, and a promise by appellant Santos, but
the evidence is not conclusive that appellant Ben Perlas participated
in the commission of the robbery by reason of such reward or promise,
it appearing that even before the other accused met with Pascual
Bartolome and the other municipal officials who made the promise, the
other accused had already decided to commit the robbery. No doubt,
the reward and the promise aforementioned must have given the
403

Art . 14

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Crimi nal Law

other accused, including appellant Ben Perlas, further encouragement
in the commission of the robbery; however, in our opinion, for this
aggravating circumstance to be considered against the person induced,
the said inducement must be the primary consideration for the
commission of the crime by him. (People v. Paredes, Nos. L-19149-50,
August 16, 1968, 24 SCRA 635, 662)

Art. 14

in the death of that person is not even an independent crime of
homicide, it being absorbed. (People v. Paterno, et al., 85 Phil. 722)
On the other hand, if the offender had the intent to kill the
victim, burned the house where the latter was, and the victim died
as a consequence, the crime is murder, qualified by the circumstance
that the crime was committed "by means of fire." (See Art. 248)
When used as a means to kill another person, the crime is murder.

Par. 12. -- That the crime be committed by means ofinundation,
fire, poison, explosion, stranding ofa vessel or intentional damage thereto, derailment ofa locomotive, or
by the use of any other artifice involving great waste
and ruin.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis has reference to means and ways employed.
Unless used by the offender as a means to accomplish a criminal

purpose, any of the circumstances in paragraph 12 cannot be
considered to increase the penalty or to change the nature of the
offense.

As generic aggravating circumstance.
A killed his wife by means of fire, as when he set their house
on fire to kill her; or by means of explosion, as when he threw a
hand grenade at her to kill her; or by means of poison which he
mixed with the food of his wife. In any of these cases, there is only a
generic aggravating circumstance, because they cannot qualify the
crime. The crime committed is parricide which is already qualified
by relationship.
When another aggravating circumstance already qualifies the
crime, any of these aggravating circumstances shall be considered as
generic aggravating circumstance only.

The killing of the victim by means of such circumstances as
inundation, fire, poison, or explosion qualifies it to murder. (Art. 248,
par. 3)
1.

"By means offire"

In a case, the accused had set fire to an automohile under a
building, with the result that the edifice was consumed by fire. One
of the inmates of the house perished in the conflagration.
Held: In order to constitute murder, there should be an actual
design to kill and that the use of fire should be purposely adopted as
a means to that end. (U.S. v. Burns, 41 Phil. 418, 432)
Hence, if the purpose of the explosion, inundation, fire or poison
is to kill a predetermined person, the crime committed is murder.
Once any of these circumstances is alleged in the information to
qualify the offense, it should not be considered as generic aggravating
circumstance for the purpose of increasing the penalty, because it is
an integral element of the offense.
But if a house was set on fire after the killing of the victim,
there would be two separate crimes of arson and murder or homicide.
(People v. Bersabal, 48 Phil. 439, 441; People v. Pring, 63 Phil. 546,
552) There would not be an aggravating circumstance of "by means
of fire."
2.

"By means of explosion"

When the crime intended to be committed is arson and somebody
dies as a result thereof, the crime is simply arson and the act resulting

When the killing is perpetrated with treachery and by means of
explosives, the latter shall be considered as a qualifying circumstance.
Since the use of explosives is the principal mode of attack, reason
dictates that this attendant circumstance should qualify the offense
instead of treachery which will then be relegated merely as a generic

404

405

When there is no actual design to kill a person in burning a house, it
is plain arson even if a person is killed.

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
aggravating circumstance. (People v. Comadre, G.R. No. 153559, June
8, 2004)

When a person commits any of the crimes defined in the Revised
Penal Code or special law with the use of the explosives, detonation
agents or incendiary devices, which results in the death of any person
or persons, the use of such explosives, detonation agents or incendiary
devices shall be considered as an aggravating circumstance. (Sec. 3
of P.D. No. 1866 as amended by Sec. 2 of R.A. No. 8294) Republic Act
No. 8294 did not amend the definition of murder under Article 248,
but merely made the use of explosives an aggravating circumstance
when resorted to in committing "any of the crimes defined in the
Revised Penal Code." The legislative purpose is to do away with the
use of explosives as a separate crime and to make such use merely
an aggravating circumstance in the commission of any crime already
defined in the Revised Penal Code. Thus, R.A. No. 8294 merely
added the use of unlicensed explosives as one of the aggravating
circumstances specified in Article 14 of the Revised Penal Code. Like
the aggravating circumstance of"explosion" in paragraph 12, "evident
premeditation" in paragraph 13, or "treachery" in paragraph 16 of
Article 14, the new aggravating circumstance added by R.A. No. 8294
does not change the definition of murder in Article 248. (People v.
Comadre, supra)
What crime is committed if a hand grenade is thrown into the
house where a family of seven persons live, and as a result of the
explosion, the wall of the house is damaged, endangering the lives of
the people there?
The offense is a crime involving destruction. (Art. 324) If one
of the people there died, but there is no intent to kill on the part of
the offender, it will be a crime involving destruction with the use of
explosives as an aggravating circumstance. If there is intent to kill and
explosion is used by the offender to accomplish his criminal purpose,
it is murder if the victim dies as a direct consequence thereof.
3.

"By means of derailment of locomotive"

Under Article 330, which defines and penalizes the crime of
damage to means of communication, derailment of cars, collision or
accident must result from damage to a railway, telegraph or telephone
lines.
406

But this is without prejudice to the criminal liability for other
consequences of criminal act.
(1)

What crime is committed if as a result of the derailment
of cars only property is damaged? It is damage to means
of communication under Article 330.

(2)

What is the crime if the death of a person also results
without intent to kill on the part of the offender? It is a
complex crime of damage to means of communication with
homicide. (Arts. 330 and 249 in relation to Arts. 4 and 48)

(3)

What is the crime committed, if the death of a person
resulted and there was intent to kill on the part of the
offender? It is murder, because the derailment of cars or
locomotive was the means used to kill the victim. (Art. 248)

(4)

Must this aggravating circumstance be considered to raise
the penalty, if it already qualifies the crime to murder? No
because of Article 62, par. 1, which provides that when
the aggravating circumstance is included by the law in
defining a crime, it shall not be taken into consideration
for the purpose of increasing the penalty.

It will be noted that each of the circumstances of fre. "
"explosion," and "derailment of a locomotive" may be a part of
the definition of particular crime, such as, arson (Art. 320), crime
involving destruction (Art. 324), and damages and obstruction to
means of communication. (Art. 330)
In these cases, they do not serve to increase the penalty, because
they are already included by the law in defining the crimes.
Paragraph 12 distinguished from paragraph 7.
Under paragraph 12, the crime is committed by means of any
of such acts involving great waste or ruin. Under paragraph 7, the
crime is committed on the occasion of a calamity or misfortune.

Par. 13.-- That the act be committed with evident premeditation.

407

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Basis of this aggravating circumstance.
The basis has reference to the ways of committing the crime,
because evident premeditation implies a deliberate planning of the
act before executing it.
Illustration of deliberate planning of the act before executing It.
Pastor Labutin had planned to liquidate Simplicio Tapulado.
The plan could be deduced from the outward circumstances shown
from the time he walked with Vicente Ompad and Angel Libre (the
triggermen) to the house of Lucio Samar where he caused his coaccused to be drunk, the breaking out of his plan to kill the victim
to his co-accused at the time when he knew that they were already
drunk, his remark that he had grudge against the victim in reply to
the comment of Vicente Ompad that he had no ill-feeling against h.im
(victim), h.is immediate action to supply the ammunition when Vicente
Ompad remarked about the lack of it, and his being always near the
triggermen at the critical moments when the crime was actually to
take place. These circumstances were means which he considered
adequate and effective to carry out the intended commission. He
had sufficient time to reflect and allow his conscience to overcome
his resolution to kill. That Pastor Labutin acted with known
premeditation, is evident indeed. (People v. Ompad, No. L-23513,
January 31, 1969, 26 SCRA 750, 759)
Evident premeditation may be considered as to principal by
induction.
Thus, when Gil Gamao as far back as March 1907, attempted to
induce Batolinao to kill the priest; in March 1909, two months prior
to the murder, he offered Patpat P50.00 to kill the priest; some days
prior to the murder, he said that an anarchistic society had been
formed with the object of killing the friars; and on the afternoon of
May 15, he presided at the meeting held in his own house, where it
was agreed that the priest should be killed and he there deliberately
selected his nephew to commit the crime, and directly induced him to
do it; the crime, insofar as Gil Gamao was concerned, was committed
with known premeditation. (U.S. • Gama0, 23 Phil. 81, 96)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

to carry out the criminal intent during the space of time sufficient to
arrive at a calm judgment. (People v. Durante, 53 Phil. 363, 369)
Evident premeditation has been fully established. The
commission of the crime was premeditated and reflected upon and
was preceded by cool thought and a reflection with the resolution to
carry out the criminal intent during a span of time sufficient to arrive
at the hour of judgment. (People v. Escabarte, No. L-42964, March
14, 1988, 158 SCRA 602, 612)
Thus, evident premeditation may not be appreciated absent any
proof as to how and when the plan to kill was hatched or what time
elapsed before it was carried out. (People w. Perones, G.R. No. 71153,
August 16, 1991, 200 SCRA 624, 635)
Neither is it aggravating where the fracas was the result of
rising tempers, not a deliberate plan (People v. Padrones, G.R. No.
85823, September 13, 1990, 189 SCRA 496, 511), nor when the attack
was made in the heat of anger. (People v. Anin, No. L-39046, June
30, 1975, 64 SCRA 729, 734)
It is not aggravating in the absence of evidence showing that
the accused had, prior to the killing, resolved to commit the same,
nor is there proof that the shooting of the victim was the result of
meditation, calculation or resolution, and the deceased was unknown
to the accused before the incident. (People v. Samonte, Jr., No.
L-31225, June 11, 1975, 64 SCRA 319, 326)
The premeditation must be "evident."
There must be evidence showing that the accused meditated
and reflected on h.is intention between the time when the crime was
conceived by him and the time ii was actually perpetrated. (People
v. Carillo, 77 Phil. 579) The premeditation must be evident and not
merely suspected. (People v. Yturraga, 86 Phil. 534, 538; People w.
Manangan, No. L-32733, September 11, 1974, 59 SCRA 31, 3839,
People v. Lacao, No. L-32078, September 30, 1974, 60 SCRA 89, 95)
Requisites of evident premeditation:

Essence of premeditation.

The prosecution must prove

The essence of premeditation is that the execution of the criminal
act must be preceded by cool thought and reflection upon the resolution

1.

The time when the offender determined to commit the
crime;

408

409

TITLE ONE
Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability

Criminal Law

2.

An act manifestly indicating that the culprit has clung to
his determination; and

3.

A sufficient lapse of time between the determination and
execution, to allow him to reflect upon the consequences
of his act and to allow his conscience to overcome the
resolution of his will. (People v. Lagarto, G.R. No. 65883,
May 6, 1991, 196 SCRA 611, 619-620; People v. Clamor,
G.R. No. 82708, 198 SCRA 642, 655; People v. Pacris, G.R.
No. 69986, March 5, 1991, 194 SCRA 654, 664; People v.
Iligan, G.R. No. 75369, November 26, 1990, 191 SCRA 643,
653; People v. Requipo, G.R. No. 90766, August 13, 1990,
188 SCRA 571, 577 and legions of other cases)

Example:
U.S. v. Manalinde
14 Phil. 77)
Facts: The accused who pleaded guilty confessed that his wife died about
100 days before; that he was directed by Datto Mupuck to go huramentado and
to kill the two persons he would meet in the town; that if he was successful
in the matter, Mupuck would give him a pretty woman on his return; that in
order to carry out his intention to kill two persons in the town of Cotabato, he
provided himself with a kris, which he concealed in banana leaves; that he
travelled for a day and a night from his home; that upon reaching the town,
he attacked from behind a Spaniard, and immediately after, he attacked a
Chinaman who was close by; and that he had no quarrel with the assaulted
persons.
Held: Those facts established the aggravating circumstance of evident
premeditation.
Manalinde illustrates the three requisites of evident premeditation.

First requisite On a certain date, Manalinde accepted the proposition that
he would turn huramentado and kill the first two persons he would
meet in the market place. On said date, the offender is said to have
determined to commit the crime.
Second requisite -He undertook the journey to comply therewith and provided
himselfwith a weapon. Thejourney and the carrying ofthe weapon are

acts manifestly indicating that the offender clung to his determination
to commit the crime.
Third requisite After the journey for a day and a night, he killed the victims.
One day and one night constitute a sufficient lapse of time for the
offender to realize the consequences of his contemplated act.
Other illustrative cases.
The circumstance of evident premeditation is present because
on that very Friday afternoon immediately after the incident at the
canteen, appellant Renegado, giving vent to his anger, told his coemployee, Ramirez, and the security guard, Velasco, that he was going
to kill Lira. That state of mind of appellant was evident once more
when he went to the school dance that same Friday evening and he
asked another security guard if Lira was at the dance. On the following
day, Saturday, appellant met Mrs. Benita Tan to whom he confided
that had he seen Lira the night before he would surely have killed
him. And on Monday morning, knowing Lira's snack time, appellant
armed himself with a knife, proceeded to the canteen at around 9:30
a.m. and seeing the teacher Lira with his back towards him, stabbed
Lira from behind. (People v. Renegado, No. L-27031, May 31, 1974,
57 SCRA 275, 290)
What else can better portray this circumstance that the frequent
meetings of the four accused at the Barrio Fiesta Restaurant in order
to discuss, lay out the plan, and secure the different paraphernalia
consisting of the rope, icepick, flannel cloth, flashlight and shovel?
Added to this is the careful selection of an "ideal" site for the grissly
happening. (People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30, 1975, 62 SCRA
174, 215)
The admission of the accused that he had with him a .22 caliber
revolver on the afternoon of December 12, 1969; that when he saw
the victim driving his car on P. Paredes Street he followed him
up to the corner of P. Paredes and Lepanto Streets where he shot
the victim eight times suddenly and without any warning, speaks
eloquently of his plan generated by an all-consuming hatred, to kill
the person whom he considered responsible for all his misfortunes.
The lower court did not, therefore, err in considering the aggravating
411

410

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

Art. 14

(d)

The date and time when the offender determined to commit the
crime essential.

When the defendants made repeated statements that the
hour of reckoning of the victim would arrive and armed
themselves with deadly weapons. (People v. Lopez, 69 Phil.
298)

(e)

The date and, if possible, the time when the offender determined
to commit the crime is essential, because the lapse of time for the
purpose of the third requisite is computed from that date and time.

When the defendant commenced to sharpen his bolo on
the afternoon preceding the night of the crime. (U.S. v.
Liwakas, 17 Phil. 234)

(D)

When the defendant, according to his own confession, three
times attempted to take the life of the deceased in order
to be able to marry his widow, with whom he was in love.
(People v. Ducusin, 53 Phil. 280)

(g)

Where the accused repeatedly plotted the commission of the
murder over a period of several weeks and, on at least two
occasions, made preliminary efforts to carry it out. (People
v. Jaravata, G.R. No. L-22029, August 15, 1967, 20 SCRA
1014)

circumstance of evident premeditation against the appellant. (People
v. Benito, No. L-32042, February 13, 1975, 62 SCRA 351, 359)

Second requisite necessary.
The premeditation must be based upon external acts and not
presumed from mere lapse of time. (U.S. v. Ricafort, 1 Phil. 173, 176)
The criminal intent evident from outward acts must be notorious
and manifest, and the purpose and determination must be plain and
have been adopted after mature consideration on the part of the
persons who conceived and resolved upon the perpetration of the
crime, as a result of deliberation, meditation and reflection sometime
before its commission. (People v. Zapatero, No. L-31960, August 15,
1974, 58 SCRA 450, 459; U.S. v. Banagale, 24 Phil. 69, 73)
Thus, although in offender's confession there is a statement
that, on the morning of June 29, when he heard that Calma was at
large, he proposed to kill him, there is an entire absence of evidence
showing that he meditated and reflected on his intention between the
time it was conceived and the time the crime was actually perpetrated.
(People v. Carillo, 77 Phil. 572)
Second requisite exists.

Mere threats without the second element does not show evident
premeditation.
(1)

A threat to kill, unsupported by other evidence which would
disclose the true criminal state of mind of the accused, will
only be construed as a casual remark naturally emanating
from a feeling of rancor and not a resolution of the character
involved in evident premeditation. (People v. Fuentesuela,
G.R. No. L-48273, April 22, 1942)

(2)

The mere fact that the accused stated in his extrajudicial
confession that as soon as he heard that the deceased
had escaped from the army stockade he prepared to kill
him, is not sufficient to establish evident premeditation.
It is necessary to establish that the accused meditated
on his intention between the time it was conceived and
the time the crime was actually perpetrated. Defendant's
proposition was nothing but an expression of his own
determination to commit the crime which is entirely
different from premeditation. (People v. Carillo, 77 Phil.
572)

(3)

Evident premeditation was not present in the case at bar. It
is true that two days immediately preceding the shooting,

After the offenders had determined (conceived) to commit
the crime, they manifestly indicated that they clung to their
determination (a) When the crime was carefully planned by the offenders.
(b)

When the offenders previously prepared the means which
they considered adequate to carry it out. (U.S. v. Cornejo,
28 Phil. 457)

(c)

When a grave was prepared at an isolated place in the
field for the reception of the body of the person whom the
criminals intended to kill. (U.S. v. Arreglado, 13 Phil. 660)
412

413

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
appellant threatened to shoot the deceased and on the eve
of the killing, appellant expressed his intention to finish
him. However, there was no showing, that in between,
appellant made plans or sought the deceased to accomplish
the killing. In fact, the killing happened when appellant
was plowing the field and the deceased unexpectedly
appeared thereat. It is clear that appellant's act of shooting
the deceased was not premeditated. The rule is that the
qualifying circumstance of premeditation is satisfactorily
established only if it is proved that the defendant had
deliberately planned to commit the crime, and had
persistently and continuously followed it, notwithstanding
that he had ample time to allow his conscience to overcome
the determination of his will, if he had so desired, after
meditation and reflection. x x x. This circumstance is not
proven where there is no evidence as to the time when the
defendant decided to kill the victim. (People v. Sarmiento,
No. L-19146, May 31, 1963, 8 SCRA 263, 267-268; People
v. Bautista, 79 Phil. 652, 657)

evident premeditation. (People v. Manzano, Nos. L-33643-44, July
31, 1974, 58 SCRA 250, 261-262)
What is sufficient lapse of time?
1.

Evident premeditation was held attendant where the
accused had three days' time to meditate upon the crime
which he intended to commit, and was not prompted by the
impulse of the moment. (People v. Lasafin, 92 Phil. 668,
670)

2.

The existence of evident premeditation is undeniable.
From the incident that dated back one month previously
when the deceased during a fight, slapped the appellant
and ordered him to kneel down, the humiliation inflicted
him caused him to persist in the thought that one day he
would be avenged. So he made it clear on the very same
evening of that encounter. Two days later, he stepped on
the running board of a bus, peeped inside and inquired
if the deceased was there. When he did not find him he
made the remark that if he were there, he had something
for him. Under such a circumstance, the premeditation to
inflict harm is quite evident. (People v. Mojica, 70 Phil.
502, 508-509)

3.

Evident premeditation was attendant where the accused
had one whole day to make the necessary preparations from
the time he conceived the idea of attacking the deceased.
(People v. Dosal, 92 Phil. 577, 881)

4.

Evident premeditation was attendant where the accused
had more than one-half day for meditation and reflection
and to allow his conscience to overcome the resolution of
his will (veneer las determinaciones de la voluntad) had he
desired to hearken to its warnings. (U.S. u. Gil, 13 Phil.
530, 547; People v. Diaz, No. L-24002, January 21, 1974,
55 SCRA 178, 188)

5.

Four hours that intervened between rage and aggression
of the accused is sufficient time for desistance. (People v.
Lazada, 70 Phil. 525, 527)

6.

When the accused came to know that the deceased delivered only 100 bundles of corn, he was enraged. That was

Existence of ill-feeling or grudge alone is not proof of evident
premeditation.
While the appellant might have nursed a grudge or resentment
against the victim, that circumstance is not a conclusive proof of
evident premeditation. (People v. Lacao, No. L-32078, September 30,
1974, 60 SCRA 89, 95)
It is true that about 12 days before the killing, the accused tried
to injure the victim. He desisted after he was restrained by third
persons who intervened during the altercation. The prosecution's
evidence does not show the steps that the accused took thereafter in
order that he could kill the victim on that fateful hour when the latter
was answering a call of nature on the porch of his house. Possibly,
the killing was actually premeditated but the prosecution's evidence
is not conclusive on the presence of that aggravating circumstance.
(People v. Manangan, No. L-32733, September 11, 1974, 59 SCRA 31,
39)
The mere fact that after lunch time the accused mauled and
detained the victim and that at around 4:00 p.m., while the latter
was in their custody, he was killed, would not mean that there was
414

415

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

3:00 p.m. At 7:00 p.m. of same date, the accused armed
himself with a bolo and lance, went to the house of the
deceased and killed the latter. The lapse of time of 3 1/2
hours between the plan and the commission of the crime is
sufficient time for the offenders to reflect dispassionately
upon the consequences of their contemplated act. (People
v. Mostoles, 85 Phil. 883, 892)
7.

Evident premeditation was attendant where the accused
apprehended the victims about 10:00 in the evening and the
crime was consummated at about 1:00 early the following
morning. The accused had sufficient time to meditate and
reflect on the consequences of their act. (People v. Berdida,
No. L-20183, June 30, 1966, 17 SCRA 520, 530)

8.

Evident premeditation preceded the commission of the
crime. The slaying was done about three hours from the
time the scheme to kill was plotted. (People v. Gausi, No.
L-16498, June 29, 1963)

9

The killing of the deceased was aggravated by evident
premeditation because the accused conceived of the
assault at least one hour before its perpetration. (People v.
Dumdum, Jr., No. L-35279, July 30, 1979, 92 SCRA 198,
202)

Where there Is no sufficient lapse of time.
1.

2.

Where the defendant constabulary soldier was rebuked
by his superior at around 7:00 a.m. and, a quarter of an
hour later, he shot to death his superior, there was no
premeditation because a sufficient time did not elapse
to allow the conscience of the accused to overcome the
resolution of his will ifhe desired to hearken to its warning.
(U.S. v. Blanco, 18 Phil. 206, 208)
The appellant had only about half an hour for meditation
and reflection from the time he left the house, went to
his camp, put on his fatigue uniform, got a garand rifle
and returned to said house, followed the serenaders a
short distance and then fired the two shots. The time was
insufficient for full meditation and reflection. (People v.
Pantoja, No. L-18793, October 11, 1968, 25 SCRA 468, 471)
416

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
3.

By quickly returning to the group with the knife within
three minutes after leaving, the accused let no appreciable
time pass to allow him to reflect upon h.is resolve to carry
out his criminal intent. (People v. Macaspac, G.R. No.
198954, February 22, 2017)

4.

Evident premeditation was rejected because the accused
planned to kill the deceased at 7:00 in the morning and
the killing took place at 9:00 the same morning. The
accused did not have sufficient time to reflect during the
two hours that preceded the killing. (People v. Crisostomo,
No. L-38180, October 23, 1981, 108 SCRA 288, 297)

Why sufficient time is required.
The offender must have an opportunity to coolly and serenely
think and deliberate on the meaning and the consequences of what he
planned to do, an interval long enough for his conscience and better
judgment to overcome h.is evil desire and scheme. (People v. Mendoza,
91 Phil. 58, 64)
Evident premeditation contemplates cold and deep meditation,
and tenacious persistence in the accomplishment of the criminal act.
(People v. Gonzales, 76 Phil. 473) Mere determination to commit the
crime does not of itself establish evident premeditation for it must
appear, not only that the accused made a decision to commit the crime
prior to the moment of execution, but also that his decision was the
result of meditation, calculation or reflection or persistent attempt.
(People v. Carillo, 77 Phil. 572; People v. Sarmiento, No. L-19146,
May 31, 1963, 8 CRA 263, 268)
There must be sufficient time between the outward acts and the
actual commission of the crime.
Thus, the mere fact that the accused was lying in wait for h.is
victim just before the attack is not sufficient to sustain a finding of
evident premeditation, in the absence of proof that he had been lying
in wait for a substantial period of time. (U.S. v. Buncad, 25 Phil. 530,
539)
But when it appears that the accused borrowed a bolo for the
purpose ofcommitting the crime early in the morning and was lying in
wait for some time before he attacked h.is victim, evident premeditation
is sufficiently established. (U.S. v. Mercoleta, 17 Phil. 317, 320)
417

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Conspiracy generally presupposes premeditation.

Distinguish the ruling in the Timbol case from that in the Guillen case.

Where conspiracy is directly established, with proof of the
attendant deliberation and selection of the method, time and means
of executing the crime, the existence of evident premeditation can
be taken for granted. (U.S. v. Cornejo, 28 Phil. 457, 461; People v.
Tmbang, 74 Phil. 295, 297)

It is true that in the case of People v. Guillen, 85 Phil. 307, it was
held that when the person killed is different from the one intended
to be killed, the qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation
may not be considered as present; however, in the case of People v.
Timbol, et al., G.R. Nos. L-47471-47473, August 4, 1944, it was held
that evident premeditation may be considered as present, even if a
person other than the intended victim was killed, if it is shown that
the conspirators were determined to kill not only the intended victim
but also any one who may help him put a violent resistance. (People
v. Ubina, 97 Phil. 515, 535)

Exception:
But when conspiracy is only implied, evident premeditation
may not be appreciated, in the absence of proof as to how and
when the plan to kill the victim was hatched or what time had
elapsed before it was carried out. (People v. Custodio, 97 PhL.
698, 704; People v. Upao Moro, G.R. No. L-6771, May 28, 1957)
Evident premeditation and price or reward can co-exist.

The aggravating circumstance of price, reward, or promise
may be taken into consideration independently of the fact that
premeditation has already been considered, inasmuch as there exists
no incompatibility between these two circumstances, because if it is
certain that as a general rule price or reward implies premeditation,
it is no less certain that the latter may be present without the former.
(U.S. v. Robor, 7 Phil. 726, 728)

It is not necessary that there is a plan to kill a particular person.

For premeditation to exist, it is not necessary that the accused
planned to kill a particular person.
(1)

The criminal intent which was carried out was to kill the
first two persons whom the accused should meet at the
place where he intended to commit the crime. Evident
premeditation was considered against the accused. (U.S.
v. Manalinde, 14 Phil. 77, 82)

(2)

After careful and thoughtful meditation, the accused
decided to kill, at the first opportunity, whatever individual
he should meet from the town of Macabebe, on account of
the previous illness of his son of cholera which he attributed
to the persons from Macabebc.

Premeditation is absorbed by reward or promise. (People v.
Napenas, G.R. No. L-46314, December 24, 1938)
But this rule is applicable only to the inductor. The mere fact that
another executed the act on the promise of reward does not necessarily
mean that he had sufficient time to reflect on the consequences of his
act. (U.S. v. Manalinde, 14 Phil. 77, 82)

field: Inasmuch as the accused intentionally sought
out a native of the town of Macabebe, a human being, there
is no doubt that, actuated by the impulse of his prejudice
against any individual from Macabebe and obedient to
his criminal resolution seriously conceived and selected
to carry out vengeance, he perpetrated the crime with
premeditation. (U.S. v. Zalsos and Ragmac, 40 Phil. 96,
103)

When victim is different from that intended, premeditation Is not
aggravating.

Evident premeditation may not be properly taken into account
when the person whom the defendant proposed to kill was different
from the one who became his victim. (People v. Mabug-at, 51 Phil.
967, 970; People v. Guillen, 85 Phil. 307, 318; People v. Hilario, et al.,
G.R. No. 128083, March 16, 2001)

418

(3)

A general attack upon a village having been premeditated
and planned, the killing ofany individual during the attack
is attended by the aggravating circumstance of evident
premeditation. (U.S. v. Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 154; U.S.
v. Binayoh, 35 Phil. 23, 30; U.S. v. Butag, 38 Phil. 746, 747)
419

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Reason for the difference of the rulings.

When the offender decided to kill a particular person and
premeditated on the killing of the latter, but when he carried out his
plan he actually killed another person, it cannot properly be said that
he premeditated on the killing of the actual victim.
But ifthe offender premeditated on the killing ofany person, like
the offender in the Manalinde case who decided to kill the first two
persons he would meet in the market place, it is proper to consider
against the offender the aggravating circumstance of premeditation,
because whoever is killed by him is contemplated in his premeditation.
And where the victim belonged to the class designated by the
accused, although the victim was not previously determined by him,
premeditation is an aggravating circumstance.

the penalty. (People v. Valeriano, 90 Phil. 15, 34; People v. Nabual,
No. L-27758, July 14, 1969, 28 SCRA 747, 752)
If there is no evidence that the conspirators previously
planned and agreed to kill the victims, evident premeditation is not
aggravating in robbery with homicide. (People v. Pulido, 85 Phil. 695,
709)
Where the killing of a person during the commission of robbery
was only an incident, because their original plan was only to rob, and
they killed the deceased when the latter refused to open the "kaha
de yero" and fought with them, this aggravating circumstance should
be disregarded. (People v. Pagal, No. L-32040, October 25, 1977, 97
SCRA 570, 576)

ln the case of U.S. v. Zalsos and Ragmac, supra, the victim, a
peddler from the town ofMacabebe, belonged the class designated by
the accused, that is, "persons from Macabebe" to whom he attributed
the existence of a cholera epidemic in his barrio. Such being the case,
any individual from the town of Macabebe was contemplated in his
premeditation.

The basis has reference to the means employed in the commission
of the crime.

Distinguished from the Caranto case.

Application of this paragraph.

In the Caranto case, it appears that the victim was also
undetermined, and the threats made by defendant who had lost a
fishing boat was that either he or the thief would be turned into ghost.
The killing of the thief afterwards was held not to be murder qualified
by evident premeditation, because there was merely a threat which
was not of a direct and specific character. (U.S. v. Caranto, 4 Phil.
256, 257)

This circumstance is characterized by the intellectual or mental
rather than the physical means to which the criminal resorts to carry
out his design. This paragraph was intended to cover, for example, the
case where a thieffalsely represents that he is the lover of the servant
of a house in order to gain entrance and rob the owner (astucia); or
where (fraude) A simulates the handwriting of B, who is a friend
of C, inviting the latter, without the knowledge of B, by means of a
note written in such simulated hand, to meet B at the designated
place, in order to give A, who lies in wait at the place appointed, an
opportunity to kill C; or where (disfraz) one uses a disguise to prevent
being recognized. (U.S. v. Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 155)

to

Evident premeditation, while Inherent In robbery, may be aggravating
In robbery with homicide if the premeditation included the killing
of the victim.

It is inherent in robbery, specially where it is committed by
various persons, because they must have an agreement, they have to
meditate and reflect on the manner of carrying out the crime and they
have to act coordinately in order to succeed. But if there is evident
premeditation not only to steal personal property in the house of
Judge Bautista but also to kill him, it shall be considered to increase

Par. 14.-- That (1) craft, (2) fraud, or(3) disguise be employed.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

Craft (involves intellectual trickery and cunning on the part of the
accused).
Craft involves the use of intellectual trickery or cunning on
the part of the accused. It is not attendant where the accused was
practically in a stupor when the crime was committed. (People v.
Juliano, No. L-33053, January 28, 1980, 95 SCRA 511, 526)

420
421

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
Craft is chicanery resorted to by the accused to aid in the
execution of his criminal design. It is employed as a scheme in the
execution of the crime. It is not attendant where the regular driver
of the victim feigned illness to enable another driver to drive for the
victim who drove the vehicle first to the house of the regular driver
who said he was already well and so he boarded with his co-accused,
took over the driver's seat, and during the trip shot the victim who
was also on board the vehicle. (People v. Zea, No. L-23109, June 29,
1984, 130 SCRA 77, 81, 90)
Where four men, having determined to kill a man in an
uninhabited place so that the crime might be less easily discovered,
invited him to go with them on a journey to a distant mountain on
the pretense that they would find there a molave tree from which
flowed a liquid supposed to have a peculiar virtue, and murdered him
in a remote and uninhabited place, the aggravating circumstance of
craft was present and should be taken into account for the purpose
of increasing the penalty. (U.S. v. Gamponia, 36 Phil. 817, 818, 820;
People v. Alcaraz, 103 Phil. 533, 549)
The act of the accused in pretending to he bona fide passengers
in the taxicab driven by the deceased, when they were not so in fact,
in order not to arouse his suspicion, and then killing him, constituted
craft. (People v. Daos, 60 Phil. 143, 154)
The act of the accused in assuming position of authority,
pretending to be a member of the CID when he was not, to gain
entrance and be able to he with the offended party alone in the latter s
house thus enabling him to commit acts of lasciviousness against
her, constituted craft. (People v. Timbol, CA., 47 O.G. 1869)
Where defendants pretended to be constabulary soldiers to gain
entry into the place of the victims, craft is properly appreciated as an
aggravating circumstance. (People v. Saquing, No. L-27903, December
26, 1969, 30 SCRA 834, 844)
The act of the accused in brushing the dirt on the pants of the
offended party, which the accused himself had dirtied, and while the
attention of the offended party was centered on the act of the accused,
a confederate of the accused grabbed the wallet of the offended party
from behind, constituted craft. (People v. Bagtas, C.A., 47 O.G. 1251)
In a case where the defendants asked the offended party
to change a PIO-bill and, when the latter took out his wallet, the
422

defendants snatched it from the hand of the offended party, it was
held that the crime of robbery was attended by the aggravating
circumstance of craft. (People v. Mallari, 60 Phil. 400, 402, 405)
Craft was used by the accused in the commission of the offense of
rape when the accused resorted to the use of innocent-looking chocolate
candies which did not arouse the suspicion of the complainant that
they contained deleterious drug, the purpose of the accused in giving
them being to weaken her resistance so that she would not be able to
repulse physically and mentally his sexual assault. (People v. Guy,
C.A., 64 O.G. 13557)
There is craft where the accused lures out the victim from his
house in order to be killed. (People v. Barbosa, No. L-39779, November
7, 1978, 86 SCRA 217, 225)
Craft was attendant where all the accused with murder in their
hearts pretended to accompany the victim in a friendly manner in
going home and in order to lure him into a false sense of security
and making him unmindful of the tragedy that would befall him, one
of them even placed his hands on the shoulder of the victim while
walking. (People w. Molleda, No. L-34248, November 21, 1978, 86
SCRA 667, 705)
The presence of craft cannot be disputed for the appellant had
deceived the victim into coming to her apartment under the pretext
of accompanying the victim to the bank, and played on the victim's
seeming fondness for one Reynaldo Sioson to lure said victim to the
third floor of the apartment where the appellant committed the crime.
The unsuspecting victim found herself caught in the malevolent
trickery practiced by the appellant, the consequence of which proved
fatal. (People vu. Rodriguez, No. L-32512, March 31, 1980, 96 SCRA
722, 738-739)
But craft is not attendant where the unlawful scheme could have
been carried out just the same even without the pretense. (People v.
Aspili, G.R. Nos. 89418-19, November 21, 1990, 191 SCRA 530, 543)
Craft, when not an aggravating circumstance.

Where craft partakes of an element of the offense, the same may
not be appreciated independently for the purpose of aggravation. Vidle,
Article 62, paragraphs 1 and 2, R.P.C. Thus, when the offender never
intended to genuinely enter into the transaction ofpurchase and sale
423

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

with the owner of the jeep, to the offender the deed of sale being a
sham, as he did not pay the price thereof, the fraud takes the place
of trespass in the taking of the jeep involved in the crime of qualified
theft committed by him. (People v. Tiongson, C.A., 59 O.G. 4521)

commission of the crime. (People v. Napili, 85 Phil. 521, 527, citing
U.S. v. Gampoiia, 36 Phil. 817, and People v. Daos, 60 Phil. 143)

Art. 14

Craft is not clearly established where the evidence shows that
the accused and his companions, who came out from behind a patch
of bamboo trees, did not camouflage their hostile intentions at the
incipiency of the attack, as they announced their presence at the
scene of the crime with shouts and gunshots. (People v. Cunanan,
No. L-30103, January 20, 1977, 75 SCRA 15, 17, 23)
Fraud (insidious words or machinations used to induce the victim
to act in a manner which would enable the offender to carry out his
design).
Where the defendants induced their victims to give up their
arms upon a promise that no harm should be done to them (U.S. v.
Abelinde, 1 Phil. 568, 574), and when the latter gave up their arms,
the former attacked and killed them, it was held that there was
fraud; and where the defendants, upon the pretext of wanting to buy
a bottle of wine, induced the victim to go down to the lower story of
his dwelling where the wine was stored, entered it when the door was
opened to him, and there commenced the assault which ended in his
death, it was also held that there was fraud. (U.S. v. Bunda/, 3 Phil.
89, 90, 98)
There is also deceit or fraud where accused lured a minor girl to
go with him and look for her sister Liza who was allegedly waiting for
the offended girl somewhere at Junquera Street but instead, accused
upon reaching said destination, dragged the girl to a secluded area
and there raped her. (People v. Famador, 173 SCRA 310)
Does gaining entrance by pretending to buy cigarettes or to drink
water constitute craft?

Art.14

Affect Criminal Liability

The facts constituting the aggravating circumstance being
similar to those in the case of U.S. v. Bundal, supra, it should be
fraud.
The accused, stepfather of the offended party, taking advantage
of the absence of the girl's mother, went to the house and took the
young girl away, telling the latter that she was to be taken to her
godmother's house. The accused, however, took the girl to another
house where he ravished her.
Held: The accused committed rape, employing fraud. (People v.
De Leon, 50 Phil. 539, 545)
Hairline distinction between craft and fraud.

There is craft or fraud when by trickery, accused gained entrance
in victim's house. By pretending they had pacific intentions (to
buy chickens) in desiring to enter Argenio's home, they allayed his
suspicions. They gained entrance into the house with his consent
through trickery or deceit. (People v. Salling, No. L-27974, February
27, 1976, 69 SCRA 427, 443)
How Is craft distinguished from fraud?

When there is a direct inducement by insidious words or
machinations, fraud is present; otherwise, the act of the accused done
in order not to arouse the suspicion of the victim constitutes craft.
Disguise (resorting to any device to conceal identity).
The fact that the defendant had his face blackened in order
that he should not be recognized at the time he committed the crime
constitutes the aggravating circumstance of disguise. (U.S. • Cofrada,
4 Phil. 154, 157)
When the defendant covered his face with handkerchief before
committing the crime, the aggravating circumstance of disguise is
present. (People v. Piring, 63 Phil. 546, 553)

To enter the house of Pedro Levanti no, one of the accused shouted
from the outside that they wanted to buy cigarettes, which induced
the owner to open the kitchen for them, and one of them said that
they wanted to drink some water which also paved the way for their
intrusion in the house. Once inside, they committed robbery with rape.
It was held that the aggravating circumstance of craft attended the

But if in spite of the use of handkerchief to cover their faces, the
culprits were recognized by the victim, disguise was not considered
aggravating. (People v. Sonsona, G.R. No. L-8966, May 25, 1956)

424

425

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
The accused with two others wore masks to cover their faces.
There could have been no other purpose for this but to conceal their
identities particularly for the one who was very much known to the
offended parties. The fact that the mask subsequently fell down
thus paving the way for this one's identification does not render the
aggravating circumstance of disguise inapplicable. (People v. Cabato,
No. L-37400, April 15, 1988, 160 SCRA 98, 110)
In a case where the defendant illegally wore a Constabulary
uniform, it was held that the aggravating circumstance of disguise
was present. (People v. Gonzalez, 56 Phil. 842 [Unrep.J)
The use of an assumed name in the publication of a libel
constitutes disguise. (People v. Adamos, C.A., G.R. No. 43808, August
20, 1936)

of by the malefactors in the course of the assault. According to the
prosecution's version, at the incipiency of the attack, the accused
and his companions did not camouflage their hostile intentions. They
announced their presence at the scene of the crime with shouts and
gunshots. That mode of attack counteracted whatever deception might
have arisen from their disguise. (People v. Cunanan, No. L-30103,
January 20, 1977, 75 SCRA 15, 23)

Par. 15.- That (1) advantage be taken of superior strength, or
(2) means be employed to weaken the defense.
Meaning of "advantage be taken."

Note the word "advantage" in this paragraph.

Disguise, not considered.

It is also worth mentioning that while appellant reportedly had a
sort of a mask and was using sunglasses, these clumsy accouterments
could not constitute the aggravating circumstance of disguise. Legally,
disfraz contemplates a superficial but somewhat effective dissembling
to avoid identification. Here, even if it is true that he assumed that
masquerade, appellant was readily recognizable because his face could
easily be seen together with the identifying feature of his mustache.
(People v. Reyes, G.R. No. 118649, March 9, 1998)
The purpose of the offender in using any device must be to conceal
his identity.

While it appears that some of the offenders had cloths wrapped
about their heads, it does not appear that this was done as a disguise,
but was following rather the custom of the country in which they had
been reared. (U.S. v. Rodriguez, 19 Phil. 150, 156)
The act of the accused in disguising herself by using her
husband's clothes and a hat given to her by her companion before they
continued on their way to the place where she killed the deceased,
was not considered aggravating circumstance of disguise, because
she did it for fear of being attacked on the way. (U.S. v. Guysayco, 13
Phil. 292, 293, 296)
The malefactors resorted to a disguise. That circumstance did not
facilitate the consummation of the killing. Nor was it taken advantage
426

To take advantage of superior strength means to use purposely
excessive force out of proportion to the means of defense available to
the person attacked. (People v. Cabling, No. L-38091, December 17,
1976, 74 SCRA 285, 303, citing Albert's Commentaries on the R.P.C.,
pp. 126-127; People v. Sarabia, No. L-31755, March 31, 1980, 96 SCRA
714, 719-720, citing Cabling; People v. Cabato, No. L-37400, April
15, 1988, 160 SCRA 98, 110, citing Cabiling; People v. Carpio, G.R.
Nos. 82815-16, October 31, 1990, 191 SCRA 108, 119, citing Cabato;
People v. Moka, G.R. No. 88838, April 26, 1991, 196 CRA 378, 387,
citing Cabato)
Illustrations of no advantage of superior strength.
(1)

One who attacks another with passion and obfuscation
does not take advantage of his superior strength.

(2)

This aggravating circumstance does not apply when a
quarrel arose unexpectedly and the fatal blow was struck
at a time when the aggressor and his victim were engaged
against each other as man to man. (U.S. v. Badines, 4 Phil.
594, 595)

In these two cases, the offenders may or might have superior
strength, but they do not or did not take advantage of it.

427

Art . 14

Illustrations of abuse of superior strength.
(1)

(2)

(3)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

An illustration of the cases which fall within this provision
is where, for example, a strong man has ill-treated a child,
an old or decrepit person, or one weakened by disease, or
where a person's physical strength has been overcome by
the use of drugs or intoxicants. In each of these cases, there
is a marked difference of physical strength between the
offended party and the offender. (U.S. v. Devela, 3 Phil.
625, 628)
The deceased Tomas Martir was unarmed, under the
influence of liquor. He was much smaller than Navarra.
Navarra's attack came after he (Martir) was pushed to the
wall by Antonio Santiago. Not content with this and after
Martir tried to escape, Virgilio Cruz fired at him. Not only
that, this was followed by two other shots from Navarra.
Since the aggressors were police officers fully armed, and
the deceased was defenseless and under the influence of
liquor, a clear case of abuse of superiority is present. The
two took advantage of these circumstances to consummate
the offense. (People v. Navarra, G.R. No. L-25607, October
14, 1968, 25 SCRA 491, 497)
The aggravating circumstance of abuse of superior strength
is attendant where the victim who died was an innocent
and tender baby, barely six months old, and the wounded
children were aged five and 12 years old, because of
the marked difference of physical strength between the
offended parties and the offender. (People v. Gatcho, No.
L-27251, February 26, 1981, 103 SCRA 207, 220)

When the attack was made on the victim alternately, there is no abuse
of superior strength.
Considering that the perpetrators attacked the victim alternately and did not combine their superior strength to overwhelm
the victim, they could not be said to have taken advantage of their
superior strength. (People v. Campit, G.R. No. 225794, December 6,
2017)

Art. 14

on the victim alternately, one after the other. (People v. Narciso, No.
L-24484, May 28, 1968, 23 SCRA 844, 865-866)
Abuse of superior strength when a man attacks a woman with a
weapon.
An attack made by a man with a deadly weapon upon an
unarmed and defenseless woman constitutes the circumstance of
abuse of that superiority which his sex and the weapon used in the act
afforded him, and from which the woman was unable to defend herself.
(People v. Guzman, 107 Phil. 1122, 1127, citing U.S. v. Camiloy, 36
Phil. 757; U.S. v. Consuelo, 13 Phil. 612; People v. Quesada, 62 Phil.
446)
Illustrations:
a.

The accused attacked an unarmed four feet, 11-inch girl
with a knife. He had abused the superiority which his sex
and weapon employed afforded him, and from which the
deceased would be unable to defend herself. (People v.
Brana, No. L-29210, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 307, 315)

b.

The accused was armed while the victim, a married woman,
was unarmed and she guilelessly approached the group of
the accused, without the least inkling that any harm would
befall her, when she was shot in the back after her hands
were tied behind her. Abuse of superiority was employed in
liquidating her. (People v. Clementer, No. L-33490, August
30, 1974, 58 SCRA 742, 744, 749)

c.

The female victim was stabbed to death. Three men had
earlier invaded her house. Her husband was away fishing
with the husband of her sister who was her only companion
and her sister's one-year-old son. Certainly, an attack
by three men against a helpless and defenseless woman
constitutes abuse of superior strength. (People v. Patinga,
No. L-37912, January 18, 1982, 111 SCRA 52, 58, 62)

No abuse of superior strength in parricide against the wife.

Use of superior strength should not be considered even if all the
accused delivered blows upon the victim, because the attack was made

Abuse of superior strength is inherent in the crime of parricide
where the husband kills the wife. It is generally accepted that the
husband is physically stronger than the wife. (People v. Galapia, Nos.
L-39303-05, August 1, 1978, 84 SCRA 526, 531)

428

429

TITLE ONE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

Evidence of relative physical strength necessary.

But the mere fact that one person was attacked by two aggressors
does not constitute this aggravating circumstance, if the relative
physical strength of the parties does not appear. There must be
evidence that the accused were physically stronger and that they
abused such superiority. (People v. Bustos, 51 Phil. 385, 392; People v.
Diokno, 63 Phil. 601, 607) The mere fact of there being a superiority
of numbers is not sufficient to bring the case within aggravating
circumstance. (U.S. v. Devela, supra; People v. Maloloy-on, G.R. No.
85246, August 30, 1990, 189 SCRA 250, 258)
Illustrations:
a.

The records of the case are bereft of any information with
respect to the physical conditions of both the accused and
the victims. Thus, abuse of superior strength cannot be
considered. (People v. Cabato, No. L-37400, April 15, 1988,
160 SCRA 98, 110)

b.

There was error in appreciating the circumstance of abuse
of superior strength. There is no evidence of the respective
or joint participation of the two accused in assaulting the
victim, much less that they took advantage of their superior
strength. (People v. Maloloy-on, G.R. No. 85246, August 30,
1990, 189 SCRA 250, 258)

c.

The fact that there were two male persons who attacked
the victim does not per se establish that the crime was
committed with abuse of superior strength there being
no proof of the relative strength of the aggressors and the
victim. (People v. Carpio, G.R. Nos. 82815-16, October 31,
1990, 191 SCRA 108, 119)

Number of aggressors, lf armed, may point to abuse of superior
strength.

In the cases of U.S. u. Tandoc, 40 Phil. 954, 957-958, and People
v. Caroz, 68 Phil. 521, 527, the greater number of the assaulting
party was considered by the Supreme Court in determining the
circumstance of superior strength. But it will be noted that in those
cases, the accused were armed.
It is manifest that defendants acted with abuse of superior
strength, for whereas the three of them were wielding bolos, the
victim was unarmed and trying to flee. Hence, the crime committed
was murder, qualified by abuse of superior strength. (People v. Verzo,
G.R. No. L-22517, December 26, 1967, 21 SCRA 1403, 1410)
But in a case where three persons armed with bolos attacked
another who was armed with a revolver, it was held that there was
no abuse of superior strength, as their strength was almost balanced,
a revolver being as effective, if not more so, than three bolos. (People
v. Antonio, 73 Phil. 421, 424-425)
Similarly, there is no abuse of superior strength where the
accused did not cooperate in such a way as to secure advantage from
their combined strength. The fact that the accused did not conspire to
kill the victim implies that they did not jointly exploit their superior
strength. Numerical superiority does not always mean abuse of
superiority. (People v. Ybanez, Jr., No. L-30421, March 28, 1974, 56
SCRA 210, 217)
Abuse of superior strength by numerical superiority.

1.

The two accused jumped on the victim as he was wrestling
with their companion who has remained at large. It was
while they had him thus outnumbered that one of the
accused delivered the fatal blow. There was abuse of
superior strength. (People v. Boyles, No. L-15308, May 29,
1964, 11 SCRA 88, 95)

2.

The assailants were four in number and were armed with
bladed instruments. The deceased was alone, unarmed, and
taken by surprise. Abuse of superior strength was properly
considered. (People v. Casillar, No. L-28132, November 25,
1969, 30 SCRA 352, 358)

When abuse of superior strength Is aggravating.

The aggravating circumstance of abuse of superior strength
depends on the age, size and strength of the parties. It is considered
whenever there is a notorious inequality of forces between the victim
and the aggressor, assessing a superiority of strength notoriously
advantageous for the aggressor which is selected or taken advantage
of by him in the commission of the crime. (People v. Carpio, supra;
People v. Cabato, supra; People v. Moka, supra)
430

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

431

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

3.

4.

5.

The three assailants are brothers. Alejandro, who was
armed with a bolo (sondang) lay in wait for the victim
and his brother, and they encountered him as they were
fleeing after Joaquin had threatened them. As the victim
retreated, and his brother took refuge in a grassy place,
Joaquin appeared from behind, holding a barbed harpoon
(gata-ao) which he plunged into the victim's back and then
tried to pull it out. While Joaquin was trying to extricate
the harpoon which got stuck because of its hooks, Alejandro
stabbed the victim with his sondang. The victim fell to the
ground. Antonieto, also armed with a sondang, slashed the
prostrate victim in the abdomen. Alejandro and Antonieto
repeatedly stabbed him while Joaquin was pulling out the
harpoon. The victim died in consequence of his numerous
wounds. Abuse of superiority is aggravating. The three
assailants took advantage of their combined strength to
overpower the victim. (People v. Velez, No. L-30038, July
18, 1974, 58 SCRA 21, 24, 31)
There were several assailants who literally ganged up on
the victim. He had to flee because he could not cope with
the successive and simultaneous assaults of his assailants.
Even the armed policeman, who was present at the scene
of the fight, could not break up the fight because the
victim had several adversaries. All that the policeman
could do was to fire his carbine into the air. There was
marked disparity between the strength of the victim and
the strength of the aggressors who, at the last stage of the
fight, surrounded their quarry, wounded him repeatedly
and left him only when he was sprawled on the ground.
Evidently, the assailants cooperated in such a way as to
derive advantage from their combined strength and to
insure the victim's death. Abuse of superiority was correctly
appreciated.
Our jurisprudence is exemplified by the holding that where
four persons attacked an unarmed victim but there was
no proof as to how the attack commenced and treachery
was not proven, the fact that there were four assailants
would constitute abuse of superiority. (People v. Garcia, No.
L-30449, October 31, 1979, 94 SCRA 14, 28, citing People
432

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Crim inal Liability

Art. 14

v. Lasada, No. 6742, January 26, 1912, 21 Phil. 287; U.S.
v. Baragale, No. 7870, January 10, 1913, 24 Phil. 69)
6.

Abuse of superiority is attendant where two accused,
both armed with knives, had cooperated in such a way as
to secure advantage from their combined superiority in
strength and took turns in stabbing the victim who was
unarmed. (People v. Diamonon, No. L-38094, November 7,
1979, 94 SCRA 227, 239)

7.

It is manifest that the accused, together with his coassailants who unfortunately have not been apprehended,
took advantage of their superior strength, when the
four of them, two of whom were armed with bladed
weapons, surrounded and stabbed the unarmed, helpless
and unsuspecting victim. Abuse of superior strength is
aggravating. (People v. Madlangbayan, No. L-33607,
December 14, 1979, 94 SCRA 679, 686)

8.

Given the fact that the victim, himself unarmed, was
simultaneously attacked by the two appellants and the
third accused who has remained at large, all of them with
weapons, they took advantage of superior strength. (People
v. Alitao, G.R. No. 74736, February 18, 1991, 194 SCRA
120, 128)

9.

Advantage of superior strength attends. The number of the
assailants and the firearms and bolos which they used on
the victim show notorious inequality of forces between the
victim and the aggressor. (People v. Moka, G.R. No. 88838,
April 26, 1991, 196 SCRA 378, 386)

10.

There were four accused, relatively of regular, medium
build and size. Two were armed with "guhi" (piece of
bamboo, sharpened or pointed at one end) and stone and
the other two with Indian arrows. The four were carrying
bolos inside a scabbard and tied to the waist. The victim
was unarmed. He had companions but they did not do
anything to help him. Abuse of superior strength was
correctly found to be attendant. (People v. Penones, G.R.
No. 71153, August 16, 1991, 200 SCRA 624, 635-636)

433

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

There is abuse of superior strength when weapon used is out of
proportion to the defense available to the offended party.

Abuse of superior strength is aggravating in coercion and forcible
abduction, when greatly in excess of that required to commit the
offense.

Art. 14

Abuse of superior strength is present not only when the offenders
enjoy numerical superiority or there is a notorious inequality of force
between the victim and the aggressor, but also when the offender uses
a powerful weapon which is out of proportion to the defense available
to the offended party. (People v. Padilla, 233 SCRA 46)
Simultaneous attack by two persons with revolvers against a
defenseless person is aggravated by superior strength.
When two persons took part in the crime armed with bolos or
revolvers and made a simultaneous attack upon a defenseless person,
the aggravating circumstance of abuse of superior strength should
be taken into consideration. (U.S. v. Baniagale, 24 Phil. 69, 71, 83;
U.S. v. Abril, 51 Phil. 670, 675; U.S. w. Lasada, 21 Phil. 287, 291) In
these cases, the two defendants arc both guilty as principals.
There is no abuse of superior strength when one acted as principal
and the other two as accomplices.
But when the court finds that one of the three accused committed
the crime as principal and the two as accomplices, abuse of superior
strength cannot be taken into consideration, because it would be
inconsistent. Where abuse of superior strength is to be estimated as
an aggravating circumstance from the mere fact that more than one
person participated in the offense, it must appear that the accused
cooperated together in some way designed to weaken the defense.
This would make them guilty in the character of principals. (People u.
Cortez, 55 Phil. 143, 148-149; Lumiguis v. People, G.R. No. L-20338,
April 27, 1967, 19 SCRA 842, 846)
When there is an allegation of treachery, superior strength Is
absorbed.
Superior strength is absorbed and inherent in treachery. (People
v. Dadao, G.R. No. 201860, January 22, 2014; People v. Centeno, G.R.
No. 33284, April 20, 1989, 172 SCRA 607, 612; People v. Liston, G.R.
No. 63396, November 15, 1989, 179 SCRA 415, 421)

434

Art. 14

Abuse of superior strength may be present in coercion (Art. 286)
or forcible abduction. (Art. 342; People v. Fernando, C.A., 43 O.G.
1717) Although the commission of the crime of coercion or forcible
abduction presupposes superiority of force on the part of the offenders,
yet when the strength availed ofis greatly in excess ofthat required for
the realization of the offense, as where the offenders were very much
superior to the complainant individually and collectively (cf, People
v. Dayug, 49 Phil. 423, 427, People u. Pineda, 56 Phil. 688, 689, 690),
abuse of superior strength should be considered for the purpose of
increasing the penalty.
Other crimes in which abuse of superior strength is aggravating.
Abuse of superior strength is aggravating in illegal detention
(Arts. 267 and 268), where six persons took and carried away the
victim from his home (U.S. v. Santiago, 4 Phil. 168, 169); in robbery
with rape, committed by five armed persons (People v. Macaya, 85
Phil. 540, 541, 544); in multiple rape, committed hy four men (U.S.
v. Camiloy, 36 Phil. 757, 758); in robbery with homicide, committed
by three men. (People u. Boyles, No. L-15308, May 29, 1964, 11 SCRA
88, 91-92, 96)
The circumstance of "by a band" and that of "abuse of superior
strength," distinguished.
The circumstances of band and abuse of superiority are separate
and distinct legal concepts.
The element of band is appreciated when the offense is committed
by more than three armed malefactors regardless of the comparative
strength of the victim or victims. Hence, the indispensable components
of cuadrilla are: ( 1) at least four malefactors, and (2) all of the four
malefactors are armed. On the other hand, the gravamen of abuse of
superiority is the taking advantage by the culprits of their collective
strength to overpower their relatively weaker victim or victims.
Hence, in the latter aggravating factor, what is taken into account
is not the number of aggressors nor the fact that they are armed, but
their relative physical might vis-a-vis the offended party. (People v.
Apduhan, Jr., No. L-19491, August 30, 1968, 24 SCRA 798, 814-815)
435

Art. 14

TITLE ONE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The aggravating circumstance of the commission of the crime
by a band has been established, it appearing that there were more
than three armed malefactors who acted together in the commission
of the offense. (People v. Escabarte, No. L-42964, March 14, 1988, 158
SCRA 602, 613)
The aggravating circumstance of commission of a crime by a
band was incorrectly appreciated. A band (en cuadrilla) consists of
at least four malefactors who are all armed. When there were only
three perpetrators and two weapons, a kitchen knife and a dagger, the
terrible threesome of the accused did not constitute a band. (People
v. Ga, G.R. No. 49831, June 27, 1990, 186 SCRA 790, 797-798)
Aggravating circumstances absorbing band.

Abuse of superiority absorbs cuadrilla. If treachery absorbs
abuse of superiority and band (U.S. v. Abelinde, 1 Phil. 568, 572) then
it is reasonable to hold that band should not be treated separately and
distinct from abuse of superior strength. The two circumstances have
the same essence which is the utilization of the combined strength of
the assailants to overpower the victim and consummate the killing.
(People v. Medrana, No. L-31871, December 14, 1981, 110 SCRA 130,
145)
The aggravating circumstance of by a band is absorbed in
treachery. (People v. Ampo-an, G.R. No. 75366, July 4, 1990, 187
SCRA 173, 189; People u. Rojas, Nos. L-46960-62, January 8, 1987,
147 SCRA 169, 178-179)

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability
Intoxicating the victim to weaken defense.

This aggravating circumstance exists also when the offender,
who had the intention to kill the victim, made the deceased intoxicated,
thereby materially weakening the latter's resisting power. (People u.
Ducusin, 53 Phil. 280, 289)
If the state of intoxication Is such that the victim cannot put up any
sort of defens e treachery.

!fin his intoxicated state it was impossible for the victim to put
up any sort of resistance at the time he was attacked, treachery may
be considered. (People v. Ducusin, supra)
Applicable only to crimes against persons, etc.

This circumstance is applicable only to crimes against persons,
and sometimes against person and property, such as robbery with
physical injuries or homicide.
Note:

In People v. Guy, supra, employing means to weaken the
defense is not the aggravating circumstance. It is craft.

Means to weaken the defense absorbed in treachery.

The aggravating circumstance ofemploying means to weaken the
defense is absorbed by treachery. (People v. Tunhawan, No. L-81470,
October 27, 1988, 166 SCRA 638, 649-650)

Means employed to weaken defense.

The circumstance of employing means to weaken the defense is
illustrated in the case where one, struggling with another, suddenly
throws a cloak over the head of his opponent and while in this situation
he wounds or kills him. (U.S. v. Devela, supra)
One who, while fighting with another, suddenly casts sand or
dirt upon the latter's eyes and then wounds or kills him, evidently
employs means which weaken the defense of his opponent. (People
v. Siaotong, G.R. No. L-9242, March 29, 1957)
But the mere fact that a Garand rifle was used in killing the
victim does not necessarily raise the aggravating circumstance of
employing means to weaken the defense. (People v. Tunhawan, No.
L-81470, October 27, 1988, 166 SCRA 638, 649)
436

Par. 16.-- That the act be committed with treachery (alevosia).
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis has reference to the means and ways employed in the
commission of the crime.
Meaning of treachery.

There is treachery when the offender commits any of the
crimes against the person, employing means, methods or forms in
the execution thereof which tend directly and specially to insure its
execution, without risk to himself arising from the defense which the
437

Art . 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

offended party might make. (Art. 14, par. 16, R.P.C; People v. Lacao,
Sr., G.R. No. 95320, September 4, 1991, 201 SCRA 317, 330; People
v. Velaga, Jr., G.R. No. 87202, July 23, 1991, 199 SCRA 518, 523)

means itself, in connection with the aggressor's purpose in employing
it. Otherwise, there would be no attempted or frustrated murder
qualified by treachery. For this reason, the law does not require that
the treacherous means insure the execution of the aggression, without
risk to the person of the aggressor arising from the defense which the
offended party might make, it being sufficient that it tends to this
end. (People v. Parana, 64 Phil. 331, 336)

Art. 14

Treachery means that the offended party was not given
opportunity to make a defense. (People v. Tiozon, G.R. No. 89823, June
19, 1991, 198 SCRA 368, 387, citing earlier cases; People u. Narit, G.R.
No. 77087, May 23, 1991, 197 SCRA 334, 351, citing earlier cases)
Treachery attended the shooting of the deceased. The attack was
sudden, unexpected, without warning, and without giving the victim
an opportunity to defend himself or repel the aggression, as, in fact,
the deceased did not sense any danger that he would be shot by the
assailant as there was no grudge or misunderstanding between them.
(People v. Rey, G.R. No. 80089, April 13, 1989, 172 SCRA 149, 158)
Rules regarding treachery.
(1)

Applicable only to crimes against the person.
This is based on the phrase "crime against the person"
in the definition of treachery.

(2)

Means, methods or forms need not insure accomplishment
of crime.
It is not necessary that the means, methods or
forms employed in the execution of the crime insure its
accomplishment, as the law says, "to insure its execution"
only.

(3)

The mode of attack must be consciously adopted.
This is based on the phrase "employing means,
methods, or forms in the execution which tend directly and
specially," in the definition of treachery.

Applicable only to crimes against persons.
This circumstance is applicable only to crimes against persons.
It is not necessary that the mode of attack Insures the consummation
of offense.

1.
Where the accused attacked the offended party unexpectedly
and the wounds inflicted by him upon the latter would have caused
death had not the weapon whereby the same were inflicted met with
an obstacle, such as the ribs, which prevented its penetrating the
lungs and kidneys, alevosia is present and the defendant is guilty of
frustrated murder. (People u. Reyes, 47 Phil. 635, 639)
2.
Where one assaulted another from behind, but failed to
kill the latter because the wound inflicted was not sufficient to cause
death, the attack was characterized by treachery even if the offender
did not attain his end.
The above illustrations are examples of frustrated murder and
attempted murder, respectively, characterized by treachery. Treachery
was considered, even if the offense was not consummated.
Treachery must be proved by clear and convincing evidence.
Treachery is not to be presumed or taken for granted from the
mere statement of a witness that "the attack was sudden." There
must be a clear showing from the narration of facts why the attack or
assault is said to be "sudden." The reason for this is that treachery,
like any element of the crime, must be proved by clear and convincing
evidence. (People v. Santos, No. L-32073, October 23, 1978, 85 SCRA
630, 639)
Treachery cannot be presumed; it must be proved by clear and
convincing evidence, or as conclusively as the killing, if such be the
crime, itself. (People v. Tozon, G.R. No. 89823, June 19, 1991, 198
SCRA 368, 387-388, citing earlier cases)

The treacherous character of the means employed in the
aggression does not depend upon the result thereof but upon the

The suddenness of attack does not, of itself, suffice to support
a finding of alevosia, even if the purpose was to kill, so long as the
decision was made all of a sudden and the victim's helpless position
was accidental. The qualifying circumstance of treachery may not be

438

439

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

simply deduced from presumption as it is necessary that the existence
of this qualifying or aggravating circumstance should be proven as
fully as the crime itself in order to aggravate the liability or penalty
incurred by the culprit. (People v. Ardisa, No. L-29351, January 23,
1974, 55 SCRA 245, 258; People v. Narit, G.R. No. 77087, May 23,
1991, 197 SCRA 334, 351; People v. Tozon, G.R. No. 89823, June
19, 1991, 198 SCRA 368, 387-388; People v. Lubreo, G.R. No. 74146,
August 2, 1991, 200 SCRA 11, 28)
Where no particulars are known as to the manner in which the
aggression was made or how the act which resulted in the death of
the deceased began and developed, it can in no way be estabhshed
from mere suppositions that the accused perpetrated the killing
with treachery. The wound in the back might have been the last one
inflicted or might have been inflicted by accident in the course of the
fight. (U.S. v. Perdon, 4 Phil. 141, 143-144; U.S. • Panagilion, 34
Phil. 786, 792-793)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

opportunity to defend himself, and all surrounding
circumstances indicate that the attack was the result of a
rash and impetuous impulse of the moment rather than
from a deliberate act of the will. (People w. Tugbo, Jr., G.R.
No. 75894, April 22, 1991, 196 SCRA 133, 138-139)
Exceptions:
1.

When the victim was tied elbow to elbow, his body with
many wounds and his head cut off, treachery may be
considered though no witnesses saw the killing. (U.S. •
Santos, 1 Phil. 222, 224-225)

2.

The means used by the accused-appellants to insure the
execution of the killing of the victims so as to afford the
victims no opportunity to defend themselves was the act
of tying the hands of the victims. Thus, no matter how the
stab and hack wounds had been inflicted on the victims, the
victims had no opportunity to defend themselves because
the accused-appellants had earlier tied their hands. (People
v. Osianas, et al., G.R. No. 182548, September 30, 2008)

3.

Treachery must be appreciated in the killing of a child
even if the manner of attack is not shown. It exists in the
commission of the crime when an adult person illegally
attacks a child of tender years and causes his death. (People
v. Retubado, G.R. No. L-58585, 162 CRA 276, 286, citing
People v. Valerio, Jr., L-4116, February 25, 1982, 112 SCRA
231)

Illustrations:
l.

There is no treachery where the assailant was alone while
his victim had four companions nearby who could respond
instinctively upon seeing their injured companion; an
altercation preceded the attack; and the meeting of the
victim and the assailant was only accidental. (People v.
Velaga, Jr., G.R. No. 87202, July 23, 1991, 199 SCRA 518,
523)

2.

Treachery is not attendant where no witness who could
have seen how the deceased was shot was presented.
(People v. Tozon, supra, at 389)

3.

Treachery is not present where the witness to the attack
did not see how it all began and could not provide the
details on how the initial attack was commenced and how it
developed until the victim fell to the ground at which time
he saw the fallen victim being beaten; the autopsy report
shows no back injury; and the attack was made in broad
daylight, on a public road and in an inhabited area, with
the use of a wooden club, all indicative of a casual and not
a planned encounter. (People v. Narit, supra, at 351-352)

4.

Treachery is not attendant where the attack was frontal,
indicating that the victim was not totally without
440

Art. 14

The mode of attack must be consciously adopted.
This means that:
(1)

The accused must make some preparation to kill the
deceased in such a manner as to insure the execution of
the crime or to make it impossible or hard for the person
attacked to defend himself or retaliate (People v. Tumaob,
83 Phil. 738, 742; People v. Saez, No. L-15776, March 29,
1961, 1 SCRA 937, 944; People v. Iligan, G.R. No. 75369,
November 26, 1990, 191 SCRA 643, 653); or

(2)

The mode of attack must be thought of by the offender,
and must not spring from the unexpected tum of events.
441

Art. 14

(People v. Dau, C.A., 40 0.G., Sup. 11, 107) The mode of
attack could not have been thought of when the decision
to shoot the deceased was sudden, in view of the latter's
flight, and the relative positions of the victim and the killer
were entirely accidental. (People v. Abalos, 84 PHiL. 771,
773)
In the following cases, it was held that there was treachery:
1)

The act of shooting the victim at a distance, without the
least expectation on his part that he would be assaulted,
is characterized by treachery. The assailant deliberately
employed a mode of execution which tended directly and
specially to insure the consummation of the killing without
any risk to himself arising from the defense which the
victim could have made. (People v. Tamani, Nos. L-2216061, January 21, 1974, 55 SCRA 153, 175)

2)

The killings were attended with the aggravating
circumstance of treachery because the accused made a
deliberate, surprise attack on the victims. They perpetrated
the killings in such a manner that there was no risk to
themselves arising from any defense which the victims
might have made. (People v. Mori, Nos. L-23511-12,
January 31, 1974, 55 SCRA 382, 403-404)

3)

The circumstances surrounding the killing of the
deceased show treachery. His hands were raised and he
was pleading for mercy with one of the assailants when
another struck him on the neck with a bolo. The role of
the third assailant of weakening the defense, by disabling
the son of the deceased, was part and parcel of the means
of execution deliberately resorted to by the assailants to
insure the assassination of the deceased without any risk
to themselves. (People v. Ricohermoso, Nos. L-30527-28,
March 29, 1974, 56 SCRA 431, 437)

4)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The assailant, in strategically placing himselfin a forested
area near the highway and firing at the unsuspecting victim
at a distance of eight meters, employed a mode of execution
that insured the consummation of the killing without any
risk arising from any defense that the victim could have
442

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
made. (People v. Zapatero, No. L-31960, August 15, 1974,
58 SCRA 450, 459)
5)

In a sense, there was treachery because the victim, a
woman, was first reduced to helplessness before she was
shot. (People v. Clementer, No. L-33490, August 30, 1974,
58 SCRA 742, 749)

6)

The victim was shot while he was gathering tuba on top
of a coconut tree. He was unarmed and defenseless. He
was not expecting to be assaulted. He did not give any
immediate provocation. The deliberate, surprise attack
shows that Sangalang and his companions employed a
mode of execution which insured the killing without any
risk to them arising from any defense which the victim
could have made. (People v. Sangalang, No. L-32914,
August 30, 1974, 58 SCRA 737, 741)

7)

It was treacherous to shoot Cayago at night, while he
was urinating on the porch and when he did not expect
at all that his enemy, Manangan, was only four meters
away aiming a carbine at him. It was an ambuscade.
Manangan resorted to a mode of execution that insured
the consummation of the killing without risk to himself
arising from any defense which the victim could have made.
(People v. Manangan, No. L-32733, September 11, 1974, 59
SCRA 31, 37)

8)

There is treachery where the victim was tied and gagged
before being stabbed. Undisputed facts show that Henry
Chua's hands were tied and his mouth was gagged with a
flannel cloth before he was stabbed twice with an icepick
and buried in a shallow grave near a creek. These facts
portray well that the tied hands of the victim rendered him
defenseless and helpless thereby allowing the accused to
commit the crime without risk at all to their person. (People
v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174,211)

9)

There was treachery because the five accused suddenly
intercepted the victim while he was on his way to the house
of his cousin. The appellants resorted to a mode of attack
which insured the consummation of the crime without any
risk to themselves. The victim was unarmed and he had
443

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
no time to defend himself in view of the suddenness of the
assault and the fact that he was drunk at the time. (People
v. Pajenado, No. L-26458, January 30, 1976, 69 SCRA 172,
179-180)
10) The attack on the victim was deliberate, sudden and
unexpected and from behind. Most of the wounds sustained
by the victim and which were fatal were found on his back.
All of these are indicative of the fact that the accused
employed means and methods which tended directly and
especially to insure the execution of the offense without
risk to the offenders arising from the defense which the
offended party might have made. (People v. Palencia, No.
L-38957, April 30, 1976, 71 SCRA 679, 689)
11) The victim was clearly not in a position to defend himself
at the time of the attack. He was then on top of a coconut
tree. His assailant was on the ground aiming and firing at
him much as ifhe were a sitting duck. There was, in other
words, the employment of means or methods or manner
of execution which insured the attacker's safety from any
defensive or retaliatory act on the part of the victim, who
was perched on top of the coconut tree quite helpless.
(People v. Toribio, G.R. No. 88098, June 26, 1991, 198
SCRA 529, 540)
12) Treachery was correctly appreciated. The accused, armed
with a gun, riding tandem on a motorcycle, suddenly
and without warning shot the victim in the back as the
motorcycle sped by. The victim was then walking along
a road, unsuspecting and unarmed. The motorcycle then
turned back to where the victim lay wounded, and the
accused fired at him once more, again hitting him in the
back. The victim had no effective opportunity to defend
himself and to strike back at the assassin. (People v.
Clamor, G.R. No. 82708, July 1, 1991, 198 SCRA 642, 654655)
13) Treachery is attendant. The accused, after having made
two steps behind the victim, suddenly and unexpectedly,
with the use of a bolo, hacked the deceased at his back
causing a deep wound and fracture of the 5th rib. When
the victim faced the accused, he was again hacked at the
444

forehead. (People v. Lubreo, G.R. No. 74146, August 2, 1991,
200 SCRA 11, 29)
14) The deceased was stabbed without warning. So sudden and
unanticipated was the attack that the victim was given
no chance to defend himself. Then the accused, although
apparently acting without prior agreement, also instantly
and all together attacked him. Even if their aforesaid
acts were independently performed on their individual
initiatives, such concerted action ensured the commission
of the crime without risk to them arising from any
defense or retaliation that the victim might have resorted
to. Treachery was correctly appreciated against all the
accused. (People v. Lacao, Sr., G.R. No. 95320, September
4, 1991, 201 SCRA 317, 330)
15) The victims were caught off guard when the accused, in
the dead of night, arrived at the fishpen and climbed the
same, and without warning, opened fire at the sleeping/
resting victims to disable them. Upon disabling the victims,
the accused continued shooting at the victims. The stealth,
swiftness and methodical manner by which the attack was
carried out gave the four victims no chance at all to evade
the bullets and defend themselves from the unexpected
onslaught. Thus, there is no denying that the collective
acts of the accused and the accused-appellants reek of
treachery. (People v. Las Pinas, G.R. No. 191723, July 23,
2014)
When treachery is not present.
1)

There was no treachery. The attack was perpetrated in a
frontal encounter, shown by the location of the wounds on
the front part of the victim's body. There were no wounds
on the back. The assailants did not make any deliberate,
surprise attack on the victim. They did not consciously
adopt a treacherous mode of attack. The attack was
preceded by an altercation and on the spur of the moment.
(People v. Ybanez, Jr., No. L-30421, March 28, 1974, 56
SCRA 210, 217)

2)

The trial court correctly held that there was no treachery.
The initial assault on the victim was not made in a sudden
445

Art. 14

and unexpected manner. The malefactors gave him an
ominous warning of their presence and heralded their
entrance into his house by firing two gunshots at the
ground. They first mauled him presumably in a frontal
encounter. (People v. Manzano, Nos. L-33643-44, July 31,
1974, 58 SCRA 250, 260)
3)

4)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The accused and his companions did not camouflage their
hostile intentions. They announced their presence at the
scene of the crime with shouts and gunshots. That mode of
attack negated the existence of treachery since the element
of surprise, which marks the presence of treachery, was
absent. (People v. Cunanan, No. L-30103, January 20, 1977,
75 SCRA 15, 23)
When the victim was alerted to the impending lethal attack
due to the preceding heated argument between him and the
accused, with the latter even uttering threats against the
former, treachery cannot be appreciated as an attendant
circumstance. (People v. Macaspac, G.R. No. 198954,
February 22, 2017)

When treachery cannot be considered.

Treachery cannot be appreciated where there is nothing in
the record to show that the accused had pondered upon the mode or
method to insure the killing of the deceased or remove or diminish any
risk to himself that might arise from the defense that the deceased
might make, as when his decision to shoot the victim is sudden,
brought about by a stinging provocation from the latter. (People v.
Macaso, No. L-30489, June 30, 1975, 64 SCRA 659, 666-667)
In the following cases, it was held that there was treachery:
"Inasmuch as Refuerzo was unarmed and utterly
defenseless, he tried to escape through the window. Quirino
Ramolete shot him in that situation. Refuerzo fell into the
batalan with three serious gunshot wounds of entry on his back.
Treachery (alevosia) was manifest in that manner of assault
because it insured the killing without any risk to the assailant."
(People v. Ramolete, et al., 56 SCRA 66)
"When the victim saw appellant hacking her sister, she ran
out of the house and cried for help. Appellant chased her and,
446

Art. 14

upon overtaking her, struck her on the head." (People v. Cruz,
109 Phil. 288)
Note:

Did the accused consciously adopt that method of
shooting the deceased as the latter "tried to escape
through the window" and of striking the victim on the
head while chasing her? It happened so suddenly that
he could not have thought of that manner of assault.

When there is no evidence that the accused had, prior to the
moment of the killing, resolved to commit the crime, or there is no proof
that the death of the victim was the result of meditation, calculation
or reflection, treachery cannot be considered. (U.S. v. Balagtas, 19
Phil. 164)
If the decision to kill was sudden, there is no treachery, even
if the position of the victim was vulnerable, because it was not
deliberately sought by the accused, but was purely accidental. (People
v. Cadag, et al., G.R. No. L-13830, May 31, 1961)
The reason for those rulings is that the law itself says: "There
is treachery when the culprit employed means, methods or forms of
execution which tend directly and specially to insure the execution
of the crime, without risk to himself." Hence, the mere fact that the
attack was sudden and unexpected does not show treachery, unless
there is evidence that such form of attack was purposely adopted
by the accused. There must be evidence showing that the accused
reflected on the means, methods and forms of killing the victim. (People
v. Tumaob, supra)
The characteristic and unmistakable manifestation of treachery
is the deliberate, sudden and unexpected attack of the victim from
behind, without any warning and without giving him an opportunity
to defend himself or repel the initial assault.
But mere suddenness of the attack is not enough to constitute
treachery. Such method or form of attack must be deliberately chosen
by the accused. (People v. Macalisang, G.R. No. L-24546, February
22, 1968, 22 SCRA 699, 704)
To sustain a finding of treachery, the means, method or form
of attack must be shown to have been deliberately adopted by the
appellant. (People v. Caldito, G.R. Nos. 78432-33, February 9, 1990,
182 SCRA 66, 77, citing People v. Manalo, 148 SCRA 98, 108)
447

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

That the mode ofattack was consciously adopted may be inferred from
the circumstances.

companion could stab him repeatedly and with impunity, they thereby
employed means which assured the execution of the crime without
risk to themselves arising from the defense that their victim might
have made. (People v. Hernandez, G.R. No. 90641, February 27, 1990,
182 SCRA 794, 799)

1.
The aggravating circumstance of treachery is established
where the evidence showed that one of the accused approached the
victim from behind, encircling his arm in a tight grip around the
victim's neck while his co-accused held the victim's two hands, and as
the victim was thus rendered helpless and unable to defend himself,
both the former and a third co-accused stabbed the victim with the
scissor blades, inflicting upon the victim at least four serious stab
wounds, any one of which could have caused his death. (People v.
Lunar, No. L-15579, May 29, 1972, 45 SCRA 119, 140)
2.
Treachery attended the killing where the assailants hid
behind a pile of logs under cover of darkness and the victim was
approached from behind and shot as he turned around. (People v.
Jaravata, No. L-22029, August 15, 1967, 20 SCRA 1014, 1020)
3.
By their acts of showering the house with bullets, executed
in the darkness of the night, the offenders employed means, methods
and forms in the execution of the crime which tended directly to insure
the execution of their criminal design without risk to themselves
arising from the defense which the occupants of the house might
make. (People v. Elizaga, No. L-23202, April 30, 1968, 23 SCRA 449,
463)
4.
If the accused was well hidden behind a tree when he shot
the victim who, unarmed and unaware, had no way of defending
himself, the accused deliberately employed means, methods or forms
to insure the execution of the crime, without risk to himself. (People
v. Guevarra, G.R. No. L-24371, April 16, 1968, 23 SCRA 58, 72)
In the case of People v. Dadis, G.R. No. L-21270, November 22,
1966, 18 SCRA 699, 700, 701-702, the defendant also hid behind a
tree and shot at the victim while the latter was running away and
was thus without means of defending himself, but treachery was not
appreciated because the defendant did not purposely take advantage
of the circumstance to kill the victim without risk to himself. He did
so because he was scared, believing that the deceased was armed
with a gun.

6.
The numerous stab wounds, some of which were inflicted at
the back of the victim, show that the attack was sudden and brutal.
The suddenness of the attack deprived the victim, a woman, unarmed
and alone, the opportunity to run or fight back. The assailant, a
strong young man, did not even suffer any injuries except for the
small wound on his finger inflicted by a bite. Obviously, apart from
using her teeth, the victim could not put up any defense. (People v.
Badilla, G.R. No. 69317, May 21, 1990, 185 SCRA 554, 570)
Where the meeting between the accused and the victim is casual
and the attack impulsively done, there is no treachery.

Facts: Upon seeing the accused, the deceased started to run
whereupon the accused whistled at him. As the deceased ignored the
call and continued to run away, the accused got off from his bicycle
and, from a distance of some 50 meters, fired a shot at the deceased
who was fatally hit. The meeting of the two persons was casual. The
accused fired at his victim impulsively, because the latter ignored the
call of the accused.
Held: Where the meeting between the accused and the victim
was casual and the attack was done impulsively, there is no treachery
even if the attack was sudden and unexpected and while the victim
was running away with his back towards the accused. (People v.
Calinawan, 83 Phil. 647, 648)
The reason for this ruling is that the accused could not have
made preparation for the attack, the meeting between him and the
deceased being casual, and the means, method and form of attack
could not have been thought of by the accused, because the attack
was impulsively done.

5.
Three men, armed with a knife, crept up in the dark against
a defenseless and unsuspecting victim who was answering a call of
nature. When two of them pinioned the victim's arms so that their

In another case, the victim was sent to the store to buy some
beer. It, therefore, just so happened that he was sent on an errand
at that particular time to that particular place; otherwise, he would
have remained at home. Nobody knew beforehand that he would go to
the store. Not even the appellant nor his deceased brother could have

448

449

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

expected to meet the victim there at that specific moment. Nor could
appellant have foreseen that the victim would be carrying bottles of
beer at the moment that he would attack the latter. The meeting of
the victim and his assailants was casual. Treachery did not attend.
(People u. Diaz, No. L-75433, November 9, 1988, 167 SCRA 239, 246)
Alevosia cannot be appreciated. The manner in which the
aggression was made or how the act which resulted in the death of the
victim began and developed was not shown. It would appear, too, that
the accused had no opportunity to plan the way, method, or means
with which to execute the felony, as the meeting between the accused
and the deceased was accidental since there is no evidence that the
accused knew beforehand that the deceased would be passing by the
warehouse where they were working at that particular time. (People
v. Bacho, G.R. No. 66645, March 29, 1989, 171 SCRA 458, 465, 466)

Treachery attends where the victim had just
awakened when attacked, because he might still be dazed
and unprepared for the attack and would not be in a
position to offer any risk or danger of retaliation to the
attacker. (People v. Perante, Jr., supra; People v. Atencio,
No. L-22518, January 17, 1968, 22 SCRA 88, 102; People
u. Auila, 92 Phil. 805, 809)
(c)

There is treachery where the victim was stabbed in
a defenseless situation, as when he was being held by the
others while he was being stabbed, as the accomplishment
of the accused's purpose was ensured without risk to
him from any defense the victim may offer. (People v.
Condemena, G.R. No. L-22426, May 29, 1968, 23 SCRA
910; People v. Lunar, G.R. No. L-15579, May 29, 1972, 45
SCRA 119) Here, the accused-appellant stabbed the victim
on the chest while his companions held both of the victim's
arms. (People w. Montejo, No. L-68857, November 21, 1988,
167 CRA 506, 515)

Attacks showing intention to eliminate risk.

Victim asleep.
Treachery attends where the victim was stabbed
while he was asleep. (People v. Caringal, G.R. No. 75368,
August 11, 1989, 176 SCRA 404, 41.9; People v. Nolasco,
No. L-55483, July 28, 1988, 163 SCRA 623, 629; People v.
Trinidad, No. L-38930, June 28, 1988, 162 CRA 714, 725;
People v. Reunir, No. L-73605, January 29, 1988, 157 SCRA
686, 693; People v. Andres, No. L-75355, October 29, 1987,
155 SCRA 290, 300; People v. Perante, Jr., Nos. L-6370910, July 16, 1986, 143 SCRA 56, 60; People v. Miranda, 90
Phil. 91, 96; People v. Dequina, 60 Phil. 279, 286)

(b)

Victim half-awake orjust awakened.
Treachery characterized the crime. Even if the
deceased was already awake when the aggression
commenced, and even if there was light, the victim was
still down on his back, still drowsy, and unarmed. He was
unaware of the defendant's intention. The blows were
delivered all of a sudden and without warning. (People u.
Yadaon, 82 Phil. 160, 163)
450

Victim grappling or being held.
Treachery is present where the assailant stabbed the
victim while the latter was grappling with another, thus
rendering him practically helpless and unable to put up
any defense. (People v. Lingatong, G.R. No. 34019, January
29, 1990, 181 SCRA 424, 430)

Another reason why treachery cannot be considered is that the
meeting of the victim and the accused was only accidental. (People
v. Velaga, Jr., G.R. No. 87202, July 23, 1991, 199 SCRA 518, 523)

(a)

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

(d)

Victims were having lunch.
The victims were eating lunch on campus. They were
not at a place where they would be reasonably expected to
be on guard for any sudden attack by rival fraternity men.
The victims, who were unarmed, were also attacked with
lead pipes and baseball bats. The only way they could parry
the blows was with their arms. In a situation where they
were unnamed and outnumbered, it would be impossible
for them to fight back against the attackers. The attack also
happened in less than a minute, which would preclude any
possibility of the bystanders being able to help them until
after the incident. The swiftness and the suddenness of
the attack gave no opportunity for the victims to retaliate
or even to defend themselves. Treachery, therefore, was
451

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 14

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

present in this case. (People v. Feliciano, Jr., G.R. No.
196735, May 5, 2014)
(e)

Attacked from behind.
(1)

With a firearm.
Treachery attended the crime, the accused
having shot the victim from behind without warning.
(People v. Acosta, G.R. No. 70153, July 2, 1990;
People v. Juanga, G.R. No. 83903, August 30, 1990,
189 SCRA 226, 233; People v. Marmita, Jr., G.R. No.
75618, December 29, 1989, 180 SCRA 723, 731)
Treachery qualified the crime because, although
the victim was forewarned of his impending death, he
was shot in the back while he was entirely defenseless
and the killers were under no risk whatsoever from
any retaliation the victim might make. (People v.
Carmina, G.R. No. 81404, January 28, 1991, 193
SCRA 429, 435)
The shooting of Atty. Norberto Maramba was
treacherous. The accused suddenly and without
warning shot him when the latter turned his back
towards the accused and returned to his table to cat.
Atty. Maramba was fatally hit on the back of his head
and fell to the cement floor. Atty. Maramba did not
sense any danger that he would be shot by the accused
considering that he and the accused knew each other
personally and that there was no previous grudge or
misunderstanding between them. (People v. [AC, Nos.
L-66939.41, January 10, 1987, 147 SCRA 219, 230)

(2)

With a bladed weapon.
There was treachery, as the stabbing was from
behind, done in a sudden and unexpected manner
while the deceased was sitting and his head down
on his hands. (People v. Delgado, G.R. No. 79672,
February 15, 1990, 182 SCRA 343, 351)
Treachery was duly and sufficiently proven. The
victim was suddenly and without warning stabbed at
the back of his nape by the assailant from behind with
452

Art. 14

a double-bladed knife. (People v. Melgar, No. L-75268,
January 29, 1988, 157 SCRA 718, 727)
(3)

Other modes of armed attack.
Treachery in the commission of the crime was
correctly appreciated. The victim was suddenly
stabbed by the assailant without any warning.
Although he was armed with a gun, he was never
given an opportunity to ward off the assault due to
its suddenness. (People v. De Mesa, G.R. No. 87216,
July 28, 1990, 188 SCRA 48, 55)
Treachery attended where several accused
took turns in stabbing the victim who was caught
by surprise and did not have time to defend himself.
(People v. Dollantes, No. L-70639, June 30, 1987, 151
SCRA 592, 607)
There was treachery because at the time of the
attack, the victim was not in a position to defend
himself. After having been maltreated, then stabbed,
and while in flight, he was chased as though he was
a wounded quarry and in that defenseless state was
shot from behind by the assailant. (People v. Ferrera,
No. L-66965, June 18, 1987, 151 SCRA 113, 139)
There was treachery in the commission of the
crime where the victim was shot to death while he
was lying face down on the floor, without any warning
and thus was not able to defend himself at all. (People
v. Pecato, No. L-41008, June 18, 1987, 151 SCRA 14,
28)
Two policemen reacted to assert their authority
in protecting and covering civilians from the
indiscriminate firing by the accused. Accused instead,
suddenly and without warning, successively shot
them, knowing fully well that they were peace officers.
Although both were armed with their service guns,
they were unable to offer resistance and put up a
defense due to the suddenness and close succession
of the shots. Treachery attended the commission of
463

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art . 14

the crimes. (People • IAC, Nos. L-66939-41, January
10, 1987, 147 SCRA 219, 230)
Attacking the victim suddenly and with a
firearm. (People v. Rendora, G.R. No. L-14356,
September 30, 1959)
Calling the victim to come down from the house
and subjecting him to a volley of shots, causing his
death. (People • Mukung, G.R. No. L-2138, March
22, 1950)
Shooting unsuspecting victim who was hit in the
abdomen while he was wheeling around to face the
assailant. (People v. Noble, 77 Phil. 93)
In all the above cases, the offenders attacked
the victims while the latter were not in a position to
make a defense.
From the circumstances of said cases, the
Supreme Court believed that the offenders purposely
adopted certain means, methods or forms of attack
to insure the execution of the crime without risk to
themselves.
Requisites of treachery:

(1)

That at the time of the attack, the victim was not in a
position to defend himself; and

(2)

That the offender consciously adopted the particular means,
method or form of attack employed by him.

To constitute treachery, two conditions must be present, to
wit: (1) the employment of means of execution that gave the person
attacked no opportunity to defend himself or to retaliate; and (2) the
means of execution were deliberately or consciously adopted. (People
v. Mabuhay, G.R. No. 87018, May 24, 1990, 185 SCRA 675, 680)
In order for treachery to exist, two conditions must concur,
namely: (1) the employment of means, methods or manner of
execution which would insure the offender's safety from any defense or
retaliatory act on the part of the offended party; and (2) such means,
454

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

method or manner of execution was deliberately or consciously chosen
by the offender. (People v. Sabado, No. L-76952, December 22, 1988,
168 SCRA 681, 690; People v. Rellon, No. L-74051, November 8, 1988,
167 SCRA 75, 77-78; People v. Marciales, No. L-61961, October 18,
1988, 166 SCRA 436, 449; People v. Estillore, No. L-68459, March 4,
1986, 141 SCRA 456, 460)
The victim was not in a position to defend himself.

1.
Treachery is properly appreciated when the victims were
made to lie face down, their hands tied at the back before they were
killed (People v. Saquing, No. L-27903, December 26, 1969, 30 SCRA
834, 845), or when the victim was shot from behind while dancing
(People v. Berzuela, G.R. No. 132078, September 25, 2000), or when
the victim was shot while blindfolded. (People v. Jakosalem, G.R. No.
130506, February 28, 2002)
2.
The victim was totally defenseless. He was caught by
surprise when the assailants, whom he considered his friends,
suddenly attacked him. Without warning, he was hit in the head, then
stabbed in the back. Thus disabled, he was stabbed in the chest. And
even as he ran for his life, he was pursued and stabbed some more
when he stumbled. He never had a chance to save his life. (People v.
Espinosa, G.R. No. 72883, December 20, 1989, 180 SCRA 393, 400)
3.
The violent death of the victim was accompanied by
treachery where, although there were no eyewitnesses to the actual
assault, he was apparently beaten to death while his hands and feet
were tied with a rope. (People v. Gapasin, No. L-52017, October 27,
1986, 145 SCRA 178, 194)
4.
Treachery was also present where the assailants made a
deliberate, sudden and surprise attack from behind while the victim
sat defenseless in the driver's seat of his jeep. When he stopped his
jeep, one of the assailants placed a piece of wire around his neck and
strangled him while the other held him. At that precise moment of
the attack, the victim was not in a position to defend himself and the
accused deliberately and consciously adopted the particular method
or form of attack which was strangulation from behind by one and
holding him by the other beside him. (People v. Masilang, No. L-64699,
July 11, 1986, 142 SCRA 673, 682)

455

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

There is treachery when the offenders made a deliberate surprise or
unexpected attack on the victim.
1.
There was treachery because the brothers made a
deliberate surprise or unexpected assault on Tadia. They literally
ambushed him. They waited for him on the cliff, a high ground which
rendered it difficult for him to flee or maneuver in his defense. Tadia
was shot sidewise while he was ascending the hill or cliff burdened
by his food basket. (People v. Diaz, No. L-24002, January 21, 1974,
55 SCRA 178, 186)
2.
The accused waited patiently and deliberately at the
farmhouse of the deceased, met her on the road when he saw her
coming riding on a sled, waited by the roadside until the victim
passed by and then, without warning and without giving the victim
a chance to escape, made a sudden and unexpected attack. The
unarmed, 56-year-old woman was absolutely helpless and unable to
defend herself from the overpowering strength of the accused when he
stabbed her twice with a combat bolo. The victim had no opportunity
to defend herself or repel the initial assault. (People v. Bayocot, G.R.
No. 55285, June 28, 1989, 174 SCRA 285, 293)
3.
There is treachery where everyone of the three victims
was completely helpless and defenseless when shot and killed by the
accused with no risk to themselves. The first was completely taken
by surprise when he was shot in the face. The second was lying down
when he was shot in the head. The third was seated when he was shot
in the head and shoulders. None of the three victims had a chance to
resist. (People v. Munoz, G.R. Nos. 38969-70, February 9, 1989, 170
SCRA 107, 120)
4.
Treachery was attendant where the victim was stabbed
suddenly and he was totally unprepared for the unexpected attack
as he was dancing at the precise time of the incident. He was given
absolutely no chance to defend himself. (People v. Acaya, No. L-72998,
July 29, 1988, 163 SCRA 768, 773)
5.
'There was alevosia where the unarmed and unsuspecting
victim was ambushed in the dark, without any risk to his assailants.
(People v. Egaras, No. L-33357, July 29, 1988, 163 SCRA 692, 696,
citing earlier cases)
6.
'The victim was bringing food items for a noche buena when
he was suddenly attacked by two assailants, one armed with a spear
456

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Alfoct Criminal Liability

Art. 14

and the other with a bolo. The attack was so sudden that the victim
had no opportunity to defend himself or to inflict retaliatory blows
on the assailants. He just fell down after the spearing and was then
hacked with the bolo. The killing was characterized by treachery.
(People v. Bravante, No. L-73804, May 29, 1987, 150 SCRA 569, 576)
7.
The victim was merely unwarily texting inside the tent
when the two men held him from behind so that the appellant can
deliver blows to his abdomen. The victim was too unprepared and
helpless to defend himself against these three men. (People v. Buenafe,
G.R. No. 212930, August 3, 2016)
There is no treachery when the victim was already defending himself
when he was attacked by the accused.
Where the deceased was suddenly attacked, but he was able to
retreat to avoid being hit by the hacking blows and was hit only when
he was already in the act of defending himself against the attack of
the accused, there is no treachery. (People v. Diva, No. L-22946, April
29, 1968, 23 SCRA 332, 340)
Likewise, treachery is not present where the accused and the
victim grappled with each other. (People v. Butler, No. L-50276,
January 27, 1983, 120 SCRA 281,306)
Does the fact that advantage was taken of relative confusion, so that
the act and identity of the offender would not be detected, and so that
his escape would be facilitated adequately establish treachery?
The Solicitor General in his brief recommends that defendant
be found guilty only of homicide, stating that, in his view, treachery
is not borne out by the evidence. Our consideration, however, of the
facts shown in the record, particularly Rolando Banhao's testimony,
convinces us that treachery has been adequately established. As
recounted by said witness, defendant stabbed the deceased at the time
when, on account of the shower, people were going out of the dance
hall to seek for cover. Advantage was therefore taken by defendant
of the relative confusion created by the shower on the crowd, so that
his act and identity would not be detected by the people in the dance
hull, and so that his escape would be facilitated. (People v. Titos, G.R.
No. L-28596, February 21, 1968, 22 SCRA 657, 660-661)
457

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
The reason for the ruling is not in accordance with the second
requisite of treachery, and is completely alien to the definition of the
aggravating circumstance.
Treachery does not connote the element of surprise alone.

Counsel contends that since the deceased had been threatened
since the day before the shooting, he was not caught by surprise at
all. But treachery does not connote the element of surprise alone,
but exists when the offender employs means which tend directly and
specially to insure the execution of the offense, without risk to himself
arising from the defense which the offended party might make. (Art.
14, par. 16, R.P.C.) When appellant accosted his victim, who could
have had no idea as to just how the threat to him would be carried
out, and without warning, shot him five times, nothing could possibly
have been done by the latter in his own defense. (People v. Casalme,
No. L-18033, July 26, 1966, 17 SCRA 717, 720)
The appellant followed the serenaders as they walked, made no
indication that he would shoot, and then suddenly fired from behind,
two shots in rapid succession from a distance of about five meters.
Under the circumstances, clearly there was treachery. (People v.
Pantoja, No. L-18793, October 11, 1968, 26 SCRA 468, 471)
Mere sudden and unexpected attack does not necessarily give rise
to treachery.

It does not always follow that because the attack is sudden and
unexpected it is tainted with treachery. Indeed, it could have been
done on impulse, as a reaction to an actual or imagined provocation
offered by the victim. (People u. Sabanal, G.R. Nos. 73486-87, April
18, 1989, 172 SCRA 430, 434, citing People v. Malazzab, 160 SCRA
123; People u. Anirion, 158 SCRA 701; People v. Macaso, 64 SCRA
659; People u. Ardiza, 55 SCRA 245; People v. Macalisang, 22 SCRA
699; and People v. Tumaob, 83 Phil. 738)
When the accused gave the deceased a chance to prepare, there
was no treachery.

When the accused challenged the deceased to a gunfight before
the shooting, the attack was not treacherous even if the shooting
was sudden and the deceased was not prepared because it gave the
deceased a chance to prepare for the impending attack. (People u.
Vsagar, 93 Phil. 319, 326-327)
458

No treachery where the attack is preceded by a warning.

And when the attack was frank, made face to face, and the
accused first asked, "What did you say?" before starting the aggression,
there is no treachery because that question was already a warning
to the offended party of the hostile attitude of the accused. (People u.
Luna, 76 Phil. 101, 104)
Calling attention of victim not necessarily a warning.

Treachery in the commission of the crime is clearly established
in this case: the assailant fired two successive shots at the defenseless
victim, a fiscal, while the latter was still seated in his jeep, hitting
him at the neck and lumbar region. The fact that the assailant called
out, "Fiscal" before shooting the victim does not negate the presence
of treachery. The assailant being a hired killer, he wanted to insure
that he was shooting the correct person. When the victim turned his
face to find out who was calling him, the assailants fired immediately,
rendering no opportunity for the victim to defend himself. (People v.
Magduero, No. L-68699, September 22, 1986, 144 SCRA 210, 217-218)
No treachery where shooting is preceded by heated discussion.

Facts: After a brief exchange of strong language, the accused
pulled his revolver and fired at the deceased three times successively,
while the latter was absolutely defenseless, as he had no weapon of
any kind whatsoever in his hands at that time.
Held: Since the shooting was preceded by a heated discussion
between the two, it must have placed the deceased on his guard, and
the alleged treachery cannot be legally considered. (People u. Gonzales,
76 Phil. 473, 479)
There is no treachery where the commission of the crime was
preceded shortly before by a boxing incident and the victim and his
companions had all the opportunity to insure their safety, immediately
before the attack of the defendants. (People v. Gupo, G.R. No. 75814,
September 24, 1990, 190 SCRA 7, 19)
There is no treachery where the assault upon the deceased was
preceded by a heated exchange of words between the accused and the
deceased. It cannot be said that the deceased was caught completely
by surprise when the accused took up arms against him. (People v.
Ritlorta, G.R. No. 57415, December 15, 1989, 180 SCRA 102, 107)
459

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Where the victim had provoked the assailant by hitting not only
him, but also his wife, he should have been sufficiently forewarned
that reprisal might be in the offing. The element of a sudden
unprovoked attack indicative of treachery is therefore lacking. (People
v. Manlapaz, No. L-27259, February 27, 1974, 55 SCRA 598, 604)
Even where the victim was shot from behind, if the shooting was
done in the course of a heated argument between the victim and the
assailant, treachery should not be appreciated, for in that situation,
the assailant was filled with anger and rage and excitement, and had
no time to reflect on his actions. (Rustia v. People, G.R. No. 208351,
October 5, 2016)
Killing unarmed victim whose hands are raised is committed with
treachery.
The accused pointed his rifle at the victim at a distance of six
meters and said, "Pardong, stand up, we are going to shoot you." 'The
victim had his hands raised, pleading in a loud voice, "Do not kill
me, investigate first what was my fault." The accused shot the victim,
mortally wounding him.
Held: The killing was committed with treachery. (People v.
Barba, G.R. No. L-7136, September 30, 1955)
Where the victim was shot when his hands were raised, to show
that he would not fight, or because of fright, or to try to ward off the
shots that were to come, he was clearly in a defenseless position.
This circumstance constitutes treachery. (People v. Castro, G.R. Nos.
L-20555 and L-21449, June 30, 1967, 20 SCRA 543, 547)
Treachery was present in this case. The victim was unarmed
and had raised his hands crying and pleading for his life when he
was shot by the assailants. Obviously, the stand taken by the victim
posed no risk to the assailants. (People v. Jute, G.R. No. 72975, March
31, 1989, 171 SCRA 586, 595, citing People w. Lebumfacil, L-32910,
March 28, 1980, 96 SCRA 573; People v. Lasatin, L-5874, February
11, 1953, 92 Phil. 668)
Killing a woman asking for mercy is committed with treachery.
The accused shot Mrs. Howell while she was pleading for her
daughters: "Maawa na kayo. Huwag po."
460

Held: The killing was committed with treachery. (People v.
Dagundong, G.R. No. L-10398, June 30, 1960, 108 Phil. 682, 684,
693)
There Is treachery In killing a child.

Killing a child is characterized by treachery because the
weakness of the victim due to his tender age results in the absence
of any danger to the accused. (U.S. o. Oro, 19 Phil. 548, 554)
The killing of a one-year-old child, a six-year-old child, and
a 12-year-old child is attended with treachery. The killing is
murder even if the manner of attack was not shown. The qualifying
circumstance of treachery ex.ists in the commission of the crime of
murder when an adult person illegally attacks a child of tender years
and causes his death. (People v. Retubado, G.R. No. 58585, June 20,
1988, 162 SCRA 276; People v. Valerio, G.R. No. L-4116, February 25,
1982, 112 SCRA 208; U.S. v. Lansangan, 27 Phil. 474; U.S. v. Baul,
39 Phil. 846; People v. Ganohon, G.R. Nos. 74670-74, April 30, 1991,
196 SCRA 431, 446)
Intent to kill is not necessary in murder with treachery.

Thus, one who struck another with the fist from behind, the
blow landing on the back part of the head, causing the latter to fall
backwards, his head striking the asphalt pavement which caused
death resulting from a fracture of the skull, is guilty of murder
although he did not intend to kill the deceased. The Supreme Court of
Spain has held that there is no incompatibility, moral or legal, between
alevosia and the mitigating circumstance of not having intended to
cause so great an injury. (People v. Cagoco, 58 Phil. 524, 530)
But intent to kill is necessary in murder committed by means
of fre. (U.S. v. Burns, 41 Phil. 418, 432-433)
Treachery may exist even If the attack Is face to face.

It is not necessary for treachery to be present that the attack
must come from behind the victim.
Treachery should be taken into account even if the deceased was
face to face with his assailant at the time the blow was delivered,
where it appears that the attack was not preceded by a dispute and
461

Art.14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

the offended party was unable to prepare himself for his defense. (U.S.
v. Cornejo, 28 Phil. 457, 461)
The attack was sudden and unexpected to the point of
incapacitating George Ott to repel or escape from it. The offender
adopted a method which tended directly and especially to insure the
accomplishment of his purpose without risk to himself arising from
any defense which the offended party might make. True, the victim
and the accused were face-to-face when the attack commenced, the
first shot, according to all indications, having hit the victim in the
abdomen. But it is also true that he had just wheeled around to see
who had spoken to him when the defendant opened fire. (People v.
Noble, 77 Phil. 93)
Treachery is present although the shooting was frontal, as
when the attack was so sudden and unexpected that the victim was
not in a position to offer an effective defense. Thus, where the victim
approached the driver of a pickup [track] and, as he approached the
pickup, the victim was met with gunfire which was followed by two
more successive shots, there was treachery. (People v. Cuadra, No.
1-27973, October 23, 1978, 85 SCRA 576, 595)
Treachery attended where the victim was completely taken by
surprise and shot, where he was seated peacefully eating with his
family. That he was shot face-to-face did not make the attack any less
treacherous as he was totally taken aback and rendered completely
defenseless when he was shot. (People v. Liston, G.R. No. 63396,
November 15, 1989, 179 SCRA 415, 421)
Treachery attends although the attack is frontal where the
victim was completely helpless, as when both his hands were held by
the attackers numbering five ganging up on him. (People v. Solares,
G.R. No. 82363, May 5, 1989, 173 SCRA 203, 208)
Where before the victim was stabbed and hit several times
with hollow blocks on the head, his arms were twisted, rendering
him helpless to defend himself or repel the initial assault, the mode
of attack was deliberately and consciously resorted to insure the
commission of the crime without risk to the assailants arising from the
defense that the victim might put up. (People v. Paras, No. L61773,
January 31, 1987, 147 SCRA 594, 610)

462

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Flashing the beam of a flashlight on the face of victim.

The deliberate flashing of light on the face of Paterno by
appellant and his immediate successive stabbing of Paterno show a
conscious adoption by appellant of a mode, in executing the killing,
free from any possible defense that his victim may raise. (People v.
Noay, G.R. No. 122102, September 25, 1998)
Attack from behind Is not always alevosla.

The mere fact that the attack was inflicted when the victim had
his back turned will not in itself constitute alevosia. It must appear
that such mode of attack was consciously adopted and the question
of risk to the offender must be taken into account. (People v. Baldos,
C.A., 34 O.G. 1937)
The fact that the fatal wounds were found at the back of the
deceased does not, by itself, compel a finding of treachery. Such a
finding must be based on some positive proof and not merely by an
inference drawn more or less logically from hypothetical facts. The
facts preceding the actual shooting must be in evidence. (People v.
Ablao, G.R. No. 69184, March 26, 1990, 183 SCRA 658, 668)
The mere fact that the victim had a stab wound at the back is
not indicative ofalevosia, where the deceased had sustained two other
stab wounds at the front, and the evidence clearly shows that the stab
wound at the back was the last to be inflicted. (People v. Bacho, G.R.
No. 66645, March 29, 1989, 171 SCRA 458, 466)
The fact that the injuries of the victim were inflicted from
behind as the latter was running away does not necessarily establish
treachery where it does not appear that the assailant purposely
chose to employ such means of attack so that there would be no risk
to himself from any defense which the offended party might make.
(People v. Besana, Jr., No. L-26194, May 19, 1975, 64 SCRA 84, 88,
citing People v. Tumaob, 83 Phil. 742)
Must treachery be present at the beginning of the assault?

It depends upon the circumstances of the case.
It must be shown that the treacherous acts were present and
preceded the commencement of the attack which caused the injury
complained of. ( U.S. v. Balagtas, 19 Phil. 164, 172)
463

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Notwithstanding that the shooting was sudden and unexpected
and committed on a helpless victim, in the absence of a showing
that such mode of attack was adopted consciously and that the
assailant knowingly intended to ensure the accomplishment of his
criminal purpose, and where the shooting was only an aftermath of
a mauling, kicking, and boxing incident, treachery did not attend.
It is an established rule that treachery must be present from the
commencement of the attack. (People v. Tapeno, No. L-33573, August
29, 1988, 164 SCRA 696, 703)

safety of the attackers themselves, there is no treachery. (People v.
Clemente, No. L-23463, September 28, 1967, 21 SCRA 261, 270)

Art. 14

Even though in the inception of the aggression which ended
in the death of the deceased, treachery was not present, if there
was a break in the continuity of the aggression and at the time the
fatal wound was inflicted on the deceased he was defenseless, the
circumstance oftreachery must be taken into account. (U.S. v. Baluyot,
40 Phil. 385, 395)
Treachery need not exist in the beginning of the assault if the
victim was first seized and bound and then killed. (People v. Canete,
44 Phil. 478, 483)
U.S. v. Balagtas
(19 Phil. 164)
Facts: The accused knocked down the victim, striking him while on the
ground. Then, the accused threw him into the water, face downward, while
he was still alive in a helpless and defenseless condition.

Art. 14

People v. Canete
(44 Phil. 478)
Facts: The accused assaulted the deceased with a knife and, in the
course of the fight which ensued, inflicted a serious cut on his thigh. Upon
receiving the wound, the deceased turned and fled, and was immediately
pursued by the accused. Afte r going a short distance, the deceased fell to
the ground face downwards; and before he could recover his equipoise and
resume his flight, the accused ran up and delivered a fatal thrust with his
knife in the back of the deceased.
Held: That as the assault was not characterized by alevosia in its
inception and the aggression was continuous until the consummation of the
deed, the offense constituted simple homicide and not murder.

Canete could not have consciously adopted that method ofattack,
that is, stabbing the deceased in the back when the latter was in a
helpless condition, since the assault began face to face and it was only
when the deceased turned around and ran away that their relative
positions changed. And as the aggression was continuous, Canete had
no time to prepare for, or even to think of, that method of attack.
U.S. v. Baluyot
(40 Phil. 385)

If the wounding of the victim while lying on the ground was
merely incidental to the ensuing pursuit, not intended to ensure the

Facts: The accused entered the office of the governor of Bataan when
the latter was sitting on a chair behind his desk. The accused approached
the desk and upon reaching a position directly in front of the governor, spoke
certain words. Upon discovering that the governor was unarmed, the accused
drew his own weapon and fired. The bullet fired entered in the frontal region
of the right shoulder blade of the governor and inflicted a wound of minor
importance. The governor immediately arose. He escaped in the direction to
his left by way of the space between the left corner of his desk and the wall
nearby, leading into a corridor. The accused meanwhile turned somewhat to
his right and advanced slightly in the direction taken by the governor who
was running away. The accused fired again at the governor, hitting the latter
in the region of the right shoulder blade and passing through the body, an
inch or two from the wound made by the first shot. The governor continued
his flight along the corridor and took refuge in a closet at the end of the
corridor. Once within, he shut the door and placed himself in a position to
obstruct the entrance of his pursuer, who vainly attempted to open the door.
The governor screamed for help. This time, the accused who was outside the
closet stopped for a moment and judging the position of the governor's head

464

465

Held: The knocking down of the victim, striking him on the ground,
and throwing him into the water constituted one and the same attack. One
continuous attack cannot be broken up into two or more parts and made to
constitute separate, distinct, and independent attacks so that treachery may
be injected therein.

Note: In this case, there was no treachery at the inception of the attack.
Also, even if the deceased was shot while he was lying wounded
on the ground, it appearing that the firing of the shot was a mere
continuation ofthe assault in which the deceased was wounded, with
no appreciable time intervening between the delivery of the blows and
the firing of the shot, it cannot be said that the crime was attended
by treachery. (People v. Peje, 99 Phil. 1052 [Unrep.])

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
from the direction of the sound emitted, fired his revolver in the direction

indicated. The bullet passed through the panel of the door and struck the
governor in the forward part of the head near and above the temple. This

wound was necessarily fatal.
Held: The entire assault from the beginning until the second shot was
fired must be considered continuous and that the second shot was fired while
the victim was endeavoring to flee to a place of safety.
Even supposing that alevosia had not been present in the beginning
of the assault, it would be necessary to find this element present from the
manner in which the crime was consummated.
In the closet with the door shut, it was impossible for the governor to
see what his assailant was doing or to make any defense whatever aguinst
the shot directed through the panel of the door. It was us if the victim had

been bound or blindfolded, or had been treacherously attacked from behind
in a path obscured by the darkness of the night.
When the second shot was fired, the deceased was fleeing
away and entirely defenseless; but since the entire assault from the
beginning up to that time was continuous and that the assault was
begun without treachery, the Supreme Court did not consider the
second wound as having been inflicted with treachery. Moreover, the
second wound was not fatal, like the first wound. It was the third
wound in the head which caused the death of the victim. The crime
of murder was consummated with the infliction of the third wound.
But before the third wound was inflicted by the accused, he had
stopped for sometime. This fact is deducible from the circumstances
that the accused attempted vainly to open the door of the closet; and
that when he failed, he judged the position of the head of the governor
before firing his revolver. Evidently, a certain period of time must
have elapsed in doing all of these acts. Because of that interruption,
the assault was not continuous up to the moment when the fatal blow
was inflicted treacherously. During the period of interruption, the
accused was able to think and even to make preparation for a method
or form of attack that insured the execution of the crime without risk
to himself.
Summary of the rules.
(1)

When the aggression is continuous, treachery must be
present at the beginning of the assault. (People v. Canete,
supra)
466

(2)

When the assault was not continuous, in that there was
an interruption, it is sufficient that treachery was present
at the moment the fatal blow was given. (U.S. v. Baluyot,
supra)

In treachery, it makes no difference whether or not the victim was
the same person whom the accused intended to kill.
As the appellant committed the act with intent to kill and with
treachery, the purely accidental circumstance that as a result of the
shots, a person other than the one intended was killed, does not modify
the nature of the crime nor lessen his criminal responsibility, and he
is responsible for the consequences of his acts. (People v. Guevarra,
No. L-24371, April 16, 1968, 23 SCRA 58, 72)

That another person, and not the victim, was the intended victim
is not incompatible with the existence of treachery. Treachery may be
taken into account even if the victim of the attack was not the person
whom the accused intended to kill. (People u. Trinidad, No. L-38930,
June 28, 1988, 162 CRA 714, 725)
Treachery, whenever present in the commission of a crime,
should be taken into account no matter whether the victim of the
treacherous attack was or was not the same person whom the accused
intended to kill. (People ow. Mabug-at, 51 Phil. 967, 970-971; People v.
Guillen, 85 Phil. 307, 318)
The reason for this rule is that when there is treachery, it is
impossible for either the intended victim or the actual victim to defend
himself against the aggression. (People v. Andaya, C.A., 40 0.G., Sup.
12, 141)
When treachery is not to be considered as to the principal by
Induction.
When it is not shown that the principal by induction directed
or induced the killer of the deceased to adopt the means or methods
actually used by the latter in accomplishing the murder, because the
former left to the latter the details as to how it was to be accomplished,
treachery cannot be taken into consideration as to the principal by
induction. It shall aggravate the liability of the actual killer only.
( U.S. v. Gamao, 23 Phil. Bl, 96) The ruling is based on Article 62.
467

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL. CODE
Criminal Law

Treachery, abuse of superior strength, and means employed to
weaken the defense, distinguished.
Any one of these aggravating circumstances may facilitate the
commission of the crime.
In treachery, means, methods or forms of attack are employed
by the offender to make it impossible or hard for the offended party
to put up any sort of resistance. (People v. Ducusin, 53 Phil. 280,
289-290; People v. Tumaob, 83 Phil. 738)
In abuse of superior strength, the offender does not employ
means, methods or forms of attack; he only takes advantage of his
superior strength.
In means employed to weaken the defense, the offender, like in
treachery, employs means but the means employed only materially
weakens the resisting power of the offended party.
When there is conspiracy, treachery is considered against all the
offenders.
Treachery should be considered against all persons participating
or cooperating in the perpetration of the crime, except when there is
no conspiracy among them. Hence, if there was no conspiracy even
if two accused helped each other in attacking the deceased, only the
one who inflicted the wound upon the deceased while the latter was
struggling with the other defendant, is to suffer the effect of the
attendance of treachery. (People v. Carandang, 54 Phil. 503, 506)
The ruling stated in the first sentence should be subject to the
provision of Article 62, paragraph No. 4, that is, treachery should be
considered against "those persons only who had knowledge" of the
employment of treachery "at the time of the execution of the act or
their cooperation therein."

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art.14

was not present when the crime was actually committed, and left the
means, modes or methods of its commission to a great extent to the
discretion of the others, citing People v. De Otero, 51 Phil. 201.
The citation is not in point. It refers to a case where the accused
was convicted as principal by inducement per se under paragraph 2
of Article 17 of the R.P.C., without proof of conspiracy with the other
accused. In the case at bar, however, there was conspiracy among
the defendants, and the rule is that every conspirator is responsible
for the acts of the others in furtherance of the conspiracy. Treachery
evident in the act of the gunman in suddenly firing his revolver,
preceded as it was by a false showing of courtesy to the victim, thus
insuring the execution of the crime without risk from any defense
or retaliation the victim might offer - should be appreciated as a
generic aggravating circumstance against the mastermind even when
he was not present when the crime was committed. (People v. Pareja,
No. L-21937, November 29, 1969, 30 SCRA 693, 715-716)
The ruling in this case should be subject to the provision of
Article 62, paragraph 4.
If the intervention of other persons did not directly and especially
insure the execution of the crime without risk to the accused, there
is no treachery.
Thus, even if the wife and sister of the accused held the deceased
by his shirt when the accused inflicted the bolo wounds which caused
his death, there is no treachery, because the body and hands of the
deceased were not deprived of liberty of action and, hence, there is
still risk to the person of the accused arising from the defense which
the victim might make. (People w. Julipa, 69 Phil. 751, 753)

The mastermind should have knowledge of the employment of
treachery if he was not present when the crime was committed.

But if, of the four persons who were to rob a house, one grappled
with the watchman while the two opened fire and mortally wounded
both combatants, it was held that even though in the inception of
the aggression, the watchman carried a carbine and was at liberty
to defend himself, it is a fact that at the time the fatal wounds were
inflicted, he was defenseless. His freedom of movement was being
restrained hy one of the culprits when the others fired at him. (People
v. Mobe, 81 Phil. 58, 62)

The trial court refused to consider treachery even as a generic
aggravating circumstance against appellant, on the ground that he

Under the circumstances, there was no risk to the aggressor
arising from any defense which the deceased might make.

468

469

When there is conspiracy, treachery attends against all
conspirators, although only one did the actual stabbing of the victim.
(People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174,211)

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Treachery, evident premeditation and use of superior strength are
absorbed in treason by killings.

Treachery, evident premeditation and use of superior strength
are, by their nature, inherent in the offense of treason. (People v.
Racaza, 82 Phil. 623, 637)
Treachery absorbs abuse of superior strength, aid of armed men,
by a band, nighttime, and means to weaken the defense.

Abuse of superior strength and employing means to weaken the
defense of the deceased by throwing sand to his face are absorbed
in treachery. (People v. Siaotong, G.R. No. L-9242, March 29, 1957
[Unrep.J)
The aggravating circumstances of superior strength and by band
arc absorbed in treachery. (People v. Ampo-an, G.R. No. 75366, July
4, 1990, 187 SCRA 173, 189; People v. Manzanares, G.R. No. 82696,
September 8, 1989, 177 SCRA 427, 434; People v. Molato, G.R. No.
66634, February 27, 1989, 170 SCRA 640, 647; People v. Renejane,
Nos. L-76954-55, February 26, 1988, 158 SCRA 258, 269) Abuse of
superiority and aid of armed men are absorbed in treachery. (People
v. Ferrera, No. L-66965, June 18, 1987, 151 SCRA 113, 139)
The killings were attended with the aggravating circumstances
of treachery, abuse of superiority, dwelling and band (cuadrilla).
The qualifying circumstance alleged in the information is treachery
which absorbs abuse of superior strength and cuadrilla. (People v.
Mori, Nos. L-23511-12, January 31, 1974, 55 SCRA 382, 403; People
v. Sangalang, No. L-32914, August 30, 1974, 58 SCRA 737, 741)
The aggravating circumstances of superior strength and aid
of armed men, as well as nighttime, are included in the qualifying
circumstance of treachery. (People v. Sesperie, 102 Phil. 199, 210)
Nighttime and abuse of superior strength are inherent in
treachery and cannot be appreciated separately. (People v. Bardon,
No. L-60764, September 19, 1988, 165 SCRA 416, 426; People v.
Kintuan, No. L-74100, December 3, 1987, 156 SCRA 195, 202)
Treachery absorbs noctumity, abuse ofsuperiority, band and aid
of armed men. While there may be instances where any of the other
circumstances may be treated independently of treachery, it is not
so when they form part of the treacherous mode of attack. (People v.
Sudoy, October 10, 1974, 60 SCRA 174, 182)
470

TITLE ONE
Felonies end Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

Nighttime Inherent in treachery.

The reason for this rule is that nighttime forms part of the
peculiar treacherous means and manner adopted to insure the
execution of the crime. (People u. Pardo, 79 Phil. 568; People v. Corpuz,
107 Phil. 44, 50)
Had it not been at night, the accused would not have been able
to approach the deceased without the latter's becoming aware of his
presence and guessing his intention. (People v. Balagtas, 68 Phil. 675,
677) Hence, nighttime is not a separate aggravating circumstance,
whenever treachery is already considered.
When nighttime Is not absorbed in treachery.

There was treachery in the commission of the offense at bar.
The victims' hands were tied at the time they were beaten. Since the
treachery rests upon an independent factual basis, the circumstance
of nighttime is not absorbed therein, but can he perceived distinctly
therefrom. A special case therefore is present to which the rule that
nighttime is absorbed in treachery does not apply. (See People u. John
Doe, G.R. No. L-2463, March 31, 1950; 2 Vada, Codigo Penal, 274275; People v. Berdida, No. L-20183, June 30, 1966, 17 SCRA 520,
529; People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174,
212; People v. Luna, No. L-28174, July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA 195, 208)
Craft is Included in and absorbed by treachery.

Craft is included in and absorbed by the qualifying circumstance
of treachery, because it was used to insure the commission of the
crime without any risk to the culprits. (People v. Malig, 83 Phil. 804)
But in the case of People v. Daos, 60 Phil. 143, 154, it was held
that the aggravating circumstances of craft and treachery should be
taken into consideration, on the ground that the act of the accused
in pretending to be bona fide passengers in the taxi in order not to
arouse the driver's suspicion constitute craft; and the fact that in
assaulting him they did so from behind, catching him completely
unaware, certainly constitutes treachery.
When craft was employed in robbery with homicide, not with
a view to malting treachery more effective as nighttime or abuse of
superior strength would in the killing of the victim, but to facilitate
471

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

the taking of the jeep in the robbery scheme as planned by the culprits,
it is not absorbed in treachery. (People v. San Pedro, No. L-44274,
January 22, 1980, 95 SCRA 306, 309)

independent circumstance of treachery. (People v. Lawas, G.R. Nos.
L-7618-20, June 30, 1955)

Age and sex are Included In treachery.

Disregard of age and sex may be deemed included in treachery.
(People v. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35, 42, citing People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil.
548)
The aggravating circumstances of disregard of age and sex, and
advantage taken of superior strength, should not have been considered
independently of the aggravating circumstance of treachery which
was already considered. (People v. Gervacio, No. L-21965, August 30,
1968, 24 SCRA 960, 976)
111ustrallon of aggravating circumstance absorbed by another.

The circumstances of nighttime, uninhabited place, cruelty
and aid of armed persons cannot be taken into consideration as
aggravating circumstances, because the first (nighttime) was
necessarily included in that of treachery; that of uninhabited place,
because it has not been proven that there were no houses near the
house of the deceased; that of cruelty, because the fire, which is the
fact in which said circumstance is made to consist, took place after the
victims were already dead, the appellant not having taken advantage
of said means to deliberately augment the seriousness of the crime;
and that of aid of armed persons, because the appellant as well as
those who cooperated with him in the commission of the crime in
question, acted under the same plan and for the same purpose. (People
v. Pring, 63 Phil. 546, 553)
Dwelling is not included in treachery.
The aggravating circumstance of dwelling cannot be included in
the qualifying circumstance of treachery. (People v. Ruzol, 100 Phil.
537, 544; People v. Jimenez, 99 Phil. 285, 288)
Defenseless condition of victims Is Included In abuse of superior
strength, not treachery.

Art. 14

Treachery Is inherent in murder by poisoning.

Treachery is inherent in murder by poisoning. (People v. Caliso,
58 Phil. 283, 295)
Treachery cannot co-exist with passion or obfuscation.

Treachery cannot co-exist with passion or obfuscation, for while
in the mitigating circumstance of passion or obfuscation, the offender
loses his reason and self-control, in the aggravating circumstance
of treachery the mode of attack must be consciously adopted. One
who loses his reason and self-control could not deliberately employ
a particular means, method or form of attack in the execution of the
crime. (People u. Wong, C.A., 70 O.G. 4844)

Par. 17.

That means be employed or circumstances brought
about which add ignominy to the natural effects of
the act.

Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis has reference to the means employed.
Ignominy, defined.

Ignominy is a circumstance pertaining to the moral order, which
adds disgrace and obloquy to the material injury caused by the crime.
(U.S. w. Abaigar, 2 Phil. 417, 418; People v. Acaya, No. L-72998, July
29, 1988, 163 SCRA 768, 774)
Applicable to crimes against chastity, less serious physical Injuries,
light or grave coercion, and murder.

This aggravating circumstance is applicable when the crime
committed is against chastity.

The defenseless condition of the women and children shot
to death by the offenders should be considered as included in the
qualifying circumstance of abuse of superior strength, not as an

Ignominy aggravates the penalty for the crime of less serious
physical injuries. (Art. 265, par. 2)

472

473

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Ignominy was considered in the crime of light coercion under
Article 287, paragraph 2, in a case where the accused who embraced
and kissed the offended party acted under an impulse of anger
rather than a desire to satisfy his lust. The act was committed in the
presence of many persons. The offended party was a young woman.
These circumstances tended to make the effects of the crime more
humiliating. (People v. Cantong, C.A., 50 0.G. 5899)
The act of "plastering" mud on the victim's vagina right after
she was raped, is adequately and properly described as "ignominy."
(People v. Fernandez, No. L-62116, March 22, 1990)
There is ignominy to be considered in determining the proper
penalty for murder, when before he was killed, the deceased, a
landowner, was forced by the accused to kneel in front of his house
servants drawn up in line before him. (U.S. v. De Leon, 1 Phil. 163,
164)
"That means be employed."

When the accused raped a woman after winding cogon grass
around his genital organ, he thereby augmented the wrong done by
increasing its pain and adding ignominy thereto. (People v. Torrefiel,
et al., CA., 45 O.G. 803)
"That xxx circumstances be brought about."
(1)

It would be present in a case where one rapes a married
woman in the presence of her husband (U.S. v. Iglesia, 21
Phil. 55, 57), or alleged husband (People v. Soriano, No.
L-32244, June 24, 1983, 122 SCRA 740, 750-751), or where
the accused rapes a woman in the presence of her betrothed
(U.S. v. Casanas, 5 Phil. 377-378), or where a woman was
successively raped by four men (U.S. v. Camiloy, 36 Phil.
757, 758), or where one of the victims was raped in the
presence of her husband, and the other successively raped
by five men (People v. Detuya, No. L-39300, September 30,
1987, 154 SCRA 410, 426), or where the accused used not
only the missionary position, i.e., male superior, female
inferior, but also the dog style of sexual intercourse, i.e.,
entry from behind. (People v. Saylan, No. L-36941, June
29, 1984, 130 SCRA 159, 167)
474

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art . 14

But where the rape of the wife was not perpetrated
in the presence or with the knowledge of her husband, or
where the rape was done after the husband was killed,
the rape committed could not have added ignominy to the
crime. (People v. Mongado, No. L-24877, June 30, 1969, 28
SCRA 642, 651)
(2)

There is ignominy when in compelling an old woman to
confess to the theft of clothes, the accused maltreated
her and took off her drawers because the removing of her
drawers could have no other purpose but to put her to
shame. (People v. Fernando, CA., 43 0.G. 1717)
The crime committed in that case is grave coercion.
(Art. 286)

"Which add ignominy to the natural effects of the act."

According to this clause, the means employed or the
circumstances brought about must tend to make the effects of the
crime more humiliating or to put the offended party to shame.
The fact that the appellants, in ordering the complainant to
exhibit to them her complete nakedness for about two minutes before
raping her, brought about a circumstance which tended to make the
effects of the crime more humiliating. (People v. Jose, No. L-28232,
February 6, 1971, 37 SCRA 450, 476) Similarly, in a case where it
was established that the accused used a flashlight and examined
the genital of the victim before he ravished her, and committed the
bestial deed in the presence of the victim's old father, the Supreme
Court held that these facts clearly show that the accused deliberately
wanted to further humiliate the victim, thereby aggravating and
compounding her moral sufferings. (People v. Bumidang, G.R. No.
130630, December 4, 2000)
Ignominy attended in this case: Between seven and eight o'clock
in the evening, the unwary victim went to the beach where she was
accustomed to void and when she squatted, the assailant unexpectedly
appeared behind her, held her hair, thus tilting her face, and while in
that posture, he inserted into her mouth the muzzle of his pistol and
fired. She died. (People v. Nierra, No. L-32624, February 12, 1980, 96
SCRA 1, 5-6, 14)
475

Art.14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
But the fact that the accused sliced and took the flesh from the
thighs, legs and shoulders of the victim after killing her by the use of
a knife does not add ignominy to the natural effects of the act. (People
v. Balondo, No. L-27401, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 155, 159, 161;
People v. Ferrera, No. L-66965, June 18, 1987, 151 SCRA 113, 140)
It is incorrect to appreciate adding ignominy to the offense where
the victim was already dead when his body was dismembered. It is
required that the offense be committed in a manner that tends to
make its effects more humiliating to the victim, that is, add to his
moral suffering. (People v. Carmina, G.R. No. 81404, January 28,
1991, 193 SCRA 429,436)
The mere fact that the assailant fired more shots at the prostrate
bodies of his victims is not sufficient to show the existence of ignominy.
(People v. Pantoja, No. L-18793, October 11, 1968, 25 SCRA 468, 472)
No ignominy when a man is killed in the presence of his wife.

The fact that the deceased was killed in the presence of his
wife certainly could not have such signification. The circumstance of
ignominy was not present, because no means was em ployed nor did
any circumstance surround the act tending to make the effects of the
crime more humiliating. (U.S. v. Abaigar, supra)
Rape as ignominy in robbery with homicide.

Rape committed on the occasion of robbery with homicide
increases the moral evil of the crime, and it is incorrect to say that
there is no law which considers rape as an aggravating circumstance
simply because it is not specifically enumerated in Article 14 of the
R.P.C. as an aggravating circumstance. As has been held in People v.
Racaza, 82 Phil. 623, 638, rapes, wanton robbery for personal gain,
and other forms of cruelties are condemned and their perpetration
will be regarded as aggravating circumstances of ignominy and of
deliberately augmenting unnecessary wrongs to the main criminal
objective under paragraphs 17 and 21 of Article 14 of the R.P.C.
(People v. Tapales, No. L-35281, September 10, 1979, 93 SCRA 134,
142. But see People v. Mongado, No. L-24877, June 30, 1969, 28 SCRA
642, 651-652)

476

Par. 18.-- That the crime be committed after an unlawful entry.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis has reference to the means and ways employed to
commit the crime.
Meaning of unlawful entry.

There is an unlawful entry when an entrance is effected by a
way not intended for the purpose.
To effect entrance, not for escape.

Unlawful entry must be a means to effect entrance and not for
escape. (People v. Sunga, 43 Phil. 205, 206)
Example: The act of entering through the window, which
is not the proper place for entrance into the house, constitutes
unlawful entry.
Is there unlawful entry if the door is broken and thereafter
made an entry [through] the broken door? No, it will be covered
by paragraph 19.
Reason for aggravation.

One who acts, not respecting the walls erected by men to guard
their property and provide for their personal safety, shows a greater
perversity, a greater audacity; hence, the law punishes him with more
severity.
Application of this circumstance.

It should be considered in rape committed in a house after an
entry through the window. It should be considered also in murder
where the accused entered the room of the victim through the window.
It should be considered also in robbery with violence against or
intimidation of persons, because unlawful entry is not inherent in that
particular kind of robbery. The window is not intended for entrance
into the building.
But unlawful entry is one of the ways of committing robbery
with force upon things under Article 299, paragraph (a), and Article
302 of the Code. It is inherent in this kind ofrobbery.
477

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
If the crime charged in the information was only theft, and
during the trial, the prosecution proved unlawful entry, it is a generic
aggravating circumstance which may raise the penalty for theft to
the maximum period. It would be improper to convict the accused
of robbery with force upon things because unlawful entry was not
alleged in the information. (People v. Sunga, 43 Phil. 205, 206)
Dwelling and unlawful entry taken separately in murders committed
in a dwelling.
When the accused gained access to the dwelling by climbing
through the window and once inside, murdered certain persons in the
dwelling, there were two aggravating circumstances which attended
the commission of the crimes dwelling and unlawful entry. (People
v. Barruga, 61 Phil. 318, 331)
Unlawful entry is not aggravating in trespass to dwelling.

Trespass to dwelling is committed when a private individual
shall enter the dwelling of another against the latter's will and may
be committed by means of violence. (Art. 280)
If the offender entered the dwelling of another through an
opening not intended for the purpose, like the window, the unlawful
entry was an integral part of the circumstance of violence with which
the crime of trespass was committed. (U.S. • Barberan, 17 Phil. 509,
511-512)
Par. 19.- That as a means to the commission ofa crime, a wall,
roof, floor, door, or window be broken.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.

The basis has reference to means and ways employed to commit
the crime.
Is the cutting of the canvas of the tent where soldiers are sleeping
covered by paragraph 19?
It was considered aggravating in murder where the accused cut
the ropes at the rear of a field tent and killed two soldiers inside the
tent. (U.S. v. Matanug, 1 Phil. 188, 189, 192)

"As a means to the commission of a crime."

A broke a window to enable himself to reach a purse with
money on the table near that window, which he took while his body
was outside of the building. The crime of theft was attended by this
aggravating circumstance. Note that because of the phrase "as a
means to the commission of a crime," it is not necessary that the
offender should have entered the building. What aggravates the
liability of the offender is the breaking of a part of the building as a
means to the commission of the crime.
To be considered as an aggravating circumstance, breaking the
door must be utilized as a means to the commission of the crime. It
is not to be appreciated where the accused did not break the door
of the victims as a means to commit robbery with homicide where
the accused after breaking the rope which was used to close the
door could have already entered the house. Breaking of the shutters
and the framing of the door to insure the elements of surprise does
not aggravate the commission of the crime. (People v. Capillas, No.
L-27177, October 23, 1981, 108 SCRA 173, 187)
To effect entrance only.

But it may be resorted to as a means to commit a crime in a
house or building.
For example, a murderer who, for the purpose of entering the
house of his victim, breaks a wall or a window of the house.
The circumstance is aggravating only in those cases where the
offender resorted to any of said means to enter the house. If the wall,
etc., is broken in order to get out of the place, it is not an aggravating
circumstance.
Breaking a part of the building is one of the means of entering
the building to commit robbery with force upon things under Article
299, paragraph (a), and Article 302 of the Code. It is inherent in this
kind of robbery. Breaking a part of the building is not aggravating
in that crime.
Where breaking of door or window is lawful.

The Supreme Court called it "the aggravating circumstance of
forcible entry."

Under Rule 113, Section 11 (Revised Rules of Criminal
Procedure). - An officer, in order to make an arrest, either by virtue

478

479

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

of a warrant, or without a warrant as provided in Section 5, may
break into any building or enclosure where the person to be arrested
is or is reasonably believed to be, if he is refused admittance thereto,
after announcing his authority and purpose.
Rule 126, Section 7 (Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure).
- The officer, if refused admittance to the place of directed search
after giving notice of his purpose and authority, may break open any
outer or inner door or window of a house or any part of a house or
anything therein to execute the warrant or liberate himself or any
person lawfully aiding him when unlawfully detained therein.

Par. 20.- That the crime be committed ( I) with the aid of
persons under fifteen years of age, or (2) by means
of motor vehicles, airships, or other similar means.
Basis of the aggravating circumstances.

The basis has reference to means and ways employed to commit
the crime.
Two different aggravating circumstances in paragraph 20.

Two different circumstances are grouped in this paragraph. The
first one tends to repress, so far as possible, the frequent practice
resorted to by professional criminals to avail themselves of minors
taking advantage of their irresponsibility; and the second one is
intended to counteract the great facilities found by modern criminals
in said means to commit crime and flee and abscond once the same is
committed. (Albert)
"With the aid of persons under fifteen years of age."

A caused B, a boy 14 years old, to climb the wall of the house
ofC, to enter the same through its window, and once inside, to take,
as in fact B took, clothes and other personal property in the house of
C. Then B threw them to the ground where A picked them up. The
aggravating circumstance that the crime was committed with the
aid of a person under 15 years of age should be taken into account
against A.
480

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Art. 14

"By means of motor vehicles."

Use of motor vehicle is aggravating where the accused used the
motor vehicle in going to the place of the crime, in carrying away the
effects thereof, and in facilitating their escape. (People v. Espejo, No.
L-27708, December 19, 1970, 36 SCRA 400, 418)
May this aggravating circumstance be considered if the motor
vehicle was used, not as a means to commit the crime, but only as a
means for the flight or concealment of the offender? Judge Guevara
believes that the use of motor vehicles is aggravating "because the
same furnish a quick means for the flight or concealment of the
offender."
The accused used the motor vehicle in going to the place of the
crime, in carrying the effects thereof and in facilitating the escape.
(People v. Espejo, 36 SCRA 400)
When the accused has decided to realize his plan of liquidating
the victim, drove his pickup with his companions, conducted a
surveillance of the victim's whereabouts while driving his pickup,
killed the victim upon meeting him, and made good his escape by
speeding away in his vehicle, the motor vehicle was used as a means
to commit the crime and to facilitate escape, which is aggravating.
(People v. Cuadra, No. 1-27973, October 23, 1978, 85 SCRA 576, 596)
After an earlier confrontation, the principal accused caught up
with the victim on board a jeep which the former was driving. As soon
as he had stopped the vehicle, he stepped down and axed the victim,
while one of several companions stabbed him, the rest stoning him.
The victim died. The jeep having played an important role in the
accomplishment of the crime and the accused and his companions
having made good their escape by speeding away aboard the jeep
in order to avoid discovery of their identities, use of motor vehicle
is aggravating. (People v. Bardon, No. L-60764, September 19, 1988,
165 SCRA 416, 420, 426)
Where the use of a vehicle was not deliberate to facilitate the
killing of the victim, the escape of the assailants from the scene of
the crime, and the concealment of the body of the victim, but only
incidental, it is not an aggravating circumstance. (People v. Munoz,
No. L38016, September 10, 1981, 107 SCRA 313, 338)
481

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE ONE

Criminal Law

Felonies and Circumstances which

Where it appears that the use of motor vehicle was merely
incidental and was not purposely sought to facilitate the commission
of the offense or to render the escape of the offender easier and his
apprehension difficult, the circumstance is not aggravating. (People
v. Garcia, No. L-32071, July 9, 1981, 105 SCRA 325, 343)

Use of motor vehicle was aggravating in theft where a truck
was used in carrying away the stolen rails and iron and wooden ties
from the scene of the theft to the place where they were sold (People
v. Arabia, C.A., 53 0.G. 6569), and in robbery with homicide where
a motor vehicle was used in transporting the accused. (People v.
Valeriano, 90 Phil. 15, 31, 35)

Art. 14

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability

Use of motor vehicle will not be considered as an aggravating
circumstance where there is no showing that the motor vehicle was
purposely used to facilitate the commission of the crime or where it
is not shown that without it, the offense charged could not have been
committed. Thus, where the primary purpose of the assailant in riding
on a motorized tricycle was to return to their camp (assailant was a
PC enlistedman) after shooting a first victim and it was just incidental
that on his way to the camp, he happened to see the second victim,
the circumstance is not aggravating. (People v. Mil, Nos. L-28104-05,
July 30, 1979, 92 SCRA 89, 102)
Estafa which is committed by means of deceit or abuse of
confidence, cannot be committed by means of motor vehicle.
While it is true that a jeep was used in carting away the Vicks
Vaporub, we feel that the crime of estafa was not committed by means
of said vehicle. Furthermore, under Article 14, paragraph 20 of the
R.P.C., that aggravating circumstance exists only if "the crime be
committed xx x by means of motor vehicles xx x." (People v. Bagtas,
et al., CA-G.R. No. 10823-R, September 12, 1955)
Theft, which is committed by merely taking personal property which
need not be carried away, cannot be committed by means of motor
vehicles.
The culprits used a car and, for part of the way, a hired jeep
in going to and coming from the place where the crime (theft) was
committed. It would be stretching the meaning of the law too far to
say that the crime was committed "by means ofmotor vehicles." (People
v. Real, 10 C.A. Rep. 668)
Examples of crimes committed by means of motor vehicle.

Even if the victims rode voluntarily in the jeepney, since they
were lured and taken to the place where they were killed, the use of
motor vehicles was considered aggravating. (People v. De la Cruz, 100
Phil. 624, 634)
The accused took away the complainant from her aunt's
residence in Makati, Rizal in a taxicab. The use of motor vehicle,
facilitated the taking away of the complainant and her consequent
detention. (People v. Ablaza, No. L-27352, October 31, 1969)
When the accused stabbed and inflicted upon his girlfriend,
mortal wounds which caused her death, while they were in a taxi
which was hired and used by him, the aggravating circumstance of
by means of motor vehicle was present. (People v. Marasigan, 70 Phil.
583, 594)
Use of motor vehicle is aggravating where the car of the accused
was used in trailing the victim's car up to the time that it was
overtaken and blocked. It carried the victim on the way to the scene
of the killing; it contained at its baggage compartment the pick and
shovel used in digging the grave; and it was the fast means of fleeing
and absconding from the scene. (People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January
30, 1975, 62 SCRA 174,214)
Appellant was riding a motorcycle behind the unknown driver
when he twice shot the victim who thus lost control of his owner-type
jeep and crashed into the interlink wire fence beside the road. The
motorcycle then stopped near the jeep, and appellant shot the victim
again thrice, before leaving the crime scene aboard the motorcycle.
(People v. Salahhudin, G.R. No. 206291, January 18, 2016)
"Or other similar means."

A, with the help of B and with lewd designs, forcibly took and
carried away a woman by means of an automobile to another town.
The crime of forcible abduction (Art. 342) was committed with this
aggravating circumstance.

The expression should be understood as referring to motorized
vehicles or other efficient means of transportation similar to
automobile or airplane.

482

483

Art. 14

Tl-IE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Thus, if the culprit, before committing and after committing
the crime, rode in a bicycle and escaped, there is no aggravating
circumstance. But it is aggravating if he used a motorcycle.

Cruelty was not present in a case where the assailant stoned
twice the victim, not for the purpose of increasing his sufferings, but
to kill him (U.S. v. Gasal, 3 Phil. 354, 357), or in a case where the
acts of the assailants showed only a decided purpose to kill and not
to prolong sufferings of the victim (U.S. u. Tan Corteso, 32 Phil. 104,
116), or where the purpose was to ensure the death of the three victims
and to tamper with the bullet wounds to make them appear as bolo
wounds in order to conceal the fact that a gun was used in killing
them (People v. Llamera, supra), or where the victim was drowned
in the sea after stabbing him while bound (People u. Luna, supra),
or where the victim was buried after being stabbed, not to make him
suffer any longer but to conceal his body and the crime itself(People
v. Ong, supra), or where the accused kicked the deceased or placed
his right foot on the body of the deceased to verify whether or not
the latter was still alive, and not for the purpose of deliberately and
inhumanly increasing his sufferings. (People • ML, Nos. L-28104-05,
July 30, 1979, 92 SCRA 89, 101)

Art. 14

Par. 21.- That the wrong done in the commission of the crime
be deliberately augmented by causing other wrong
not necessary for its commission.
Basis of this aggravating circumstance.
The basis has reference to ways employed in committing the
crime.
What is cruelty?
There is cruelty when the culprit enjoys and delights in making
his victim suffer slowly and gradually, causing him unnecessary
physical pain in the consummation of the criminal act. (People u.
Dayug, 49 Phil. 423, 427; People v. Ong, No. L-34497, January 30,
1975, 62 SCRA 174, 215)
For cruelty to be aggravating, it is essential that the wrong
done was intended to prolong the suffering of the victim, causing
him unnecessary moral and physical pain. (People v. Llamera, Nos.
L-21604-6, May 25, 1973, 51 SCRA 48, 60)
For cruelty or vindictiveness to be appreciated, the evidence
must show that the sadistic culprit, for his pleasure and satisfaction,
caused the victim to suffer slowly and gradually, and inflicted on him
unnecessary moral and physical pain. (People u. Luna, No. L-28812,
July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA 198, 209)
Requisites of cruelty:
1.

That the injury caused be deliberately increased by causing
other wrong;

2.

That the other wrong be unnecessary for the execution of
the purpose of the offender.

"Be deliberately augmented by causing other wrong."
This phrase means that the accused at the time of the commission
of the crime had a deliberate intention to prolong the suffering of the
victim.
484

Affect Criminal Liability

"Other wrong not necessary for its commission."
A and B, who had tied C in the latter's house, struck him with
their guns to make him point the place where he was keeping his
money. Striking him with the guns is other wrong," but it is necessary
for the commission of the crime of robbery, particularly to get C's
money. Hence, there is no cruelty.
Cruelty refers to physical suffering of victim purposely intended
by offender.
Cruelty requires deliberate prolongation of the physical suffering
of victim. (People v. Dayug, supra; People v. Llamera, supra)
Cruelty is present where appellant tied the victim to a bed, burnt
her face with a lighted cigarette while raping her and laughed as he
did all these. (People u. Lucas, G.R. No. 80102, January 22, 1990)
The victim rolled unconscious after she was ravished, appellant
still hacked her, almost splitting her face in two. Such bestiality is a
form of cruelty and perversity which aggravated the crime, it being
unnecessary to the commission thereof, and manifestly an outrage
on the victim's person. (People v. Nescio, G.R. No. 102008, December
28, 1994)
485

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Criminal Law
Cruelty cannot be presumed.
There being no showing either that the other wounds found on
the body of the victim were inflicted to prolong his suffering before the
fatal wound was dealt, it cannot be concluded that the aggravating
circumstance of cruelty was duly proven. Cruelty cannot be presumed.
(People v. Artieda, No. L-38725, May 15, 1979)
Cruelty considered in murder by burning the mouth of a child.
This circumstance is considered in the charge of murder for
burning the mouth and other parts of the body of an infant, 11 months
old. If the desire of the defendant had been only to kill the child, he
could have carried out his purpose without compelling the victim to
undergo such great suffering and for so long a time. (U.S. v. Oro, 19
Phil. 548, 554)
Cruelty considered in extracting victim's eye and stuffing his mouth
with mud.

After hog-tying the victim, the accused extracted the victim's
left eye from its socket with the pointed end of his cane and also
stuffed the victim's mouth with mud. Held: There is cruelty. (People
v. Mariquina, 84 Phil. 39, 40-41, 43, 44)

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 14

Affect Criminal Liability
to prolong the suffering of his victim, is not sufficient for taking this
aggravating circumstance into consideration."
Plurallty of wounds alone does not show cruelty.

Number of wounds alone does not show cruelty, it being
necessary to show that the accused deliberately and inhumanly
increased the sufferings of the victims. (People v. Aguinaldo, 55 Phil.
610, 615-616; People v. Manzano, Nos. L-33643-44, July 31, 1974, 58
SCRA 250, 262; People v. Lacao, No. L-32078, September 30, 1974,
60 SCRA 89, 96-97)
In the absence of a showing that the other wounds found on the
body of the victim were inflicted to prolong his suffering before the
fatal wound was dealt, it cannot be concluded that cruelty was duly
proven. Cruelty cannot be presumed. (People v. Artieda, No. L-38725,
May 15, 1979, 90 SCRA 144, 156)
Where there were many wounds because there were many
assailants, the number of wounds alone is not sufficient to show
that the killing was committed for the purpose of deliberately and
inhumanly augmenting the suffering of the victim. (People v. Vasquez,
No. 54117, April 27, 1982, 113 SCRA 772, 776)
No cruelty when other wrong was done after the victim was dead.

When the series of acts causing unnecessary sufferings of victim
took place in rapid succession, is there cruelty?

When a woman and her two daughters, one of them Corazon,
were fired at by the accused, Corazon screamed for help. One of the
accused grabbed her, raised her from the ground, while the other
accused battered her with the butt of the rifle and pounded her on
the ground. Corazon died of external and intra-cranial hemorrhage.
Held: There was unnecessary cruelty. (People v. Beleno, 92 Phil.
868, 869, 872)
Was there a deliberate intention on the part of the accused to
prolong the suffering of the victim? There seems to be no appreciable
time intervening between or among the series of acts of the accused.

Cutting extremities after victim is killed is not cruelty. (People
v. Bersabal, 48 Phil. 439, 441)
If at the time the house was set on fire the inmates who had been
seriously wounded were already dead, there is no cruelty. (People u.
Piring, 63 Phil. 546, 553; People v. Clamania, 85 Phil. 350, 353)
Neither may [the Court] consider the circumstance of cruelty as
found by the trial court, because there is no showing that the other
wounds found on the bodies of the victims were inflicted unnecessarily
while they were still alive in order to prolong their physical suffering.
(People v. Curiano, Nos. L-15256-57, October 31, 1963, 9 SCRA 323,
347-348)

In the case of People v. Dayug, supra, it was held that "the mere
fact of inflicting various successive wounds upon a person in order to
cause his death, no appreciable time intervening between the infliction
of one wound and that of another to show that the offender wanted

For cruelty to be appreciated as a generic aggravating circumstance, there must be positive proof that the wounds found on the
body of the victim were inflicted while he was still alive in order unnecessarily to prolong physical suffering. (People v. Pacris, G.R. No.
69986, March 5, 1991, 194 SCRA 654, 663)

486

487

Art. 14

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE

Art. 14

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Ignominy distinguished from cruelty.

3.

That the assault (direct assault) is committed with a
weapon, or when the offender is a public officer or employee,
or when the offender lays hands upon a person in authority.
(Art. 148)

Rapes, robbery and other forms of cruelties are aggravating
circumstances of ignominy and cruelty in treason.

4.

Rapes, wanton robbery for personal gain, and other forms of
cruelties are condemned and their perpetration will be regarded
as aggravating circumstances of ignominy and of deliberately
augmenting unnecessary wrongs to the main criminal objective, under
paragraphs 17 and 21 of Article 14 of the R.P.C. (People v. Racaza,
82 Phil. 623, 638)

If the crime (slavery) be committed for the purpose of
assigning the offended party to some immoral traffic, the
penalty shall be imposed in its maximum period. (Art. 272,
par. 2)

5.

If the threat (grave threats) be made in writing or through
a middleman, the penalty shall be imposed in its maximum
period. (Art. 282)

6.

If the robbery with violence against or intimidation of
persons (except robbery with homicide, or robbery with
rape, etc.) is committed in an uninhabited place or by a
band, etc., or on a street, road, highway, or alley, and the
intimidation is made with the use of a firearm, the offender
shall be punished by the maximum period of the proper
penalties. (Art. 295)

7.

If the robbery with the use of force upon things (Art. 299)
is committed in an uninhabited place and by a band, it
shall be punished by the maximum period of the penalty
provided therefor. (Art. 300)

Ignominy (par. 17) involves moral suffering, while cruelty (par.
21) refers to physical suffering.

Rape as aggravating in robbery with homicide.
Where rape attends the commission of the crime ofrobbery with
homicide, the rape should be deemed to aggravate the robbery with
homicide. (People v. Basca, 55 O.G. 797)
Rape as aggravating in murder.
Since the victim was already at the threshold of death when
she was ravished, that bestiality may be regarded either as a form of
ignominy causing disgrace or as a form of cruelty which aggravated
murder, because it was unnecessary to the commission thereof and
was a manifest outrage on the victim's person. (People v. Laspardas,
No. L-46146, October 23, 1979, 93 SCRA 638, 645)
Aggravating circumstances peculiar to certain felonies.

V.

Alternative Circumstances
1.

Among the aggravating circumstances peculiar to certain
felonies are the following:
1.

2.

That the offense (violation of domicile) be committed in
the nighttime, or if any papers or effects not constituting
evidence of a crime be not returned immediately after the
search made by the offender. (Art. 128, par. 2)
That the crime (interruption of religious worship) shall
have been committed with violence or threats. (Art. 132,
par. 2)
488

Definition or concept.
Alternative circumstances are those which must be
taken into consideration as aggravating or mitigating
according to the nature and effects of the crime and the
other conditions attending its commission.

2.

Basis of the alternative circumstances.
The basis is the nature and effects of the crime and
the other conditions attending its commission.

489

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

Chapter Five
ALTERNATIVE CIRCUMSTANCES
Art. 15. Their concept. Alternative circumstances are
those which must be taken into consideration as aggravating
or mitigating according to the nature and effects of the crime
and the other conditions attending its commission. They are
the relationship, intoxication, and the degree of instruction
and education of the offender.
The alternative circumstance of relationship shall be
taken into consideration when the offended party is the
spouse, ascendant, descendant, legitimate, natural, or adopted
brother or sister, or relative by affinity in the same degree of
the offender.
The intoxication of the offender shall be taken into
consideration as a mitigating circumstance when the offender
has committed a felony in a state of intoxication, if the same is
not habitual or subsequent to the plan to commit said felony;
but when the intoxication is habitual or intentional, it shall
be considered as an aggravating circumstance.

The alternative circumstances are:
1.
2.

Intoxication; and

3.

Degree of instruction and education of the offender.

Relationship.

The alternative circumstance of relationship shall be taken into
consideration when the offended party is the spouse,

(b)

ascendant,

(c)

descendant,

(d)

legitimate, natural, or adopted brother or sister, or

(e)

relative by affinity in the same degree of the offender.

Other relatives Included.

The relationship of stepfather or stepmother and stepson or
stepdaughter is included by analogy as similar to that of ascendant
and descendant. (People v. Bersabal, 48 Phil. 439, 441)
The reason for considering these relationships, as stated in
the case of People v. Portento, supra, is that it is the duty of the
stepmother to bestow upon her stepdaughter a mother's affection, care
and protection. Hence, the effect of the crime of murder committed
by the stepmother against her stepdaughter makes the relationship
aggravating.
The relationship of adopted parent and adopted child may also
be included, as similar to that of ascendant and descendant.
But the relationship between uncle and niece is not covered by
any of the relationships mentioned. (U.S. v. Insierto, 15 Phil. 358,
361; People v. Balondo, No. L-27401, October 31, 1969, 30 SCRA 155,
161; People v. Lamberte, No. L-65153, July 11, 1986, 142 SCRA 685,
692-693)
When mitigating and when aggravating.

The law is silent as to when relationship is mitigating and when
it is aggravating.
As a rule, relationship is mitigating in crimes against property,
by analogy to the provisions of Article 332.

Relationship;

(a)

Art. 15

490

Thus, relationship is mitigating in the crimes of robbery (Arts.
294-302), usurpation (Art. 312), fraudulent insolvency (Art. 314), and
arson. (Arts. 321-322, 325-326)
Under Article 332 of the Code, no criminal, but only civil,
liability shall result from commission of the crime of theft, swindling
or malicious mischief committed or caused mutually by spouses,
ascendants, and descendants, or relatives by affinity in the same line;
brothers and sisters and brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, if living
together.
491

Art. 15

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

In view of the provision ofArticle 332, when the crime committed
is (l) theft, (2) swindling or estafa, or (3) malicious mischief,
relationship is exempting. The accused is not criminally liable and
there is no occasion to consider a mitigating or an aggravating
circumstance.

mother, or child, whether legitimate or illegitimate, or any of his
ascendants or descendants, or spouse.

Art. 15

It is aggravating in crimes against persons in cases where the
offended party is a relative of a higher degree than the offender, or
when the offender and the offended party are relatives of the same
level, as killing a brother (People v. Alisub, 69 Phil. 362, 364), a brotherin-law (People v. Mercado, 51 Phil. 99, 102; People v. Mendova, 100
Phil. Bl I, BIB), a half-brother (People w. Nargatan, 48 Phil. 470, 472,
475), or adopted brother. (People v. Macabangon, 63 Phil. 1061-1062
[Unrep.J)
Is relationship not aggravating when the offender killed his brotherin-law?
Except an admission by the appellant that the deceased was
his brother-in-law, relationship by affinity should not be deemed
to aggravate the crime in the absence of evidence to show that the
offended party is of a higher degree in the relationship than that of
the offender. (People v. Canitan, No. L-16498, June 29, 1963, 8 SCRA
358, 364)
If the crime against persons is any of the serious physical Injuries,
the fact that the offended party Is a descendant of the offender Is
not mitigating.

When the crime against persons is any of the serious physical
injuries (Art. 263), even if the offended party is a descendant of the
offender, relationship is an aggravating circumstance.
If the offense of serious physical injuries is committed by the
offender against his child, whether legitimate or illegitimate, or any
of his legitimate other descendants, relationship is aggravating. But
the serious physical injuries must not be inflicted by a parent upon
his child by excessive chastisement.
Article 263 provides for a higher penalty "if the offense (any of
the serious physical injuries) is committed against any of the persons
enumerated in Article 246." Article 246, which defines and penalizes
the crime of parricide, enumerates the following persons: father,
492

AJTect Criminal Liability

When the crime is less serious physical injuries or slight physical
injuries, the ordinary rule applies.
But when the offense committed is less serious physical injuries
(Art. 265); or slight physical injuries (Art. 266), relationship is a
mitigating circumstance, if the offended party is a relative of a lower
degree of the offender; and an aggravating circumstance, if the
offended party is a relative of a higher degree of the offender. Both
Articles 265 and 266 do not have provisions to the contrary, as in
Article 263.
When the crime against persons is homicide or murder, relationship is
aggravating even ifthe victim ofthe crime is a relative oflower degree.
If the commission of the crime against persons resulted in the
death of the victim who is a relative ofa lower degree of the offender,
relationship is an aggravating circumstance. This rule applies when
the crime committed is homicide (Art. 249) or murder (Art. 248).
Thus, the killing of a stepdaughter by her stepmother is
attended by the circumstance of relationship which is considered as
aggravating. (People v. Portento, supra) The crime is not parricide,
because the relationship is not by blood and in the direct line; but the
relationship was considered by the Court to aggravate the penalty,
notwithstanding the fact that the victim of the crime was a relative
of a lower degree.
Relationship is mitigating in trespass to dwelling.
Where a son-in-law, believing his wife to be in her father's
house, attempted to force an entry therein, the relationship is to be
considered in mitigation. (U.S. v. Ostrea, 2 Phil. 93, 95)
Relationship Is neither mitigating nor aggravating, when relationship
Is an element of the offense.

When the qualification given to the crime is derived from the
relationship between the offender and offended party, it is neither
mitigating nor aggravating, because it is inseparable from and
inherent in the offense.
Examples: Parricide, adultery, and concubinage.
493

Art. 15

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

In crimes against chastity, relationship is always aggravating.
In crimes against chastity, like acts oflasciviousness (Art. 336),
relationship is aggravating, regardless of whether the offender is a
relative of a higher or lower degree of the offended party.
Reason for the difference In the rule.
Why is relationship aggravating in crimes against chastity even
if the offended party is a relative of lower degree?
Because of the nature and effect of the crime committed, it is
considered aggravating although the offended party is a relative of
lower degree. It is not shocking to our moral sense when we hear that
a father committed, for instance, the crime of slight physical injury
against his daughter; but it certainly is very shocking when we hear
that a father committed acts of lasciviousness on the person of his
own daughter.
The rule may be different because of the "other condition attending"
the commission of the crime.
While the relationship of brothers-in-law is aggravating when
one commits a crime against the other, such relationship is mitigating
when the accused killed his brother-in-law in view of the conduct
pursued by the latter in contracting adulterous relations with the
wife of the accused. (U.S. v. Ancheta, I Phil. 30, 32)
Also, in a case where the deceased was suffering from an attack
of insanity and the accused, his brother-in-law, in his desire to place
the deceased under control, struck him with a club, exceeding the
limits of his discretion in the heat of the struggle, it was held that
relationship was mitigating because the cause of the maltreatment
was the desire to render service to a relative. (U.S. v. Velarde, 36
Phil. 991, 992-993)
The reason for the difference in the rule is the "other condition
attending" the commission of the crime, which in the Ancheta case is
the conduct of the deceased in having adulterous relations with the
wife of the accused; and in the Velarde case, the desire of the accused
to render service to a relative.

494

Art. 15

In rape, relationship is a special circumstance which makes the
imposition of the death penalty mandatory.
Relationship as an alternative circumstance under Article 15
of the R.P.C., appreciated as an aggravating circumstance in rape,
should no longer be applied in view of the amendments introduced
by R.A. No. 7659. (People v. Manhuyod, Jr., G.R. No. 124676, May
20, 1998)
Article 335 of the R.P.C., as amended by Section 11 of R.A.
No. 7659, provides that: The death penalty shall also be imposed if
the crime of rape is committed with any of the following attendant
circumstances:
I.

Where the victim is under eighteen (18) years of age and
the offender is a parent, ascendant, step-parent, guardian,
relative by consanguinity or affinity within the third civil
degree, or the common-law spouse of the parent of the
victim.

Intoxication.
a.

Mitigating - (1) if intoxication is not habitual, or (2) if
intoxication is not subsequent to the plan to commit a felony.

b.

Aggravating
(1) if intoxication is habitual, or (2) ifit is
intentional (subsequent to the plan to commit a felony).
It is intentional when the offender drinks liquor fully
knowing its effects, to find in the liquor a stimulant to
commit a crime or a means to suffocate any remorse.

Drunkenness or intoxication is mitigating if accidental, not
habitual nor intentional, that is, not subsequent to the plan to commit
the crime. It is aggravating if habitual or intentional. A habitual
drunkard is one given to intoxication by excessive use of intoxicating
drinks. The habit should be actual and confirmed. It is unnecessary
that it be a matter of daily occurrence. It lessens individual resistance
to evil thought and undermines will-power making its victim a
potential evildoer. (People v. Camano, Nos. L-36662-63, July 30, 1982,
115 SCRA 688, 699-700)
For an accused to be entitled to the mitigating circumstance of
intoxication, it must be shown that (a) at the time of the commission
495

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

of the criminal act, he has taken such quantity of alcoholic drinks as
to blur his reason and deprive him of a certain degree of control, and
(b) that such intoxication is not habitual, or subsequent to the plan
to commit the felony. (People v. Boduso, Nos. L-30450-51, September
30, 1974, 60 SCRA 60, 70-71)

serving statement was uncorroborated and was dismissed as devoid
of any probative value. (People v. Apduhan, Jr., No. L-19491, August
30, 1968, 24 SCRA 798, 813-814)

Art. 15

"When the offender has com mitted a felony In a state of Intoxication."

The last paragraph of Article 15 says "when the offender has
committed a felony in a state of intoxication," by which clause is meant
that the offender's mental faculties must be affected by drunkenness.
Evidence for intoxication to be aggravating.

There is no showing of excessive and habitual use of intoxicating
drinks, or that the accused purposely got drunk in order to commit
the crime, where the witness merely declared that the accused were
drinking liquor on the night in question and were telling stories,
singing, laughing, and shouting and were very jolly, although said
witness further testified that the accused used to drink liquor every
Saturday night, such testimony not being competent proof that
the accused are drunkards whose habit is to get drunk, and whose
inebriety has become habitual. In such a case, intoxication is not
aggravating but mitigating. (People v. Moral, No. L-31139, October
12, 1984, 132 SCRA 474, 488)
The accused's state of intoxication must be proved.

In People v. Noble, 77 Phil. 93, 101-102, the defendant testified
that before the murder, he took a bottle of wine and drank little by
little until he got drunk. The policeman who arrested the accused
testified that the latter smelled of wine and vomited. The Court
held that the evidence presented was not satisfactory to warrant a
mitigation of the penalty.
Intoxication was likewise not completely proved in a case where
the only evidence was that the defendant had a gallon of tuba with
him at the time he committed the crime. (People v. Pardo, 79 Phil.
568, 579)

Art. 15

To be mitigating, the accused's state of intoxication must be
proved. Once intoxication is established by satisfactory evidence, in
the absence of proof to the contrary, it is presumed to be non-habitual
or unintentional. (People v. Apduhan, Jr., supra, at 813, citing People
v. Noble, 77 Phil. 93 and U.S. v. Fitzgerald, 2 Phil. 419)
Where the court below found that the appellant was under the
influence of liquor in the afternoon immediately preceding the incident
and there is no evidence indicating that he is a habitual drunkard,
the mitigating circumstance of intoxication should be considered in
favor of the appellant. (People v. Gongora, Nos. L-14030-31, July 31,
1963, 8 SCRA 472, 482; People v. De Gracia, No. L-21419, September
29, 1966, 18 SCRA 197, 207)
Note:

In these cases, there was no evidence that the
intoxication was intentional or subsequent to the plan
to commit the crime.

Drunkenness must affect mental faculties.

The Code says nothing about the degree of intoxication needed
to mitigate; but obviously to produce such an effect, it must diminish
the agent's capacity to know the injustice of his acts, and his will to
act accordingly. (Albert)
(a) Before drunkenness may be considered as a mitigating
circumstance, it must first be established that the liquor taken by
the accused was of such quantity as to have blurred his reason and
deprived him of self-control. It should be such an intoxication that
would diminish the agent's capacity to know the injustice of his acts,
and his will to act accordingly. (People v. Ruiz, Nos. L-33604-05,
October 30, 1979, 93 SCRA 739, 760-761)

In another case, intoxication was not also proved where the
accused merely alleged that when he committed the offense charged,
he was intoxicated although he was "not used to be drunk." His self-

(b) I the amount of the liquor the accused had taken was
not of sufficient quantity to affect his mental faculties, he was not in
a state of intoxication. If the accused was thoughtful enough not to
neglect giving Don Vicente Noble his injection, the inference would he
that his intoxication was not to such a degree as to affect his mental

496

497

Art. 15

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

capacity to fully understand the consequences of his act. (People v.
Noble, 77 Phil. 93, 101-102)
"When the intoxication is habitual."
A habitual drunkard is one given to intoxication by excessive
use of intoxicating drinks. The habit should be actual and confirmed.
It is unnecessary that it be a matter of daily occurrence. It lessens
individual resistance to evil thought and undermines willpower
making its victim a potential evildoer. (People v. Camano, No.
L-36662-63, July 30, 1982)
The mere fact that the accused had been drinking intoxicating
liquor about seven months and that he had been drunk once or twice a
month is not constituting habitual drunkenness. A habitual drunkard
is one given to intoxication by excessive use of intoxicating drinks. The
habit should be actual and confirmed, but it is not necessary that it
be continuous or by daily occurrence. (People v. Amenamen, C.A., 37
O.G. 2324)
In U.S. v. McMann, 4 Phil. 561, 565, a witness testified that he
saw the defendant drunk twelve times or more.
Held: He was a habitual drunkard.
Drunkenness was also found to be habitual where the defendants
admitted in open court that before they committed the crime, they
drank for three hours and often had a drinking party. (People v.
Mabilangan, No. L-48217, January 30, 1982, 111 SCRA 398, 403)
"Or subsequent to the plan to commit a felony."
Illustration:
A decided to kill B. A planned to commit the crime by preparing
the means to carry it out. When he was ready to kill B, A drank a glass
of wine and when already intoxicated, he looked for Band killed him.
Note that A drank wine to intoxicate himselfafter he had planned the
commission of the crime. In this case, the intoxication is intentional.
Intoxication is mitigating where the same was not habitual
nor intentional and the crime was not the offspring of planning and
deliberation but a fatal improvisation dictated by an impromptu
impulse. (People v. Abalos, No. L-31726, May 31, 1974, 57 SCRA 330,
338)
498

TITLE ONE

Art. 15

Felonies and Circumstances which

Affect Criminal Liability
Even If intoxication Is not habitual, it Is aggravating when
subsequent to the plan to commit the crime.
In a case where the trial court found the commission of the crime
of murder to be attended by the mitigating circumstance that the
accused was drunk, but not habitually so, it was held that it appearing
that the accused, who had plotted the death of the victim, drank
wine in order to embolden himself in the carrying out of his evil plan,
his intoxication cannot be considered as a mitigating circumstance.
(People v. Hernandez, 91 Phil. 334, 344)
Reasons for the alternative circumstance of intoxication.
As a mitigating circumstance, it finds its reason in the fact that
when a person is under the influence of liquor, his exercise of will
power is impaired.
As an aggravating circumstance, because it is intentional, the
reason is that the offender resorted to it in order to bolster his courage
to commit a crime.
It is aggravating when intoxication is habitual, because the
constant use of intoxicating liquor lessens the individual resistance
to evil thoughts and undermines the will power making himself a
potential evildoer against whose activities, society has the right for its
own protection to impose a more severe penalty. (People v. Amenamen,
supra)
Presumption is that intoxication is accidental.
The prosecution must prove that the intoxication of the offender
is habitual or intentional. (People v. Dungka, 64 Phil. 421, 426)
In the absence of proof to the contrary, it will be presumed
that intoxication is not habitual but accidental, and the fact that the
accused was drunk at the time of the commission of the crime must
then be considered as a mitigating circumstance. (U.S. v. Fitzgerald,
2 Phil. 419, 422; People v. Dacanay, 105 Phil. 1265, 1266 [Unrep.},
citing People v. Dungka, supra)
Non-habitual intoxication, lack of instruction and obfuscation are
not to be taken separately.
As non-habitual intoxication implies a disturbance of the
reasoning powers of the offender, his lack of instruction cannot have
499

Art. 15

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

any influence over him, and obfuscation which has the same effect
on his reasoning powers cannot be considered independently of nonhabitual intoxication. (People v. Baterna, 49 Phil. 996, 997-998)

the consequences of his criminal act, may still be entitled to this
mitigating circumstance. On the other hand, another person unable
to write because oflack of educational facilities or opportunities, may
yet be highly or exceptionally intelligent and mentally alert that he
easily realizes the full significance of his acts, in which case he may
not invoke this mitigating circumstance in his favor. (People v. Ripas,
95 Phil. 63, 70-71; People v. Geronimo, No. L-35700, October 15, 1973,
53 SCRA 246, 261-262)

Art. 15

The trial court considered them separately as three distinct
mitigating circumstances and imposed a penalty one degree lower.
The Supreme Court considered them as one mitigating circumstance
only and modified the penalty imposed by the trial court by raising
it and imposing the proper penalty in the minimum period.
Degree of Instruction and education of the offender.

Low degree of instruction and education or lack of it is generally
mitigating. High degree of instruction and education is aggravating,
when the offender avails himself of his learning in committing the
crime.
Lack of instruction, as mitigating.

Lack of instruction cannot be taken into account where the
defendant admitted that he studied in the first grade in a public
elementary school. Article 15 applies only to him who really has not
received any instruction. (People v. Mangsant, 65 Phil. 548, 552)
But the accused lacks education and instruction, if he did not
finish even the first grade in elementary school. (People v. Limaco,
88 Phil. 35, 44)

Mere illiteracy is not sufficient to constitute a mitigating
circumstance. There must be also lack of intelligence. (People u.
Retania, No. L-34841, January 22, 1980, 95 SCRA 201, 221; People
v. Abanes, No. L-30609, September 28, 1976, 73 SCRA 44, 47)
Lack of sufficient Instruction is not mitigating when the offender ls
a city resident who knows how to sign his name.

Appellant is guilty of murder with the qualifying circumstance of
treachery and the aggravating circumstance of evident premeditation.
The mitigating circumstance of lack of sufficient instruction cannot
be justified as appellant is a city resident and even knows how to sign
his name. The judgment is modified and appellant is sentenced to
reclusion perpetua. (People v. Cabrito, 101 Phil. 1253, 1254 [Unrep.J)
Lack of Instruction must be proved by the defense.

Lack of instruction is not mitigating where the accused finished
Grade Two and answered in Tagalog, questions put to him in English.
(People v. Luna, No. L-28812, July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA 198, 208)

Lack of education must be proved positively and cannot be based
on mere deduction or inference. (People v. Retania, supra, citing People
v. Bernardo, C.A., 40 0.G. 1707, and People v. Sakam, 61 Phil. 64)

Having studied up to sixth grade is more than sufficient schooling
to give the accused a degree of instruction as to properly apprise him
of what is right and wrong. (People v. Pujinio, No. L-21690, April 29,
1969, 27 SCRA 1185, 1189-1190)

Lack of instruction needs to be proven as all circumstances
modifying criminal liability should be proved directly and positively.
(People v. Macatanda, No. L-51368, November 6, 1981, 109 SCRA 35,
38, citing People v. Melendrez, 59 Phil. 154)

Lack of sufficient intelligence is required in illiteracy.

In the absence of any basis on record on which to judge the degree
of instruction of the accused, no evidence having been taken relative
thereto because he entered a plea of guilty, the circumstance of lack
of instruction cannot be mitigating. (People v. Macatanda, supra,
at 39)

Not illiteracy alone, but also lack of sufficient intelligence are
necessary to invoke the benefit of the alternative circumstance of lack
of instruction, the determination of which is left to the trial court.
A person able to sign his name but otherwise so densely
ignorant and of such low intelligence that he does not fully realize
500

501

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 15

The question of lack of instruction cannot be raised for the first
time in the appellate court.
It is for the trial court rather than the appellate court to find
and consider the circumstance of lack of instruction. (People v. Sari,
99 Phil. 1040 [Unrep.J)
When the trial court did not make any finding as to the degree
of instruction of the offenders, that alternative circumstance cannot
be considered on appeal in fixing the penalty to be imposed on the
accused-appellants. (People v. Diaz, No. L-24002, January 21, 1974,
55 SCRA 178, 187)
The trial court's appreciation of lack of instruction as a
mitigating circumstance was not disturbed on appeal because the
said court was in a position to gauge appellant's level of intelligence
from his appearance, demeanor and manner of answering questions.
(People v. Manuel, Nos. L-23786-87, August 29, 1969, 29 SCRA 337,
346)
Ordinarily, low degree or lack of instruction Is mitigating In all
crimes.
Lack of instruction or low degree ofit is appreciated as mitigating
circumstance in almost all crimes. (U.S. v. Reguera, 41 Phil. 506,
520 {robbery with homicide]; People v. Baltazar, No. L-30557, March
28, 1980, 96 SCRA, 556, 562-563 [Anti-Subversion Law]; People v.
Talok, 65 Phil. 696, 707 [murder)l; People v. Hubero, 61 Phil. 64, 66
[homicide))
Exceptions:
1.

Not mitigating in crimes against property, such as estafa,
theft, robbery, arson. (U.S. v. Pascual, 9 Phil. 491, 495
[estafa]; People v. De la Cruz, 77 Phil. 444, 448; People v.
Melendrez, 59 Phil. 154, 155-156 [robbery]; People v. San
Pedro, No. L-44274, January 22, 1980, 95 SCRA 306, 310
[robbery with homicide]; People v. Condemena, No. L-22426,
May 29, 1968, 23 SCRA 910, 920 [robbery with homicide))
But in U.S. v. Maqui, 27 Phil. 97, 101, lack of
instruction was mitigating in theft oflarge cattle committed
by a member of an uncivilized tribe of Igorots or in Igorot
land.
502

TITLE ONE
Felonies and Circumstances which

Art. 16

Affect Criminal Liability
But see People v. Macatanda, No. L-51368, November
6, 1981, 109 SCRA 35, 38, 39, where the accused claimed
that he was a Moslem belonging to a cultural minority, and
the high court said: "Some later cases which categorically
held that the mitigating circumstance oflack of instruction
does not apply to crimes of theft and robbery leave us with
no choice but to reject the plea of appellant. Membership
in a cultural minority does not per se imply being an
uncivilized or semi-uncivilized state of the offender, which
is the circumstance that induced the Supreme Court in the
Maqui case, to apply lack of instruction to the appellant
therein who was charged also with theft of large cattle.
Incidentally, the Maqui case is the only case where lack of
instruction was considered to mitigate liability for theft, for
even long before it, in U.S. v. Pascual, 9 Phil. 491, a 1908
case, lack of instruction was already held not applicable
to crimes of theft or robbery. The Maqui case was decided
in 1914, when the state of civilization of the Igorots has
not advanced as it had in reaching its present state since
recent years, when it certainly can no longer be said of
any member of a cultural minority in the country that he
is uncivilized or semi-uncivilized."
In robbery with homicide, where the accused was
illiterate, lack of instruction was held to be mitigating.
(People v. Patricio, 79 Phil. 227, 234; People v. Mantawar,
80 Phil. 817, 823)
But in another case, it was held that the benefit oflack
of instruction is unavailing to mitigate the crime of robbery
with homicide as this circumstance is not applicable to
the crime of theft or robbery, and much less to the crime
of homicide. No one, however unschooled he may be, is so
ignorant as not to know that theft or robbery, or assault
upon the person of another is inherently wrong and a
violation of the law. (People v. Enot, No. L-17530, October
30, 1962, 6 SCRA 325, 329)
In a later case, also of robbery with homicide, it was
also held that belonging to the cultural minorities cannot
conceivably reduce, from the subjective point of view, the
503

Art. 15

defendants' awareness of the gravity of their offense, for
robbery and killing are by their very nature just as wrong
to the ignorant as they are to the enlightened. (People v.
Salip Manla, No. L-21688, November 28, 1969, 30 SCRA
389, 397)
2.

TITLE ONE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Not mitigating in crimes against chastity, such as rape and
adultery. No one is so ignorant as not to know that the
crime of rape is wrong and in violation of the law.(Malesa
v. Director, 59 Phil. 406, 408; U.S. v. Borjal, 9 Phil. 140,
141; People v. Lopez, 107 Phil. 1039, 1042)

Art. 15

Felonies and Circumstances which
Affect Criminal Liability

It is also considered mitigating in murder in the following case:
The crime was murder qualified by evident premeditation,
the defendants having "for a long time" sought the encounter.
There was also abuse of superior strength - four men with
knives against one unarmed person. But this is compensated
by lack of instruction, these appellants being "ignorant people
living in a barrio almost 20 kilometers away from civilization."
Consequently, the medium degree of the penalty for murder reclusion perpetua
becomes imposable. (People v. Mantala,
G.R. No. L-12109, October 31, 1959)
High degree of Instruction, as aggravating.

How about in treason?
Not mitigating, because love of country should be a natural
feeling of every citizen, however unlettered or uncultured he may be.
(People v. Lansanas, 82 Phil. 193, 196; People v. Cruz, 88 Phil. 684,
687-688)
But in another case, the accused was also charged with treason.
His schooling was confined in studying and finishing caton only.
Held: Lack of instruction is mitigating. (People u. Marasigan,
85 Phil. 427, 431)
Lack of education and instruction is not mitigating in murder.
Lack of education and instruction cannot mitigate appellant's
guilt because to kill is forbidden by natural law which every rational
being is endowed to know and feel. (People v. Mutya, G.R. Nos.
L-11255-56, September 30, 1959 [Unrep.})
Exception: Although ordinarily lack of instruction is not
considered as an extenuating circumstance in the crime of
homicide or murder, nevertheless, in the instant cases, the same
may be so considered because the crimes would probably not
have been committed if the accused were not so ignorant as to
believe in witchcraft. The trial court likewise did not err in failing
to consider the lack of instruction as mitigating circumstance
in the crime of arson as the same does not extenuate offenses
against property. (People v. Laolao, G.R. Nos. L-12978-80,
October 31, 1959 [Unrep.J)
504

Examples:
A lawyer, who, with abuse ofh.is education and learning, commits
estafa.
A medical student who was convicted of slander by deed. (People
v. Roque, C.A., 40 O.G. 1710)
Degree of instruction is aggravating when the offender availed
himself or took advantage of it in committing the crime.
Thus, a doctor, who, using his knowledge, prepared certain
kind of poison to kill his victim in such a way as to avoid detection,
may be considered as having taken advantage of his high degree of
instruction and education.
But the fact that the accused was a lawyer was not considered
aggravating in physical injuries. (People v. Sulit, CA-G.R. No. 21102R, September 29, 1959) He did not take advantage of his high degree
of education.

505

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 16

Rules relative to light felonies:

Title Two

1.

Light felonies are punishable only when they have been
consummated. (Art. 7)

2.

But when light felonies are committed against persons or
property, they are punishable even if they are only in the
attempted or frustrated stage of execution. (Art. 7)

3.

Only principals and accomplices are liable for light felonies.
(Art. 16)

4.

Accessories are not liable for light felonies, even if they are
committed against persons or property. (Art. 16)

PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE
FOR FELONIES
Art. 16. Who are criminally liable. -- The following are
criminally liable for grave and less grave felonies:
1.

Principals.

2.

Accomplices.

Active subject and passive subject of crime.

3.

Accessories.

In all crimes there are always two parties, namely: the active
subject (the criminal); and the passive subject (the injured party).

The following are criminally liable for light felonies:
1.

Principals.

2.

Accomplices.

Article 16 of the Code enumerates the active subjects of the
crime.
Only natural persons can be active subject of crime.

Treble division of persons criminally liable.
The treble division of persons criminally responsible for an
offense rests upon the very nature of their participation in the
commission of the crime.
When a crime is committed by many, without being equally
shared by all, a different degree ofresponsibility is imposed upon each
and every one of them. In that case, they are criminally liable either
as principals, accomplices, or accessories.
Accessories are not liable for light felonies.
In view of the omission of accessories in naming those liable for
light felonies, the accessories are not liable for light felonies.
Reason: In the commission of light felonies, the social wrong
as well as the individual prejudice is so small that penal sanction is
deemed not necessary for accessories.
606

Only natural persons can be the active subject of crime because
of the highly personal nature of the criminal responsibility.
Since a felony is a punishable act or omission which produces or
tends to produce a change in the external world, it follows that only
a natural person can be the active subject of the crime, because he
alone by his act can set in motion a cause or by his inaction can make
possible the completion of a developing modification in the external
world.
Only a natural person can be the offender because
(a)

The R.P.C. requires that the culprit should have acted with
personal malice or negligence. An artificial or juridical
person cannot act with malice or negligence.

(b)

A juridical person, like a corporation, cannot commit a
crime in which a willful purpose or a malicious intent is
required. (West Coast Life Ins. Co. v. Hurd, 27 Phil. 401,
407-408)
507

Art. 16

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 16

(c)

There is substitution of deprivation of liberty (subsidiary
imprisonment) for pecuniary penalties in case of insolvency
of the accused.

salted fish happened to hold an uninsulated portion of an electric
wire of the electric plant managed by C. As the wire was charged
with electricity, the boy was electrocuted and consequently died.

(d)

Other penalties consisting in imprisonment and other
deprivation of liberty, like destierro, can be executed only
against individuals. (Albert)

Held: There is no evidence at all that C directly took part or aided
in the careless installation of the electric wire, a portion ofwh.ich was
negligently left uninsulated by M and his son.

Officers, not the corporation, are criminally liable.
Officers, not the corporation, are criminally liable.
If the crime is committed by a corporation or other juridical
entity, the directors, officers, employees or other officers thereof
responsible for the offense shall be charged and penalized for the
crime, precisely because of the nature of the crime and the penalty
therefor. A corporation cannot be arrested and imprisoned; hence,
cannot be penalized for a crime punishable by imprisonment.(Ong v.
Court ofAppeals, 499 Phil. 691 [2003]; Ching v. Secretary of Justice,
G.R. No. 164317, February 6, 2006)
Since a corporation cannot be proceeded against criminally
because it cannot commit crime in which personal violence or
malicious intent is required, criminal action is limited to the corporate
agents guilty of an act amounting to a crime and never against the
corporation itself. (West Coast Life Ins. Co. v. Hurd, supra)
Juridical persons are criminally liable under certain special laws.
Under B.P. Big. 68 (Corporation Code of the Philippines),
Commonwealth Act No. 146 (Public Service Law), the Securities
Regulation Code, and the Election Code, among others, corporations
may be fined for certain violations of their provisions.
Only the officers of the corporation who participated either as
principals by direct participation or principals by induction or
by cooperation, or as accomplices In the commission of an act
punishable by law are liable.
The partnership of M, A, and B was granted a franchise to
operate an electric plant. C, wife of M, was the manager of the
business. M and his son installed electric wires in the houses of their
customers. A boy who was with his father for the purpose of buying
508

As a general rule, a director or other officer of a corporation
is criminally liable for h.is acts, though in his official capacity, if
he participated in the unlawful act either directly or as an aider,
abettor or accessory, but is not liable criminally for the corporate acts
performed by other officers or agents thereof.
The ruling enunciated in the case of West Coast Life Ins. Co.
v. Hurd, supra, to the effect that criminal actions are restricted
or limited to the officials of a corporation and never against itself,
indicates the procedure to be taken in a criminal action when an
official of a corporation is involved, but does not point his degree of
participation in order to hold him liable for a certain criminal act as
such corporate official. (People v. Abdona A. Montilla, CA., 52 O.G.
4327)
Managing heads, directors or partners are liable for SSS violations
even if there is no evidence of their participation therein.
Section 28D) of the Social Security Law imposes liability for
the penalties provided under said law on: (1) the managing head; (2)
directors; or (3) partners, for offenses committed by a juridical person.
The said provision does not qualify that the director or partner
should likewise be a "managing director" or "managing partner." The
law is clear and unambiguous. (Garcia v. SSS, G.R. No. 170735,
December 17, 2007, 540 SCRA 456, 458)
The term "managing head" in Section 28(f) is used in
its broadest connotation, not to any specific organizational or
managerial nomenclature. To heed petitioner's reasoning would
allow unscrupulous businessmen to conveniently escape liability by
the creative adoption of managerial titles. (Mendoza v. People, G.R.
No. 183891, August 3, 2010)

609

Art. 17

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Partners or officers responsible for NIRC violations are criminally
liable.
Section 153(d) ofthe NIRC states that "in the case of associations,
partnerships or corporations, the penalty shall be imposed on the
partner, president, general manager, branch manager, treasurer,
officer-in-charge, and the employees responsible for the violation."
Directors, trustees or officers responsible for violation of the
Corporation Code are criminally liable.
Section 144 of the Corporation Code states that violations of
the Code shall be punished by a fine of not less than P1,000.00 but
not more than P10,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than 30
days but not more than five years, or both, in the discretion of the
court. If the violation is committed by a corporation, the same may,
after notice and hearing, be dissolved in appropriate proceedings
before the Securities and Exchange Commission: Provided, That such
dissolution shall not preclude the institution of appropriate action
against the director, trustee or officer of the corporation responsible
for said violation.
Passive subject of crime.
The passive subject of a crime is the holder of the injured right:
the man, the juristic person, the group, and the State.
Thus, while a corporation or partnership cannot be the active
subject, it can be a passive subject of a crime.

2.

Art. 17

'Those who directly force or induce others to commit

it.
3. Those who cooperate in the commission of the
offense by another act without which it would not have been
accomplished.

Two or more persons participating In the crime.
When a single individual commits a crime, there is no difficulty
in determining his participation in the commission thereof. In fact, a
single individual committing a crime is always a principal, and one
by direct participation, because he must necessarily take direct part
in the execution of the act.
Thus, when a person kills another, there is no question as to
his participation and liability in the commission of the crime. He is
a principal by direct participation. But when two or more persons
are involved in killing another, it is necessary to determine the
participation of each. If they are all principals, all of them may be
principals by direct participation (Art. 17, par. 1); or one may be a
principal by induction (Art. 17, par. 2); and the other a principal by
direct participation; or one may be a principal by direct participation
and the other a principal by indispensable cooperation (Art. 17, par.
3).

Illustration of the three types of principals.
Corpse or animal cannot be passive subject
Reason: The dead and the animals have no rights that may be
injured.
Exception: Under Article 353, the crime of defamation may be
committed if the imputation tends to blacken the memory of one who
is dead.

A, by promises of price and reward, inducedB to kill C, a person
living on an island far from the mainland. D, the owner of the only
motor boat in the place and knowing the criminal designs of A and
B, offered to transport and actually transported B to the island. Once
there, B alone killed C.
Although he did not actually participate in the killing of C,

A is a principal, because he directly induced B to kill C. B is also a
Art. I7. Principals, - 'The following are considered
principals:
1.

Those who take a direct part in the execution of the

act;
510

principal, because he took direct part in the execution of the felony by
personally killing C. D is also a principal, because he cooperated in
the commission of the offense by another act ( transporting the actual
killer to the island) without which the commission ofthe offense would
not have been accomplished.
511

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Difference between a principal under any of the three categories
enumerated in Article 17 and a co-conspirator.

Two or more persons who took part in the commission of the
crime are principals by direct participation, when the following
requisites are present:

Art. 17

The difference between an accused who is a principal under
any of the three categories enumerated in Article 17 of the R.P.C.
and a co-conspirator who is also a principal is that while the
farmer's criminal liability is limited to his own acts, as a general
rule, the latter's responsibility includes the acts of his fellow conspirators. (People v. Peralta, No. L-19069, October 29, 1968, 25 SCRA
759, 777)

Par. 1. - Principals by direct participation.
"Those who take a direct part in the execution of the act."
"Take a direct part in the execution of the act."

The principal by direct participation personally takes part in the
execution of the act constituting the crime.
Thus, one who shoots at and kills another or one who bums
the house of another, personally executes the act of killing another
or the act ofbuming the house of another. He is a principal by direct
participation in the crime of homicide (unlawfully killing another) or
in the crime of arson (maliciously burning another's property).
One who only orders or induces another to commit a crime is
not a principal by direct participation, because he does not personally
execute the act constituting the crime. It is the one personally
committing the crime in obedience to that order or because of the
inducement, who is the principal by direct participation.
A common-law wife who induced the killing of another commonJaw wife of her husband by giving money to the killer is a principal
by induction, while the killer is a principal by direct participation.
(People v. Lao, No. L-10473, January 28, 1961, 1 SCRA 42, 46-47, 51)
Two or more offenders as principals by direct participation.

Two or more persons may take direct part in the execution of
the act, in which case they may be principals by direct participation.
612

Art. 17

1.

That they participated in the criminal resolution;

2.

That they carried out their plan and personally took part
in its execution by acts which directly tended to the same
end. (People v. Ong Chiat Lay, 60 Phil. 788, 790; People v.
Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 45-46)

Thus, where the two accused each inflicted a serious wound
which contributed to the death of the victim, they arc co-principals.
(People v. Cagod, No. L-36016, January 18, 1978, 81 SCRA 110, 118)
First requisite - Participation in the criminal resolution.
Two or more persons are said to have participated in the criminal
resolution when they were in conspiracy at the time of the commission
of the crime.
It is well-settled that a person may be convicted for the criminal
act of another where, between them, there has been conspiracy or
unity of purpose and intention in the commission of the crime charged.
(People v. Talia, G.R. No. 44414, January 18, 1990, 181 SCRA 133,
148, citing People v. Ibanez, 77 Phil. 664; People v. Serrano, L-45382,
May 13, 1985, 136 SCRA 899)
Conspiracy.

A conspiracy exists when two or more persons come to an
agreement concerning the commission of a felony and decide to commit
it. (Art. 8, par. 2)
The conspiracy contemplated in the first requisite is not a felony,
but only a manner of incurring criminal liability.
To be a party to a conspiracy, one must have the intention to participate
in the transaction with a view to the furtherance of the common design
and purpose.
In order to hold an accused guilty as co-principal by reason of
conspiracy, it must be established that he performed an overt act
in furtherance of the conspiracy, either by actively participating in
the actual commission of the crime, or by lending moral assistance
513

Art. 17

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

to his co-conspirators by being present at the scene of the crime, or
by exerting moral ascendancy over the rest of the conspirators as to
move them to executing the conspiracy. (People v. Cortez, No. L-31106,
May 31, 1974, 57 SCRA 308,316, citing People v. Peralta, L- 19069,
October 29, 1968, 25 SCRA 759, 777; People v. Tumalip, No. L-28451,
October 28, 1974, 60 SCRA 303, 318)

Proof of conspiracy.

a.

Mere knowledge, acquiescence, or approval of the act without
cooperation or agreement to cooperate is not enough to constitute one a
party to a conspiracy, but that there must be intentional participation
in the transaction with a view to the furtherance of the common
design and purpose. (People v. lzon, 104 Phil. 690, 697-698, citing 15
C.J.S. 1062; People v. Cortez, supra; Taer v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 85204, June 18, 1990, 186 SCRA 598, 604)

Silence is not a circumstance indicating participation in the
same criminal design. (People v. Gensola, No. L-24491, September
30, 1969, 29 SCRA 483, 489)
Conspiracy transcends companionship.

It has been held that conspiracy transcends companionship.
Hence, the fact that the two accused may have happened to leave
together, and one of them left a closing warning to the victim, cannot
instantly support a finding of conspiracy. (People v. Padrones, G.R.
No. 85823, September 13, 1990, 189 SCRA 496, 506-507)
Existence of conspiracy.

The direct evidence of conspiracy may consist in the
interlocking extrajudicial confessions of several accused
and the testimony of one of the accused who is discharged
and made a witness against his co-accused who did not
make any confession.
In the absence of collusion among the declarants,
their confessions may form a complete picture of the
whole situation and may be considered collectively
as corroborative and/or confirmatory of the evidence
independent therefrom. (People u. Castelo, No. L-10774,
May 30, 1964, 11 SCRA 193, 221-222)

b.
Silence does not make one a conspirator.

Art. 17

To establish conspiracy, it is not essential that there be
proofs as to the previous agreement and decision to commit
the crime, it being sufficient that the malefactors shall have
acted in concert pursuant to the same objective. (People v.
San Luis, 86 Phil. 485, 497; People v. Carpio, G.R. Nos.
82815-16, October 31, 1990, 191 SCRA 108, 118; People
o. Cruz, Jr., G.R. No. 86217, October 31, 1990, 191 SCRA
127, 135; People v. Sazon, G.R. No. 89684, September 18,
1990, 189 SCRA 700, 713)

Formal agreement or previous acquaintance among several persons
not necessary in conspiracy.

In conspiracy, no formal agreement among the conspirators is
necessary. not even previous acquaintance among themselves; it is
sufficient that their minds meet understandingly so as to bring about
an intelligent and deliberate agreement to commit the offense charged.

The existence of conspiracy does not require necessarily an
agreement for an appreciable length of time prior to the execu lion of
its purpose, since from the legal viewpoint, conspiracy exists if, at
the time of the commission of the offense, the accused had the same
purpose and were united in its execution. (People v. Binasing, et al.,
98 Phil. 908)

It is sufficient that at the time of the aggression, all the accused
manifested by their acts a common intent or desire to attack so that
the act of one accused becomes the act of all. (People v. Gupo, G.R.
No. 75814, September 24, 1990, 190 SCRA 7, 18)

Conspiracy arises on the very instant the plotters agree, expressly
or impliedly, to commit the felony and forthwith decide to pursue it.
Once this assent is established, each and everyone of the conspirators
is made criminally liable for the crime actually committed by anyone
of them. (People v. Monroy, 104 Phil. 759, 764; People • Tall@, G.R.
No. 44414, January 18, 1990, 181 SCRA 133, 148)

Conspiracy need not be proved by direct evidence. It need not be
shown that the parties actually came together and agreed in express
terms to enter into and pursue a common design. The assent of the
minds may be and, from the secrecy of the crime, usually inferred
from proof of facts and circumstances which, taken together, indicate
that they arc parts of some complete whole. If it is proved that two

514

515

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

or more persons aimed, by their acts, at the accomplishment of the
same unlawful object, each doing a part so that their acts, though
apparently independent, were in fact connected and cooperative,
indicating a closeness of personal association and a concurrence of
sentiment, a conspiracy may be inferred though no actual meeting
among them to concert ways and means is proved. (People v. Mateo,
Jr., G.R. Nos. 53926-29, November 13, 1989, 179 SCRA 303, 320,
citing People v. Carbonell, 48 Phil. 868)

of the accused in the fancied cabal. (People v. Furugganan, C.R. Nos.
90191-96, January 28, 1991, 193 SCRA 471, 481; People v. Cruz, G.R.
No. 74048, November 14, 1990, 191 SCRA 377, 384)

Thus, when it is shown that all the accused were already armed
when they met, and that they went together in a jeep to the place where
they robbed the house of the offended party and raped his maids, their
conspiracy is implied. Their conspiracy is implied, notwithstanding
the claim of some of the accused that their participation therein was
only of having accompanied the other accused who had requested
them to show the house of the offended party. (People v. Garduque,
G.R. No. L-10133, July 31, 1958 (Unrep.J)
Conspiracy is shown where the offenders were all present at
the scene of the crime, acted in concert in attacking the victims,
assaulting and beating them up and chasing them and stabbing
them and in divesting them of their watches, gold rings and money,
and after the bloody slayings were done, they fled from the scene and
went their separate ways. By their concerted actions, they showed
that they acted in unison and cooperated with each other towards
the accomplishment of a common felonious purpose which was to rob
and kill the victims. (People v. Catubig, G.R. No. 71626, March 22,
1991, 195 SCRA 505, 516; People v. Carcedo, G.R. No. 48085, June
26, 1991, 198 SCRA 503, 517)
Conspiracy must be established by positive and conclusive evidence.
But while conspiracy may be implied from the circumstances
attending the commission of the crime, it is nevertheless a rule that
conspiracy must be established by positive and conclusive evidence.
(People v. Ancheta, 66 Phil. 638, 644)

Art. 17

Thus, where the defendant satisfactorily explained his presence
with the group that committed the robbery, he cannot be considered a
conspirator. (People v. Rico, CA-G.R. No. 3019-R, January 12, 1950)
Thus, too, mere presence at the scene of the crime at the time
of its commission is not by itself sufficient to establish conspiracy.
(People v. Taaca, G.R. No. 35652, September 29, 1989, 178 SCRA 56,
70)
In order to hold an accused guilty as co-principal by reason of
conspiracy, it must be established that he performed an overt act in
furtherance of the conspiracy, either by actively participating in the
actual commission of the crime, or by lending moral assistance to
his co-conspirators by being present at the scene of the crime, or by
exerting moral ascendancy over the rest of the conspirators as to move
them to executing the conspiracy. (People v. Peralta, No. L-19069,
October 29, 1968, 25 SCRA 759, 777)
When there is no conspiracy, each of the offenders is liable only
for the act performed by him.
When policeman Machica approached Guarino and Terencia
who were quarreling and told them to stop the fight, Guarino stabbed
Machica and ran away. Policeman Campos who pursued Guarino
overtook the latter and took him to the municipal building where
policeman Boco hit Guarino. Then, Chief of Police Castillo came and
shot to death Guarino in the presence of Machica, Campos and Boco
who had inflicted serious physical injuries on Guarino.

The same degree of proof necessary to establish the crime is
required to establish a finding of criminal conspiracy, that is, proof
beyond reasonable doubt. It cannot be established by conjectures
but by positive and conclusive evidence. Since conspiracy must be
proved beyond per adventure of a doubt, it follows that it cannot be
appreciated where the facts can be consistent with the nonparticipation

There was no competent proof that Machica, Campos and Boca
wanted or intended to kill Guarino. There was no previous indication
that Castillo intended to kill Guarino. Castillo just drew out his gun
and fired, and Machica, Campos and Boca could not have stopped it
even if they wanted to. There being no conspiracy or unity of purpose
and intention among the four, Machica, Campos and Boca did not
participate in the criminal resolution of Castillo. Only Castillo
who shot Guarino to death was found guilty of murder qualifed by
treachery. Machica, Campos and Boca were held liable for serious
physical injuries only. (People u. Castillo, 103 Phil. 1168 [Unrep.])

516

517

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Criminal Law
Participation in criminal resolution essential.

It is not enough that a person participated in the assault made by
another in order to consider him a co-principal in the crime committed.
He must also participate in the criminal resolution of the other.
The cooperation which the law punishes is the assistance which
is knowingly or intentionally given and which is not possible without
previous knowledge ofthe criminal purpose. (People v. Cruz, G.R. No.
74048, November 14, 1990, 191 SCRA 377, 385)
In the crime of homicide, immediate participation in the criminal
design entertained by the slayer is essential to the responsibility of
one who is alleged to have taken a direct part in the killing, but who
has not himself inflicted an injury materially contributing to the
death. (People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 46)
People v. Ortiz and Zausa
(55 Phil. 995)
Facts: Sotero Bancoyo, the deceased, and accused Ortiz and Zausa had
known one another for many years at the time the crime was committed, for
his wife and that of Ortiz were sisters. About noon September 8, 1930, the
deceased accompanied by three laborers, companions of his, was returning
from a plantation belonging to Pio Brionson carrying some corn he had
gathered; on reaching the house preceding that of the accused, as he felt
thirsty, he attempted to ask the occupants for water, but as they happened to
be absent, he went to the house of the accused, and while in front of the house
called out to Ortiz for a drink of water. The latter answered from within that
they had no water and could not serve him, to which the deceased replied:
"May we not drink your water?" Ortiz rejoined, "But we have no water. How
can you compel us to give you some water?" And immediately afterwards he

descended from the house carrying his shotgun, which he pointed at the
deceased. When the latter saw the aggressive attitude of Ortiz, he flung

himself upon him, caught hold of the weapon, and they both struggled for it.

Art. 17

commit the crime. In this [the Court) believe the defense is right. It has been
indisputably shown by the ante mortem statement (Exhibit D) that while the
deceased and Ortiz were struggling for the shotgun, Modesta Zausa caught
up the spear, hurried downstairs, approached the deceased, and suddenly
stabbed him with it. From this, it appears that there was no plan or agreement
between them to carry out the attack which ended in the death of the victim,
and that from the time Modesta Zausa thought of wounding the deceased to
the time she actually did so, barely a few seconds elapsed, and this interval
is palpably insufficient to give rise to the criminal agreement alleged in the
information.

In United States v. Magcomot, 13 Phil. 386,390, it was held: "In
the absence of a previous plan or agreement to commit a crime the
criminal responsibility arising from different acts directed against
one and the same person is individual and not collective, and each of
the participants is liable only for the acts committed by himself."
In United States v. Reyes and Javier, 14 Phil. 27 (Syllabus), one
of the defendants, named Reyes, suddenly and unexpectedly inflicted
certain mortal wounds with his club upon one Legaspi, while the
latter was being held by Javier, the other defendant. It was held:
"That Javier was neither principal nor accomplice in the commission
of the crime of homicide of which Reyes was convicted, it appearing
that there was no concerted action between him and his co-defendant,
that he had no reason to believe that a homicidal attack was about to
be made, and that, in holding Legaspi, he was voluntarily cooperating
therein."

In these cases, there was no anterior conspiracy. There was no
unity ofpurpose and intention immediately before the commission of
the crime. Hence, their criminal responsibility is individual.
In the absence ofconcerted action pursuant to a common criminal
design, each of the accused is responsible only for the consequences
of his own acts.

At this juncture, Modesta Zausa, companion of Blas Ortiz, took a spear from

according to the facts, there was no previous agreement between them to

Thus, in a case where one accused inflicted the mortal wound
by stabbing the victim with a knife while the other two assailants
merely hit the victim with a bamboo on the left arm and the head,
the former was held guilty of murder while the latter was held liable
only for lesiones leves or slight physical injuries. In still another case
where two persons attacked a single victim, one inflicting a fatal
wound hacking the victim with a bolo, almost amputating the left

518

519

within the house, rushed down and with it attacked the deceased stabbing
him on the left side of the abdomen, so that the intestines protruded. (Dying
declaration) The deceased fell to the ground unconscious, was assisted, and

that night died of peritonitis.
Held: The defense contends that Ortiz should be acquitted, because
he did not take part in the attack made by Modesta Zausa, and because,

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

arm completely, while the other also using a bolo, struck the victim
just below the armpit causing a wound that would heal in 10 days,
the one who inflicted the mortal wound was convicted of murder while
the other, only of less serious physical injuries. (Araneta, Jr. v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 43527, July 3, 1990, 187 SCRA 123, 133)

conspiracy among the three. They were not armed. They did nothing
to help their co-appellant. Their mere passive presence at the scene
of the crime did not make them liable either as co-principals or
accomplices. (People v. Madera, No. L-35133, May 31, 1974, 57 SCRA
349, 355)

No conspiracy, as shown by the acts of the defendant.

Conspiracy shown by circumstances.

1. After the appellant had stabbed the deceased, he
immediately ran away, so that when his brother Mauricio cut off
the head of the deceased, the appellant was no longer present. If
the appellant had agreed with his brother to liquidate the deceased,
instead of fleeing after he had stabbed the latter on the arm, he would
have stayed and finished the deceased by himself or with Mauricio.
The mere act of the appellant in stabbing the deceased once cannot
conclusively prove conspiracy. It results that the appellant should be
held answerable only for his individual act. (People v. Quiosay, 103
Phil. 1160-1161 Unrep.J

1.
Before the commission of the crime, Nelson drew Sumpay
aside and said, "It is a good thing that you are here, because we are
planning an idea (sic) to kill Varela"; while Norman said, "Let us
stab (buno) Jesus Varela." Sumpay protested: "Why should we stab
him when I do not even know him and he has no fault?" and Norman
(now appellant) retorted: "Just go with me because he has committed
a fault against me."

Art. 17

2.
The gunshot wound inflicted by one of the accused being
slight which did not cause the death of the victim nor materially
contribute to it in order that he may be held liable for homicide, his
liability is limited to the slight injury he caused. Since the use of a
gun fired at another shows intent to kill, he is liable for attempted
homicide and not merely for slight physical injury. (Araneta, Jr. v.
Court ofAppeals, supra, at 133-134)
3.
The spontaneity of the respective reactions of several
accused, resulting in an attack where they all participated, rules
out the existence of conspiracy. Their respective liabilities shall be
determined by the nature of their individual participations in the
felonious act. Thus, two of them who cooperated in the execution of
the offense by simultaneous acts which, although not indispensable
to the commission of the offense, bore a relation to the acts done by
the principals and supplied material or moral aid in the execution of
the crime in an efficacious way, aware of the criminal intent of the
principals, are liable only as accomplices. (People v. Lacao, Sr., G.R.
No. 95320, September 4, 1991, 201 SCRA 317, 329, 330-331)

Art. 17

Held: The presence of both brothers at the place and time of
the attack on Varela; their remark to Sumpay just before the crime
was committed; the assault on the deceased by Nelson Vinas, who
had no personal reason to hear any grudge against said Varela, were
circumstances showing that both brothers had conspired to carry out
the killing. (People v. Vinas, No. L-21756, October 28, 1968, 25 SCRA
682, 687)
2.
These are tell-tale indicia ofa community of design to kill:
close relationship among the three accused brothers and nephew; their
common desire to avenge the wrong done to their father (grandfather
in the case of the third accused); their going together to the latter's
house at lunchtime all armed; their concerted beating of the victim;
their act of bringing him to the yard ofone of the brother's house, with
said brother dragging the victim and the other two accused, father
and son, thrusting their rifles at his body, thus showing that he was
their common captive; and their presence at the yard when policemen
arrived thereat to investigate the killing. (People v. Manzano, Nos.
L-33643-44, July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA 250, 259)

4.
The fact that two of the appellants were standing behind
their co-appellant when the latter fired shots at the victim, did not
make them liable for the act of the latter, there being no proofof any

3.
There was conspiracy under these facts: the four accused
were together in the yard of the victim's house when one of them
called him and deceived him as to their purpose in awakening him at
three o'clock in the morning. They were together when they rushed
inside his house. As if implementing a previously rehearsed plan,
two of them assaulted him, the third took the money, and the fourth

520

521

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

stod guard. They left the house together after they had accomplished
their malevolent mission. The four appellants were linked to each
other by friendship or some sort of relationship. (People v. Salling,
No. L-27974, February 27, 1976, 69 SCRA 427, 443)
4.
Conspiracy may be shown by the appellants' actuations
immediately prior to, during, and right after the shooting of the victim,
as when they were not merely present at the scene of the crime but
were positively identified as among the armed men who arrived there,
shot the victim, and left together after accomplishing their purpose,
notwithstanding that they were not active participants in the killing
itself, but made no effort to prevent it, and in fact, drew their guns
that were tucked on their waists when the victim, after being shot
for the first time, tried to run. (People u. Umbrero, G.R. No. 93021,
May 8, 1991, 196 SCRA 821, 829-830)
5.
The following circumstances prove the existence of
conspiracy among the appellant and the other two accused: (1) the
presence of all the accused at the same time in an isolated area
where the killing took place; (2) the existence of five holes from each
of which each of the five accused emerged; (3) all five of the accused
were armed with shotguns or "pugakhar,g"; (4) after the victims fell
when fired upon by all of them, all the accused simultaneously came
out of hiding and scampered to the thickets. (People v. Agudez, G.R.
No. 138386, May 20, 2004)
People v. Timbol
(G.R. Nos. 47471-47473, August 4, 1944)
Facts: Gregorio Timbol, Carmelino Timbol, Dalmacio Timbol, and
Geronimo Buan were accused of the complex crime of assault upon an agent
of authority with murder.
The accused were armed and were menacingly pressing their demand

for the approval of the 60-40 participation in the mill, which had been denied
by the Board of Directors of Pasudeco. Subsequently, Capt. Olivas who was
then present, said that, as peace officer, it was his duty to give De Leon and
Gonzales protection. Gregorio Timbol drew his gun and shot Capt. Olivos at

his back. Gregorio Timbol then shot De Leon. Buan shot Gonzales. Carmelino
with teargas gun planted himself at the door out of the room to forestall any
help that might be attempted on behalf of the victims. Dalmacio Timbol was
not present during the shooting, because when his confederates were in the
threatening attitude, he left the room.
522

TITLE TWO

Art. 17

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies
Held: The conspiracy in the instant case appears conclusively to have

been proved by the following circumstances: (I) On July 2, 1939, Gregorio
invited Buan to a "good time" in Manila; (2)On July 6, Gregorio and Carmelino
came together to Manila. Gregorio bought a teargas gun. He wrote a special
delivery letter inviting Dalmacio to see him without fail on July 8, the same

date indicated to Buan; (3) On the appointed date, July 8, the four accused
came together to Manila; (4) All of them carried firearms fully loaded; (5)
Together, the four accused occupied one room in the Central Hotel and threw
themselves into an orgy; dancing, drinking, gambling, and hiring prostitutes,
all the expenses having been defrayed by Gregorio; (6) The four accused,
again together, returned to Pampanga on July 12, and upon reaching San
Fernando, together they went to the Pikes Hotel to embolden themselves

with whisky; (7) About half an hour later and after making a redistribution
of firearms among themselves, all of them together left the hotel, went to
the Pasudeco offices, and entered the office of the President, Jose de Leon;
(8) Afte r a discussion with De Leon and Gonzales, accused Gregorio Timbol
ordered them not to leave the office until his petition for a 60-40 participation
shall have been acted upon favorably; (9) When the three victims were killed,
the three accused fled, again together.
All these circumstances demonstrate conspiracy.

Conspiracy is implied when the accused had a common purpose
and were united in its execution.
There is unity of purpose and unity of execution establishing
conspiracy in this case: (1)a slapping incident preceded the shooting,
wherein the deceased slapped the face of one of the appellants; (2)
before the two groups could engage in a physical clash, they were
pacified by the carinderia owner who later flagged a taxicab for the
three accused; (3) the three boarded the taxicab leaving with the
slapped accused's parting words, "Pare hintay kayo, babalik kami";
(4) they then proceeded to Unimart Greenhills arriving at the post of
a security guard whom they persuaded to lend them his carbine; (5) in
borrowing the gun, they all signed the logbook and when the carbine
was being handed to them, they were grabbing it; (6) after receiving
the gun, they again boarded the same taxicab and returned to the
carinderia; (7) upon arrival, gunshot were fired from the taxicab with
the three accused on board, hitting the victims; (8) after having fired
at the victims, the three returned the weapon, and proceeded to the
headquarters of the Rizal Security and Protective Agency, to which
they belonged, where they narrated the incident. (People v. Damaso,
G.R. Nos. 41490-92, October 18, 1990, 190 SCRA 595, 612)
523

Art. 17

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

attitude, the deceased was struck on the upper lip
with a whip in the hands by B. At this moment, C
seized the deceased by the left hand and D seized him
by the right. While the deceased was still inclining
backwards with his hands held fast by C and D, E
placed himself in front of the deceased and plunged a
knife into the body of the latter. The injury inflicted
by E was almost instantly fatal, the deceased dying
immediately without speak..ing a word.

People v. Delgado
(77 Phil. 11)
Facts: While Restituto Bragat and Ramon Chavez were occupying a
table in a store, the three accused arrived. All of a sudden, accused Juanito

Trinidad gave Bragat a fist blow on the back of his neck followed by another
to the mouth which blows sent him to the ground. In the meantime, accused

Edwin Delgado held Chavez by the shirt and accused Ricardo Villanueva
joined in hitting Braget. Braget tried to run away, but he was overtaken by

the three accused, was boxed by Delgado, and the three accused trampled
on Bragat's body. The appearance of the police made the three accused run
away.

Held: There was no proof sufficient to establish
anything like an anterior conspiracy. But the manner
in which the accused cooperated in the perpetration
of the homicide shows that they were moved by
a common motive and that their intention was to
accomplish the death of the deceased.

Held: The community of purpose on the part of the three accused is
plainly inferable from these circumstances; (1) The three accused came
together to the scene of the occurrence; (2) While accused Trinidad struck
the first blow, accused Delgado held Chavez, and accused Villanueva
unsuccessfully attempted to hit Bragat; (3) As Bragat tried to run away, he
was pursued by the accused who trampled on his body after he had been
boxed by Delgado; (4) The three accused together left Bragat unconscious on
the ground and, together also, they went to the house of Pepe Ybanez.

Simultaneity per se is not a badge of conspiracy,
absent the requisite concurrence of wills. It is not
sufficient that the attack is joint and simultaneous; it
is necessary that the assailants are animated by one
and the same purpose. Evidently, in a situation where
the assaults were not simultaneous but successive,
greater proof is demanded to establish concert of
criminal design. (People o. Twidad, No. L-21469, June
30, 1967, 20 SCRA 549,555)

Unity of purpose and Intention in the commission of the crime is
shown in the following cases;
a.

Spontaneous agreement at the moment of the commission of
the crime is sufficient to create joint responsibility. (People
v. Allado, 43 0.G. 1717, citing People v. Caballero, 53 Phil.
585)
Example: Thus, where the deceased challenged
the two accused, who accepted, assaulted and k..illed the
challenger, it was said that the acceptance of the challenge
by the two accused and their concert ofattack clearly showed
a community of purpose and design. (People v. Ibanez, 77
Phil. 664, 665-667, citing Vada, December ofJune 13, 1904)

b.

Active cooperation by all the offenders in the perpetration
of the crime will also creatcjoint responsibility.
(1)

On the occasion of a huego de anillo, where a number
of people was present, A stepped up behind the
deceased and struck him on the back of the head
with a piece of wood. The deceased reeled under the
blow and turned inclining backwards. While in this
524

Art. 17

(2)

People v. Macabuhay, 46 0.G., No. 11.
Facts: A, B,C, D, and E were in the house of F.
Someone threw a stone towards that house. Then,
all the five marched to the residence of G, 40 yards
away, to avenge the stone-throwing. In the house of
G, they found the deceased. Suspecting the deceased
as the person who threw the stone, the four of them
suddenly seized and held fast the said victim and
the 5th stabbed the victim who died thereafter. The
common motive is to avenge the stone-throwing.
Held: A, B, C, D, and E were all liable as
principals by direct participation for the death of the
deceased.
525

TITLE TW O

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 17

(3)

A carried the gun from his house to a certain place
accompanied by his son D to look for C. In that place,
D waited for C and, when the latter was coming, A
handed his shotgun to D. D fired at C, killing him
then and there. Is A liable as principal or merely as
an accomplice?

People v. Cruz, Jr., G.R. No. 86217, October 31, 1990,
191 SCRA 127, 135.
The fact of conspiracy is well-established where
one of the appellant's companions announced the
holdup while the rest took the personal effects of the
victims, the appellant himself drawing out a bladed
weapon and proceeding to rob the victims as well.

(4)

Where the homicide was committed by the act of
one of the two accused in shooting the deceased with
a gun which was supplied by his co-accused, father of
the actual slayer, and where it also appeared that the
latter contributed to the commission of the homicide
by various other significant acts, it was held that both
father and son were properly convicted as principals
in the crime.

People v. Carpio, G.R. Nos. 82815-16, October 31,
1990, 191 SCRA 108, 118.
Conspiracy is manifested in the coordinated acts
of the assailants, of one of them holding the hand of
the victim while another was stabbing him and a
third delivering fist blows on different parts of the
body of the victim, and, when the victim was able to
escape, of giving chase and the first accused shooting
the deceased five times.

c.

Contributing by positive acts to the realization ofa common
criminal intent also creates joint responsibility.
(1)

People v. Octa, G.R. No. 195196, July 13, 2015.
Where the accused-appellant was the one who
received the ransom money, then the commonality of
purpose of the acts of accused-appellant together with
the other accused can no longer be denied. Such acts
have the common design or purpose to commit the
felony of kidnapping for ransom. Accused-appellant
is liable as a principal for being a co-conspirator in
the crime of Kidnapping for Ransom.

(2)

People v. Agbuya, 57 Phil. 238.
For several years, marked enmity existed
between two families, the Palisocs and Agbuyas.
A and D belonged to the Agbuya family, while C
belonged to the Palisoc family.
A, preparatory to the commission of the crime,
cleaned his shotgun. While cleaning his shotgun,
A inquired from D whether he had seen C. Later,
526

Art. 17

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

There was a common criminal intent in this case,
because there was bad blood between the Agbuyas
and the Palisocs and the father and son took common
cause.
(3)

People v. Mancao, 49 Phil. 887.
The accused Crispino Mancao was the instigator
and aggressor, Roberto Villela having done nothing
but to defend himself, first disarming the former of
his stick with which he was assaulted, and later of his
bolo which he used after having been deprived of his
stick. Roberto Villela might have had the advantage
in the fight had not one of Crispino Mancao's laborers
come to his rescue, upon his cry for help, and struck
Roberto Villela on the thigh; then another man of
Mancao struck Roberto Villela several times on the
left knee, and, lastly, the accused Ciriaco Aguilar
struck Roberto Villela several blows on the back with
his sickle, one of which nearly severed his spine in
the lumbar region which later caused his death.
Held: While it is true that the wounds which
caused Roberto Villela's death were not inflicted
by Crispino Mancao but by his co-accused Ciriaco
Aguilar, yet said Crispino Mancao, having been
the instigator and aggressor and having called his
527

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 17

harvesters to his aid, among them the said Ciriaco
Aguilar, wanted them to carry out, as in fact they did,
the criminal act started by him and, therefore, he is
liable not only for his own acts, but also for the acts
of those who aided him.
Mancao contributed the following positive acts:
(1) his being the instigator, (2) his being the aggressor,

and (3) his having called his harvesters.
The common criminal intent is shown by the
unity of purpose and intention of all the offenders.
d.

Presence during the commission of the crime by a band
and lending moral support thereto, also create joint
responsibility with the material executors.
(1)

U.S. v. Ancheta, 1 Phil. 165.
There were seven defendants in this case. They
had conducted the deceased to a certain place and
there, by order of A and B, the deceased was killed
by C,DandE. Fand G posted themselves with A and
Bat some distance to watch the approach of any one,
in order to prevent the discovery of the crime.
Held: All of them by previously concerted action,
met together and witnessed the capture and later, the
violent killing of the deceased. Some took a direct part
in the actual commission of the crime, others were
determined instigators who induced the former to
commit it, while the remainder cooperated in the same
by their presence and lending their moral support. The
four who were not the actual perpetrators thereof,
witnessed the commission of the crime, lending to the
murderers their moral support and, therefore, all are
thus directly responsible for the consequences and
incidents of the same.

(2)

U.S. v. Santos, 2 Phil. 453.
Facts: A band composed of some 25 men
succeeded in capturing five American soldiers and
subsequently took them to a certain place and
528

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

detained them in a house there. Five of the band,
among them the accused, subsequently took the
Americans from the house in which they were living
and led them away. The Americans were killed by two
members of the band in the presence of the accused
and the other three of the same band.
Held: It is of no importance that the accused
did not himself strike the blow or blows by which
the prisoners were killed. It is sufficient that he was
present at the place of the commission of the act,
augmenting with his arms and presence the power of
the band, thus aiding the common act of all, for him
to be considered as a principal by direct participation
in the crime prosecuted.
Note: There is a band in these cases. This circumstance is presumptive of a previous understanding
between one offender and the others who formed the
band, whereby he voluntarily lent his assistance of
thought and action for the realization of the criminal
object, increasing at least with his personal cooperation, in an effective manner, the offensive strength
of said band. (U.S. u. Asilo, 4 Phil. 175, 176)
Conspiracy is presumed when the crime is
committed by a band.
Where the accused was a member of a band
that appeared at the house of the deceased for the
purpose of killing the latter, as he was in fact killed
by two of the shots fired by some members of the
band, the accused is liable for the resulting homicide
although there was no evidence that he fired a shot
at the deceased. (U.S. • Asilo, 4 Phil. 175, 176; U.S.
v. Perez, 13 Phil. 287, 291)
But where at the start of the encounter between
the constabulary forces and an insurgent band, the
accused, who was with the band, fled from the scene
of the fight and did not take part therein, he is not
criminally liable. (U.S. v. Fresnido, 4 Phil. 522, 525)
529

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Where the robbery was committed by a band,
all the members of the band are presumed to be
conspirators or co-principals also in the assaults
committed by the band unless he who claims to
be a non-conspirator proves that he attempted to
prevent the assault. In the absence of a showing
that appellants attempted to prevent the killing of
the victim, they are equally guilty of his death at
the hands of their companions. (People v. Bazar, No.
L41829,June 27, 1988, 162 SCRA 609, 617; People v.
Cinco, G.R. No. 79497, February 27, 1991, 194 SCRA
535, 543)
e.

Where one of the accused knew of the plan of the others
to kill the two victims and he accepted the role assigned
to him, which was to shoot one of the victims, and he
actually performed that role, he is a co-principal by direct
participation in the double murder. (People v. De la Cruz,
100 Phil. 624, 632-633)

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

the outset planned, and thereafter concurred with and participated
in the execution of the criminal design. They are liable as principals
in the crime of Kidnapping with Ransom. (People v. Salvador, G.R.
No. 201443, April 10, 2013)
There may be conspiracy even If there Is no evident premeditation
on the part of the accused.

Although the presence of Sinarimbo's 10-year-old child, and
the fact that appellants were unarmed may indicate lack of evident
premeditation on their part, these circumstances and the others do
not necessarily negate the existence of conspiracy for the same does
not require necessarily an agreement for an appreciable time prior
to the occurrence. From the legal viewpoint, conspiracy exists if, at
the time of the commission of the offense, the accused had the same
purpose and were united in its execution. (People v. Binasing, 98 Phil.
902, 908, citing U.S. • Ancheta, 1 Phil. 165; U.S. • Santos, 2 Phil.
453; People v. Mandagay, 46 Phil. 838; People v. Agbuya, 57 Phil.
238; People v. Ibanez, 77 Phil. 664; People v. Macabuhay, 83 Phil.
464; People v. San Luis, 86 Phil. 485)

Ownership of safe house.

The general rule is that absent his knowledge, consent or
concurrence in the criminal design, the owner of a place, which was
used to detain kidnapped victims, cannot necessarily be considered
as either a conspirator or an accomplice in the crime of kidnapping
for ransom.

Liability of participants where there is conspiracy.

Where there is conspiracy, the act ofone is the act of all. There
is collective criminal responsibility.
Where it appears that the defendants, after conspiring together
to kill the deceased, went to his house for the purpose of carrying
out their common intent and prepared to cooperate to that end, and
some of them actually killed the deceased, while the others posted
themselves around the building ready to prevent his escape or render
any assistance which might be necessary, all will be held equally guilty
as principals irrespective of the individual participation of each in
the material act of the murder. (U.S. v. Bundal, 3 Phil. 89)

In a conspiracy to commit the crime of kidnapping for ransom,
the place where the victim is to be detained is logically a primary
consideration. In the case of the accused, their house in Lum bang
Street, Amparo Subdivision has a basement. It can be reasonably
inferred that the house fitted the purpose of the kidnappers. The
victim's detention was accomplished not solely by reason of the
restraint exerted upon him by the presence of guards in the safehouse,
but by the circumstance of being put in a place where escape became
highly improbable. In other words, the accused were indispensable in
the kidnapping of the victim because they knowingly and purposely
provided the venue to detain the victim. The accused-spouses'
ownership of the safehouse, the husband's presence therein during
the victim's arrival on the evening ofApril 7, 2002 and the wife's visits
to bring food reasonably indicate that they were among those who at

Where conspiracy has been adequately proven, all the
conspirators are liable as co-principals regardless of the extent and
character of their participation because in contemplation of law, the
act of one is the act of all. The degree of actual participation by each
of the conspirators is immaterial. As conspirators, each is equally
responsible for the acts of their co-conspirators. (People v. De la
Cruz, G.R. No. 83798, March 29, 1990, 183 SCRA 763, 778; People

530

531

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

v. Carcedo, G.R. No. 48085, June 26, 1991, 198 SCRA 503, 517-518;
People v. Alvarez, G.R. No. 88451, September 5, 1991, 201 SCRA 364,
380)

ed., 1077) In United States v. Patten, the Court said: 'Conspirators
who join in a criminal attack on a defenseless man with dangerous
weapons, knock him down, and when he tries to escape, pursue him
with increased numbers, and continue the assault, are liable for
manslaughter when the victim is killed by a knife wound inflicted
by one of them during the beating, although in the beginning they
did not contemplate the use of a knife.' " (People v. Enriquez, 58 Phil.
536, 542-543)

Art. 17

Liability of a conspirator for another conspirator's acts which differ
radically and substantially from that which they intended to commit.
A conspirator should necessarily be liable for the acts of another
conspirator even though such acts differ radically and substantially
from that which they intended to commit. (See People v. Enriquez,
58 Phil. 536; People v. Rosario, 68 Phil. 720)
In a case, the Supreme Court said:
"Upon the circumstance that the wound made with the
knife on the leg of the person assaulted was the primary cause of
death and that the author of this injury has not been identified,
the attorneys for the accused chiefly planted their defense, and
in this connection it is insisted that the conspiracy to attack
Gines contemplated only beating him up and did not include
the infliction of injury by means of a cutting instrument. Such
an act, so it is said, was not within the scope of the agreement;
and it is insisted that only the individual who inflicted the cut
(wound) could be held responsible for the death, if that person
were known. It results, in this view, that none of the appellants
can be held liable further than for the bruises inflicted by means
of the iron bars. These injuries, so it is claimed, would in the
natural course of events have been curable in a few days.
"(The Court] [is] of the opinion that this contention is not tenable.
The accused had undoubtedly conspired to do grave personal injury to
the deceased, and now that the injuries actually inflicted have resulted
in death, they cannot escape from the legal effect of their acts on the
ground that one of the wounds was inflicted in a different way from
that which had been intended. A blow inflicted by one of the small
iron bars used in this assault might well have resulted in the taking
of life, and the circumstance that a knife was also used in striking
the deceased does not relieve the appellants from the consequence of
their joint acts. As has been said by the Supreme Court of the United
States, 'If a number of persons agree to commit, and enter upon the
commission of a crime which will probably endanger human life
such as robbery, all of them are responsible for the death of a person
that ensues as a consequence.' (Boyd v. U.S., 142; U.S., 450; 35 Law
632

Art. 17

And in another case: "There is no question that the four
assailants acted in conspiracy with each other. This was evident from
the time they went to Bernardo's house pretending to look for a lost
carabao and, more convincingly, when they moved in concert to kill
Bernardo even as the two witnesses were pulled away by the hair,
after which all four of them fled together. As conspirators, they are
each liable for the attack on Bernardo, regardless of who actually
pulled the trigger or wielded the club that killed him." (People v.
Espiritu, G.R. No. 80406, November 20, 1990, 191 SCRA 503, 507)
Suppose that three persons conspired to commit robbery only,
but in the course of the robbery one of them killed an inmate of the
house, must all of them be held liable for robbery with homicide?
It seems that the others must not be held responsible for the
homicide which was not contemplated in their conspiracy and in
which they did not take part. The reason for this opinion is that
Article 296 of the R.P.C. defines the liability of the offenders in
robbery if committed by a band, that is, any member of a band
(at least four armed men) is liable for any assault committed
by the other member of the band, unless it be shown that he
attempted to prevent the same.
Hence, if the robbers are only three, or even more than
three but not more than three are armed, Article 296 is not
applicable and the robber who does not take part in the assault
is not liable therefor.
Where there Is conspiracy to commit a felony, all the conspirators
are liable for its consequences.

It is argued for appellant Barauel that inasmuch as there was
no conspiracy to kill Acuna, and inasmuch as Barauel only hit him
with an iron bar, the latter may not be held responsible for the death.
533

THE REVJSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Held: Since there was conspiracy to punish Acuna, and the
death of Acuna resulted, all the conspirators are responsible for the
consequences that arose from the punishment. (People u. Villamora,
86 Phil. 287, 291)

This is in accordance with the provision of Article 4, paragraph 1, of
the R.P.C. But when the conspirators selected a particular individual
to be their victim, and another person was killed by one of them, only
that conspirator who killed another person would be liable therefor.

Art. 17

Note:

The ruling is in accordance with the provision of Article
4, paragraph 1, of the R.P.C.

A conspirator is not liable for another's crime which Is not an
object of the conspiracy or which Is not a necessary and logical
consequence thereof.
In the case of People u. Umali, 96 Phil. 185, where only the
Huks, allies of defendant Umali, committed robbery which was not
an object of the conspiracy, it was held that defendant Umali was not
liable therefor, but liable for sedition, arson and murder, the objects
of the conspiracy.
Other defendants not held liable for the killings ofpersons not covered
by the conspiracy.
Appellant Sulpicio cannot be held liable for the killing of Casiano
Cabizares, notwithstanding a conspiracy between him and Serapio
Maquiling. The conspiracy was to kill Rafael only and no one else.
Nothing was said or agreed upon about the members of Rafael's
family. In fact, in executing their plan, appellants let the two women
inside Demetrio's house leave unhurt and they did no harm to the
remaining companions of Rafael in the house. Their target was solely
Rafael Cabizares. And the rule has always been that co-conspirators
are liable only for acts done pursuant to the conspiracy. For other
acts done outside the contemplation of the co-conspirators or which
are not the necessary and logical consequence of the intended crime,
only the actual perpetrators are liable. (People u. De la Cerna, G.R.
No. L-20911, October 30, 1967, 21 SCRA 569, 586, citing People u.
Hamiana, 89 Phil. 225; People v. Daligdig, 89 Phil. 598; People u.
Umali, 96 Phil. 185; People u. Duenas, L-15307, May 30, 1961, and
I Reyes, The Revised Penal Code, 432-433)

Art. 17

Conspiracy may cover persons previously undetermined.
Even if the conspiracy was only against Jose de Leon and not
against Augusto Gonzales and Capt. Olivas whose intervention was
merely accidental and could not have been foreseen by the accused
when they were preparing their plan, the accused are liable for all
the natural and inherent consequences of such plan, it appearing
that there was a general plan to kill anyone who might put up violent
resistance. (People v. Timbol, supra)
A person In conspiracy with others, who had desisted before the
crime was committed by the others, Is not criminally liable.
Although th.is appellant (Dalmacio Timbol) was a member of the
conspiracy, yet he desisted therefrom before the intended crimes were
committed. He left the office of De Leon and the Pasudeco building
long before the killings took place.
"And since conspiracy alone, without the execution of its purpose,
is not a crime punishable by law, except in special instances (Art. 8),
none of which is the case at bar, Dalmacio Timbol is not criminally
liable." (People v. Timbol, G.R. Nos. L-47471-47473, August 4, 1944)
It was held that the act of a conspirator who, as soon as the
aggression was started by his co-conspirators, ran away and called for
help of other persons who hurriedly responded, is an act of desistance
from taking an active part in the aggression which removes the case
from the operation of the established rule that when a conspiracy
is proved, the act of one co-conspirator is the act of all. (People v.
Mappala, 40 O.G. 1681)
When there Is conspiracy, It Is not necessary to ascertain the
specific act of each conspirator.

The ruling in the case of People v. De la Cerna, supra, should
be distinguished from the ruling in the cases of People u. Enriquez,
58 Phil. 536, and People u. Rosario, 68 Phil. 720. Conspirators are
liable for the acts of another conspirator even though such acts differ
radically and substantially from that which they intend to commit.

It is not necessary to ascertain the specific acts of aggression
committed by each of the culprits, since, having participated in the
criminal resolution, the act of one is the act of all. (People u. Mendoza,
91 Phil. 58, 63)

634

535

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Conspiracy having been established, it is immaterial who of the
conspirators fired the fatal shot. (People v. Canoy, G.R. Nos. L-465354, January 30, 1953, 92 Phil. 1076 [Unrep.J)
When there Is conspiracy, the fact that an element of the offense Is
not present as regards one of the conspirators is immaterial.

Thus, in the complex crime of seduction by means of usurpation
of official functions, where one of the accused simulated and falsely
pretended to be a minister authorized to perform marriage ceremonies
and did simulate that he was performing a marriage ceremony
between his co-accused and a girl in order thus the more easily to
deceive her and cause her to live in marital relations with the other
accused, the element ofperformance ofofficial functions was present
as regards one of the accused only; but the Supreme Court declared
the other accused guilty of, and sentenced him to the penalty for, the
same crime complexed with seduction which he actually committed.
(U.S. v. Hernandez, 29 Phil. 109)
Exceptions:
1.

In the crime of parricide, the clement of relationship must be
present as regards all the offenders.
If the wife and son of the deceased conspired to kill the
latter and did kill him, both the wife and the son are guilty of
parricide. But if the wife of the deceased and a stranger conspired
to k..ill him and did kill him, only the wife is guilty of parricide
and the stranger is guilty of homicide or murder, as the case
may be. (People v. Patricio, 46 Phil. 875)
The reason for the exception is that Article 62, paragraph
3, provides that aggravating circumstances which arise from the
private relations of the offender with the offended party shall
serve to aggravate only the liability of the principals, accomplices
and accessories as to whom such circumstances are attendant.
This provision applies when the element of the felony arises from
the private relation of the offender with the offended party.

2.

In the crime of murder where treachery is an element of the
crime, all the offenders must at least have knowledge of the
employment of treachery at the time of the execution of the act
or their cooperation therein.
536

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

Thus, ifA and B who conspired to kill C, carried out their
plan without previously considering the means, methods, or
forms in killing the latter, and only A employed treachery, since
B was present during the killing and knew the employment of
treachery by A, both are liable for murder.
But if B remained at the gate of the premises of C, and
only A actually killed C in the latter's house with treachery, so
that B did not know of the employment of treachery, only A is
liable for murder and B is liable for homicide.
The reason for this exception is that Article 62, paragraph
4, provides that the circumstances which consist in the material
execution of the act, or in the means employed to accomplish it,
shall serve to aggravate the liability of those persons only who
had knowledge of them at the time of the execution of the act
or their cooperation therein. Treachery is either a qualifying or
a generic aggravating circumstance.
All are liable for the crime of abduction, even if only one acted with
lewd designs.
Lewd designs on the part of the offender is an essential element
of the crime of abduction. (Art. 342 - forcible abduction; Art. 343 consented abduction)
In a case of forcible abduction with rape where accused conspired
with his co-accused to forcibly abduct Carmen by dragging her out of
the house where she was staying, boxing her, prying loose the hold
of her aunt on her, threatening to kill her if anyone comes near, and
standing guard to prevent any intrusion as his co-accused raped
Carmen, the accused's claim that he did not directly participate in
the abduction nor cooperated in the commission of the rape is belied
by such facts. He is a co-principal not only by direct participation but
also by cooperation. The fact that he did not personally ravish Carmen
is ofno convenience because the conspiracy having been proved, the
act of one conspirator is the act of the other. (People v. Padilla, No.
L-56218, October 23, 1984)
In multiple rape, each rapist is equally liable for the other rapes.
In a long line of cases, it has been held that in multiple rape, each
defendant is responsible not only for the rape personally committed
537

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

by him, but also for the rape committed by the others, because each
of them cooperated in the commission of the rape perpetrated by the
others, by acts without which it would not have been accomplished.
(People v. Fernandez, G.R. No. 62116, March 22, 1990, 183 SCRA
511, 517-518)

bumped a jeepney resulting in the death of one jeepney passenger,
was held criminally liable as co-principal of homicide and damage
to property through reckless imprudence under Act No. 3992 and
Article 365 of the R.P.C. (People v. Santos, C.A., 44 0.G. 1289) Both
the driver and the conductor were held liable as co-principals.

Participation in another's criminal resolution must either precede
or be coetaneous with the criminal act.

Also, a storeowner was held criminally liable under the Pure
Food and Drugs Act for the act of his employee, in selling adulterated
coffee, although the storeowner did not know that the coffee was sold
by his employee. (U.S. v. Siy Cong Bieng and Co Kong, 30 Phil. 577)
Both the storeowner and the employee were held liable as principals.

People v. Tan Diong
(59 Phil. 539)
Facts: Tan Diong, to avoid the execution of the judgment against him in
a civil case, transferred his properties by unilateral deeds of conveyance with
fictitious consideration in favor of Eustaquio Baranda whose participation
was only his testifying falsely in court that he hud acquired the properties
with sufficient consideration.

Held: As to Eustaquio Baranda, [the Court] note(s] that the conveyances
by which these properties were conveyed to him were of a unilateral character.
Baranda did not participate in the conveyances, and his alleged participation
in the fraud consisted only in the fact that he asserted ownership in the
properties conveyed. In our opinion, this does not justify his conviction as a
participant in the fraud. His resolution to accept the benefit of the fraudulent
conveyances may have been formed only after the act of Tan Diong. His guilt
as a co-conspirator in the fraud is, therefore, not proved.
Note: Baranda would have been liable as a co-principal, had he
concurred with Tan Diong at the time of or before the execution of the deeds
of conveyance.

There could be no conspiracy to commit an offense through
negligence.
Since conspiracy presupposes an agreement and a decision to
commit a felony, when it appears that the injuries inflicted on the
offended party were due to the reckless imprudence of two or more
persons, it is not proper to consider conspiracy between or among
them.
In cases of criminal negligence or crimes punishable by special law,
allowing or failing to prevent an act to be performed by another,
makes one a co-principal.

Second requisite - (Principals by direct participation)
That the culprits "carried out their plan and personally took
part in its execution, by acts which directly tended to the same end."
The principals by direct participation must be at the scene of the
crime, personally taking part in its execution.
A principal by direct participation must personally take part
in executing the criminal plan to be carried out. This means that he
must be at the scene of the commission of the crime,personally taking
part in its execution.
Thus, in the case ofPeople v. Ong Chiat Lay, 60 Phil. 788, it was
held that one of the accused was not a principal by direct participation
because he was absent from the scene of the fire when the crime of
arson was committed by the other accused.
The exception to the rule that to be a principal by direct
participation, the offender must be at the scene of the commission of
the crime, is the case where there was conspiracy to kidnap and kill
the victim and only one of the conspirators kidnapped the victim and,
after turning him over to his co-conspirators for execution, left the
spot where the victim was killed. The one who kidnapped the victim
was liable for murder committed by the others. The reason for the
exception is that by kidnapping the victim, he already performed his
part and the killing was done by his co-conspirators in pursuance of
the conspiracy. (People v. Santos, 84 Phil. 104)

Thus, a professional driver of a passenger truck who allowed his
conductor to drive the truck which, while being driven by the latter,
638

Art. 17

539

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The acts of each offender must directly tend to the same end.
While the principals by direct participation personally take part
in the execution of their common purpose, it is not necessary that
each of them should perform a positive act directly contributing to
the accomplishment of their common purpose.
In a murder which the offenders previously agreed to commit,
not only the one who inflicts the fatal wound is considered a principal,
but also the one who holds down the victim and the one who lies in
wait at the door to prevent any help from being rendered. The acts of
each and every one of the offenders in this case are all directed to the
same end, that is, the killing of their victim. Criminal responsibility
in such a case is collective. (People v. Mandagay, 46 Phil. 838)
One serving as guard pursuant to the conspiracy is a principal by
direct participation.
The appellants were part of the plot to rob the victim. At the
time of the robbery, they stood guard outside the house, while their
co-accused entered the victim's dwelling. They are equally liable as
the others. (People v. Canumay, No. L-29181, July 9, 1984, 130 SCRA
301,308)
Thus, one who stands guard outside the house for the purpose of
keeping others away, or of warning his fellow-conspirators of danger
of discovery, while the latter are murdering the occupant, takes a
direct part in the commission of the crime of murder, and is guilty as
a principal by direct participation. He is in fact present, aiding, and
abetting in the commission of the crime. (U.S. v. Reogilon, 22 Phil.
127; U.S. v. Diris, 26 Phil. 133)

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

knowledge that the deceased who was then under investigation would later
be killed. There was no evidence that there was conspiracy between those

who pleaded guilty and the present appellants.
Held: When there is no conspiracy or unity of criminal purpose and
intention indicating participation in the criminal resolution, mere passive
presence at the scene of another's crime does not constitute complicity.

When the second requisite is lacking, there is only conspiracy.
The second requisite is that the persons who have participated
in the criminal resolution, must carry out their plan and personally
take part in its execution by acts which directly tend to the same end.
If this second requisite is lacking, at most, there is only a
conspiracy among the several defendants who participated in the
criminal resolution, and if the crime they agreed and decided to
commit is not treason, rebellion or sedition, they are not criminally
liable.
Thus, if four of the accused merely attended the conferences and
entered no opposition to the nefarious scheme, merely assenting out
of respect and fear, and after the commission of the murders they
joined with the other accused in celebrating with a fiesta, by way of
custom, they were neither co-principals nor accomplices. (People v.
Asaad, 55 Phil. 697)
This is the reason why Dalmacio Timbol, who merely conspired
with his co-accused to kill the deceased but left the place before his
co-accused began shooting the deceased, was acquitted of the charge
of murder. (People v. Timbol, G.R. Nos. L-47471-73, August 4, 1944)

the crime, but that they did so in obedience to superior orders and without

Even if G's participation in the first meeting sufficiently involved
him in the conspiracy (as he was the one who explained the location of
the house to be robbed in relation to the surrounding streets and the
points thereof through which entrance and exit should be effected),
such participation and involvement, however, would be inadequate
to render him criminally liable as a conspirator. The reason for this
is that conspiracy alone, without the execution of its purpose, is not
a crime punishable by law, except in special instances (Art. 8, R.P.C.)
which, however, do not include robbery. (People v. Pelagio, G.R. No.
L-16177, May 24, 1967, cited in People v. Peralta, No. L-19069, October
29, 1968, 25 SCRA 759, 777-778)

640

541

Erception:
People v. Samano
(77 Phil. 136)
Facts: The accused were jointly tried for the murder of three persons.
Said accused were members of a guerrilla unit and were charged with having

taken the deceased Lorenzana to their headquarters and beating him to
death while investigating him on charges of espionage for the Japanese.
The other accused admitted their guilty participation in the crime. Accused

Samano and Alcantara admitted that they acted as guards near the place of

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

Par. 2.- Principals by induction.

By directly inducing another to commit a crime.

"Those who directly force or induce others to commit it."

There are two ways of directly inducing another to commit a
crime. They are:

Paragraph No. 2 of Article 17 provides for the second class of
principals.

a.

Both the one giving the price or offering reward or
promise and the one committing the crime in consideration
thereofare principals - the former, by inducement; and the
latter, by direct participation. There is collective criminal
responsibility.

The second class of principals, according to Article 17 of the
R.P.C., comprises "those who directly force or induce others to commit
it (the act)." Those who directly induce others to commit the act
are called "principals by inducement" or "principals by induction,"
from the Spanish "autores por induccion." The word "inducement"
comprises, in the opinion ofViada and the Supreme Court of Spain,
price, promise of reward, command, and pacto. (People v. Gensola,
No. L-24491, September 30, 1969, 29 SCRA 483, 490)
The principal by Induction becomes liable only when the principal
by direct participation committed the act induced.
Thus, in the case of People v. Ong Chat Lay, 60 Phil. 788, it
was held that one cannot be held guilty of having instigated the
commission of the crime without first being shown that the crime
was actually committed by another.
Two ways of becoming principal by induction.
There are two ways of becoming a principal by induction under
the second paragraph of Article 17, namely:
(1)

by directly forcing another to commit a crime, and

(2)

by directly inducing another to commit a crime.

By directly forcing another to commit a crime.
There are two ways of directly forcing another to commit a crime.
They are:
a.

By using irresistible force.

b.

By causing uncontrollable fear.

By giving price, or offering reward or promise.

A wife, who induced the killing of the mistress of her
husband by giving money to the killer, is a principal by
induction. The killer is a principal by direct participation.
(People v. Lao, No. L-10473, January 28, 1961, 1 SCRA 42)
b.

By using words of command.
Both the person who used the words ofcommand and
the person who committed the crime, because of the words
of command, are equally liable. There is also collective
criminal responsibility. (U.S. v. Gamao, 23 Phil. 81)

Requisites:
In order that a person may be convicted as a principal by
inducement, the following requisites must be present:
1.
That the inducement be made directly with the intention
of procuring the commission of the crime; and
2.
That such inducement be the determining cause of the
commission of the crime by the material executor. (U.S.
v. Indanan, 24 Phil. 203; People v. Kichi Omine, 61 Phil.
609)
To constitute inducement, there must exist on the part of the
inducer the most positive resolution and the most persistent effort to
secure the commission of the crime, together with the presentation to
the person induced of the very strongest kind of temptation to commit
the crime. (U.S. v. Indanan, supra)

In these cases, there is no conspiracy, not even a unity of
criminal purpose and intention. Only the one using force or causing
fear is criminally liable. The material executor is not criminally liable
because of Article 12, paragraphs 5 and 6.

When the accused, blinded by the grudge which she bore against
the deceased, caused her co-accused through promise of pecuniary gain

642

543

Illustration of the first requisite.

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

to shoot the victims with a gun which she had furnished the latter,
it is clear that she had the intention of procuring the commission of
the crime. (People v. Otadora, 86 Phil. 244)

woman whose husband was very stingy and treated her badly that
the only thing for her to do was to rob him, was not guilty of the
crime of robbery by inducement, for the reason that an imprudent
and ill-conceived advice is not sufficient." (Cited in the case of U.S.
v. Indanan, supra)

In the case of a married woman who suggested to her paramour
that he kill her husband in order that thereafter they might live
together freely and the paramour, acting upon these suggestions,
killed him, it was held that the proposition of the woman constituted
something more than mere counsel or advice which her co-defendant
was entirely free to accept or not. It was coupled with a consideration
which, in view of the relations existing between them, furnished a
motive strong enough to induce the man to take the life of her husband.
(U.S. v. Alcontin, 10 O.G. 1888, cited in U.S. v. Indanan, supra; People
v. Giron, 82 Phil. 783)
The cases cited also illustrate the second requisite. In the
Otadora case, the promise of pecuniary gain was the determining
cause of the commission of the crime by the principal by direct
participation. In the Alcontin case, the proposition of the woman, in
view of the relations existing between her and the other accused, was
the determining cause of the commission of the crime by the latter.
A thoughtless expression without Intention to produce the result
is not an inducement to commit a crime.

But a thoughtless expression or act, without any expectation or
intention that it would produce the result, is not an inducement to
commit a crime.
Thus, a chance word spoken without reflection, a wrong
appreciation ofa situation, an ironical phrase, a thoughtless act, may
give birth to a thought of, or even a resolution to, crime in the mind
of one for some independent reason predisposed thereto without the
one who spoke the word or performed the act having any expectation
that his suggestion would be followed or any real intention that it
produce the result. In such case, while the expression was imprudent
and the results ofit grave in the extreme, the one who spoke the word
or performed the act would not be guilty of the crime committed by
the other. (U.S. v. Indanan, supra)

Art. 17

The person who gave the advice did not have the intention to
procure the commission of the crime.
The inducement may be by acts of command, advice, or through
influence, or agreement for consideration.
The inducement and the commission of a crime whereby the
inducer becomes a principal, to the same extent and effect as if he
had physically committed the crime, may exist in acts of command,
sometimes of advice, or agreement for a consideration, or through an
influence so effective that it alone determines the commission of the
crime.
The words of advice or the influence must have actually moved the
hands of the principal by direct participation.

Thus, a person who persuaded an inexperienced boy of tender age
to steal certain jewels of his grandmother was found guilty of theft by
inducement. (Viada, cited in U.S. v. Indanan, supra) Minors under 15
years of age are easily susceptible to the suggestions of the inducer,
because usually they have no discernment or judgment of their own.
When induced to commit a crime, the influence of the inducer is the
determining cause of the commission of the crime.
Words ofcommand of a father may induce his son to commit a crime.
A distinction should be made between the words of command
of a father to his sons, under conditions which determine obedience,
and the excited exclamations uttered by an individual to whom
obedience is not due. The moral influence of the words of the father
may determine the course of conduct of a son in cases where the same
words coming from a stranger would make no impression. (People v.
Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 57)

In a decision by the Supreme Court of Spain rendered on the
10th of July, 1877, it was held that "a person who advised a married

The accused, who, exercising dominance and ascendancy over his
three-year-old son, compelled the latter to hurl a stone at another boy,
causing injury to the latter's eye, is clearly a principal by inducement.
(People v. Bautista, C.A., 58 0.G. 5197)

544

645

Example of Imprudent advice, not constituting sufficient Inducement.

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Meaning of the second requisite.

It is necessary that the inducement be the determining cause of
the commission of the crime by the principal by direct participation,
that is, without such inducement the crime would not have been
committed. (Decision of the Supreme Court of Spain, cited in U.S. u.
Indanan, supra)
Inducement exists if the command or advice is of such a nature
that, without its concurrence, the crime would not have materialized.
(People v. Cruz, G.R. No. 74048, November 14, 1990, 191 SCRA 377,
385)
Thus, if the principal by direct participation had personal reason
to commit the crime so that he would commit it just the same even if
no inducement was made by another, this second requisite does not
exist.
The inducement must precede the act induced and must be so
influential in producing the criminal act that without it, the act would
not have been performed.
Thus the price given to the principal by direct participation after
the commission of the crime, without prior promise to give a price or
reward, could not be an inducement.
If the person who actually committed the crime had a reason of
his own to commit the crime, it cannot be said that the inducement
was influential in producing the criminal act. In such case, the one
charged with having induced the commission of the crime is not
criminally liable.
People v. Castillo
(G.R. No. L-19238, July 26, 1966)
Facts: Convicted by the trial court were appellant Castillo as principal
by inducement and Marincho Castillo as principal by direct participation. It
appears that before the commission of the crime at bar, Marincho Castillo
was slapped on the face by the now deceased Juan Vargas as a result of on

altercation between them. Two months after, while appellant, holding gun,
was talking face to face with Vargas, Marincho came from behind and hacked
the latter on the head. As Marincho was about to strike the victim a second

blow, appellant said: "You kill him." Marincho, accompanied by appellant,
surrendered himself to the authorities.
Issue: Whether appellant can be found guilty as principal by inducement.
646

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

Held: In the case of People v. Caimbre, L-12087, December 29, 1960,
this Court held that in determining whether the utterances of an accused are
sufficient to make him guilty as co-principal by inducement, it must appear
that the inducement was of such nature and was made in such a way as to
become the determining cause of the crime and that such inducement was
uttered with the intention of producing the result. In this case, appellant
was, of course, armed with a revolver while talking with the deceased, but
the firearm was not pointed at the latter. Then he is alleged to have uttered

the words "You hill him" only after his son had already fatally boloed Vargas
on the head. The inducement to commit the crime was, therefore, no longer
necessary to induce the assailant to commit the crime. Appellant's guilt has
not been established beyond reasonable doubt.
By using words of command.

With respect to command, it must be the moving cause of the
offense. In the case at bar, the command shouted by Fidelina, "Rufino,
strike him!" was not the moving cause of the act of Rufino Gensola.
The evidence shows that Rufino would have committed the act at his
own volition, even without said words of command. (People v. Gensola,
No. L-24491, September 30, 1969, 29 SCRA 483, 490)
"Kill him and we will bury him" as an imprudent utterance said
in the excitement of the hour or in the heat of anger, and not, rather,
in the nature of a command that had to be obeyed, does not make
the utterer a principal by inducement. (People v. Agapinay, G.R. No.
77776, June 27, 1990, 186 SCRA 812, 821)
In determining whether the utterances of an accused are
sufficient to make him guilty as co-principal by inducement, it must
appear that the inducement was of such nature and was made in such
a way as to become the determining cause of the crime and that such
inducement was uttered with the intention of producing the result.
(People v. Castillo, No. 19238, July 26, 1966, 17 SCRA 721, 723-724)
For the utterances of an accused to make him a principal by
inducement, it is necessary that the words be of such nature and
uttered in such manner as to become the determining cause of the
crime, and that the inducement precisely was intended to serve
such purpose. In other words, the inciting words must have great
dominance and influence over the person who acts; they ought to be
direct and as efficacious or powerful as physical or moral coercion or
violence itself. (People v. Canial, Nos. L-31042-43, August 18, 1972,
46 SCRA 634, 651)
547

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 17

In a decision of the Supreme Court of Spain, cited
in People v. Kichi Omine, 61 Phil. 609, it was held that
a father who simply said to his son who was at the time
engaged in a combat with another, "Hit him,• was not
responsible for the injuries inflicted after such advice was
given.

In order that a person using words of command may be held
liable as principal under paragraph No. 2 of Article 17, the following
five requisites must all be present:
(1) That the one uttering the words of command must have
the intention of procuring the commission of the crime.
(2)

That the one who made the command must have an
ascendancy or influence over the person who acted.
Illustration of this requisite:
A was a poor, ignorant fisherman, dependent upon his
uncle B. On the other hand, B was a man of great influence
in the community. B was the local political leader of his
party. In the meeting where the plan to murder the priest
was discussed, B was the prime mover and the dommant
figure. B selected A who was present in the mcctmg to
commit the crime and directed him to do it. The influence
exercised by B over A was so great and powerful that the
latter could not resist it. (U.S. v. Gamao, 23 Phil. 81)

(3)

That the words used must be so direct, so efficacious, so
powerful as to amount to physical or moral coercion.
Illustration of this requisite:
(a)

(b)
(4)

Efficacious One who makes the accused believe that the
person to be killed was the one who had stolen the
property of the accused, is guilty as principal by
inducement.
Note: It would seem that the material executor
had a reason to kill the victim, but it was furnished by
the inductor who made him believe that the deceased
had stolen his property.

Art. 17

(5)

The material executor of the crime has no personal reason
to commit the crime.
If the principal by direct participation has a personal
reason to commit the crime, the supposed words of
inducement cannot be the determining cause.
People • Kiichi Omine
(61 Phil. 611)

Facts: 'The witnesses for the prosecution contend that while the injured
party, Angel Pulido, was talking with Omine, Eduardo Autor attempted to
intervene, but was prevented by Hilario Puli do with a bolo, who did not wound
him except on the left thumb; that Luis Ladion and Agapito Cortessano then
held Angel Pulido by the arm s, and when Eduardo Autor approached, Omine
shouted to him "pegale y matale," and Autor struck Angel Pulido in the breast
with his bolo. Previously Eduardo Autor had struck Angel Pulido with the
fist and a blow in the right eye.
Held: Under the circumstances of this case, even if it were satisfactorily
proven that Kiichi Omine uttered the words in question, [the Court] [is] of
the opinion that they would not be sufficient to make him a principal by
induction, because it does not appear that the words uttered by Kiichi Omine
caused Eduardo Au tor to strike Angel Pulido. In the first place, as [the Court]
[has] indicated, Eduardo Autor had already other reasons for striking Angel
Pulido when Omine uttered the words of inducement. In the second place,
the words in question were not in this particular case sufficient to cause
Eduardo Autor to strike the offended party with his bolo. Although Eduardo
Au tor was working under the direction of Omine, apparently, according to
the testimony of Angel Pulido, he was being paid by him (Pulido). It does not
appear that Omine had any particular influence over Eduardo Autor.
Accused Autor was found guilty of serious physical injuries. Accused
Omine was acquitted.

Powerful -- (U.S. v. Gamao, supra)

The words of command must be uttered prior to the
commission of the crime.
Thus, when the commission of the crime has already
been commenced when the words of inducement are
uttered, this requisite is lacking.
548

Requisites considered in determining the liability ofa person accused
as principal by inducement.
Appellant was prosecuted aJlegedly for uttering the words: "You
had better kill him," at the time when his co-accused was attacking
his victim. The Supreme Court stated:
549

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TW O

Criminal Law
"In the present case, there is nothing to show that appellant
had any reason at all to have Angel Olimpo killed (first requisite,
not present). On the other hand, even before he allegedly
uttered the words attributed to him, Demetrio Caimbre, had
already boloed his victim several times (fourth requisite, not
present). To this we must add the circumstance that there is no
evidence to show that appellant had sufficient moral influence
over Demetrio Caimbre as to make the latter obey him blindly"
(second requisite, not present). Appellant was acquitted. (People
v. Caimbre, 110 Phil. 370,372)
The question whether a person present upon the occasion of a
homicide but who takes no direct part in the act can be held criminally
liable for inciting and encouraging another with expressions, such
as, "go ahead," "hit him," "there you have him," "now is the time," etc.,
depends upon whether such words are spoken under conditions which
give them a direct and determinative influence upon the mind of the
principal actor. (People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 56-57)
Ascendancy or Influence as to amount to moral coercion Is not
necessary when there is conspiracy.

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

If the crime committed is not contemplated in the order given, the
Inducement Is not material and not the determining cause thereof.
People v. Lavas
(G.R. Nos. L-7618-20, July 20, 1955)
Facts: Accused Lawas, as head of the home guards whose duty was
to preserve peace and order among the inhabitants in Bario Baris, Lanao,

ordered his men to fire at the Moros suspected of having killed I1 Christian
residents. In the course of the melee that followed, some of the home guards
fired at the women and children who were in the second floor of the house.
Held: While the home guards were given an order by accused Lawas to
fire at the Moros then on the ground, said order could not imply or include an
order to go up the house and massacre the innocent and defenseless women

and children. Lawas clearly did not intend that the women and children
inside the house should also be fired at. Lawas is not guilty of murder for the

killing of the women and children, because to hold him liable as principal by
induction, it is necessary (1) that the inducement is material and precedes
the commission of the crime, and (2) that such inducement is the determining
cause thereof.

Principal by Inducement in falsification.
While it is true that it was the employee of the office of the
treasurer who performed the overt act of writing the false facts on the
residence certificate of the accused, it was, however, the accused who
induced him to do so by supplying him with those facts. The accused
was a principal by inducement. The employee was a mere innocent
agent of the accused in the performance of the act constituting the
crime. (People v. Po Giok To, 96 Phil. 913, 919)

To consider as principal by induction one who advises or incites
another to perpetrate an offense, it is essential to show that the
advisor had so great an ascendancy or influence that his words were
so efficacious and powerful as to amount to moral coercion. Proof of
such extremes is usually required to justify such conclusion. But such
proof is unnecessary where, as in this case, the principal actor admits
having been so impelled and says that he acted pursuant to a previous
plan or conspiracy to kill and promise to condone his indebtedness.
(People v. Ulip, 89 Phil. 629, 633)

In this case, the employee was not criminally liable, because he
had no knowledge of the falsity of the facts supplied by the accused.

There is collective criminal responsibility when words of
inducement were used.

Distinguish principal by Inducement from the offender who made
proposal to commit a felony.

One who planned the crime committed by another is a principal by
Inducement.
The persons who planned the crime committed by other persons
are guilty as authors by inducement. (People v. Asaad, 55 Phil. 697
(Syllabus))
550

1.

In both, there is an inducement to commit a crime.

2.

In the first, the principal by inducement becomes liable
only when the crime is committed by the principal by
direct participation; in the second, the mere proposal to
commit a felony is punishable in treason or rebellion. The
person to whom the proposal is made should not commit
651

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TW O

Criminal Law

3.

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 17

the crime; otherwise, the proponent becomes a principal
by inducement.

Meaning of the term "cooperate."

In the first, the inducement involves any crime; in the
second, the proposal to be punishable must involve only
treason or rebellion.

To cooperate means to desire or wish in common a thing. But
that common will or purpose does not necessarily mean previous
understanding, for it can be explained or inferred from the
circumstances of each case. (People w. Apelgido, 56 Phil. 571, 576)

Effects of acquittal of principal by direct participation upon the
liability of principal by inducement.
(1)

Conspiracy is negatived by the acquittal of co-defendant.

(2)

One cannot be held guilty of having instigated the
commission of a crime without first being shown that the
crime has been actually committed by another. (People v.
Ong Chiat, 60 Phil. 788, 790)
But if the one charged as principal by direct
participation is acquitted because he acted without
criminal intent or malice, his acquittal is not a ground for
the acquittal of the principal by inducement. (Sec People
v. Po Giok To, supra)
The reason for the rule is that in exempting
circumstances, such as when the act is not voluntary
because oflack of intent on the part of the accused, there is
a crime committed, only that the accused is not a criminal.
In intentional felonies, the act of a person does not make
him criminal unless his mind be criminal.

Possessor of recently stolen property Is a principal.
It is clear from Section 5(j), Rule 131, of the Rules of Court, that
the possessor of a recently stolen article is considered a principal,
not merely as an accessory or an accomplice, unless he proves in a
satisfactory manner that he is but an accessory or an accomplice
thereto and that another person, from whom the article came, is the
one who stole it from the owner thereof. (People v. Javier, No. L-36509,
February 25, 1982, 112 SCRA 186, 190)
Par. 3.-- Principals by indispensable cooperation.

Requisites:
1.

Participation in the criminal resolution, that is, there is
either anterior conspiracy or unity of criminal purpose and
intention immediately before the commission of the crime
charged; and

2.

Cooperation in the commission of the offense by performing
another act, without which it would not have been
accomplished.

First requisite:
As in paragraph 1 ofArticle 17, this co-delinquency in paragraph
3 also requires participation in the criminal resolution, that is, there
must be conspiracy. But concurrence with the principal by direct
participation in the purpose of the latter is sufficient, because the
cooperation is indispensable to the accomplishment of the commission
of the offense.
May there be cooperation by acts of negligence?
One who, by acts of negligence, cooperates in the commission
of estafa through falsification or malversation through falsification,
without which negligent acts the commission of the crime could not
have been accomplished, is a co-principal. But the one who cooperated
in the commission of the crime was held guilty of the same crime
through reckless imprudence. (Samson v. Court ofAppeals, 103 Phil.
277, 282-283; People v. Rodis, 105 Phil. 1294, 1295 [Unrep.))
Second requisite:
The cooperation must be indispensable, that is, without which
the commission of the crime would not have been accomplished. If the
cooperation is not indispensable, the offender is only an accomplice.
"Cooperate x x x by another act"

"Those who cooperate in the commission ofthe offense by another
act without which it would not have been accomplished."

The act of the principal by indispensable cooperation should
be different from the act of the principal by direct participation. The

552

553

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

law says "by another act," which means that it should not be the act
of one who could be classified as principal by direct participation.

In the case of U.S. v. Lim Buanco, the act of execution of the
crime of estafa committed by the principal by direct participation is the
fraudulent cashing of the check which resulted in the damage to the
bank. The act of cooperation of the other offender is the certification
that the check was entitled to payment.

Art. 17

Examples:
(1)

(2)

Where it appears that C seized the hands of a 12-year-old
girl, dragged her by force and violence to a place behind
a house where there were some trees whence he called
to his confederate, J, the person chiefly interested in the
perpetration of the crime, with whom C must have had an
agreement beforehand, delivered her to him upon his arrival
at the place, and then went away from the scene of the
crime so that J might freely consummate the prearranged
rape, as the latter did with violence and intimidation, it
was held that C cooperated in the perpetration of the crime
by acts without which its commission would not have been
accomplished. (U.S. v. Javier, 31 Phil. 235, 239-240)
R, an employee of a bank, had the duty to examine the
account of the drawer of a check, to determine whether or
not the drawer of the check had sufficient balance to his
credit to require the payment of the check, and to indorse
upon the check, if it was entitled to payment, the words
"Corriente, P.O. Luciano de los Reyes." After the check
was marked in this manner, it would pass to the cashier
of the bank who, in reliance upon the indorsement, would
pay or order the same to be paid. R, in connivance with
B, and knowing that the latter had no sufficient funds in
the bank, indorsed upon a check drawn by B the words
"Corriente, P.O. Luciano de los Reyes." The cashier, relying
upon the indorsement, ordered the payment of the check,
thus enabling B to draw the amount of the check. In this
case, R was a principal by indispensable cooperation. (U.S.
v. Lim Buanco, 14 Phil. 484)

In these two cases, it will be noted that the cooperation of the
other accused consisted in performing an act which is different from
the act of execution of the crime committed by the other accused.

Art. 17

If the cooperation ofone of the accused consists in performing an
act necessary in the execution ofthe crime committed, he is a principal
by direct participation.
Thus, ifin the commission of homicide, one of the offenders held
the victim while the other was stabbing him, the one who held the
victim should be a principal by direct participation.
But there are cases where the Supreme Court considered the
accused who held the victim while being stabbed by the other accused
as a principal by indispensable cooperation under paragraph 3 of
Article 17.
The evidence amply demonstrates that said Piston cooperated
in the execution of the deed on trial by holding the victim by the right
arm while his brother and co-defendant inflicted the wounds that
produced death. The responsibility he has incurred by virtue of such
cooperation, without which the deed could not have been committed
in the way it was, is beyond doubt that of principal. (U.S. v. Cueva,
23 PhL. 553)
Appellants grabbed the waist of the deceased and placed his
hands around it, thereby pinning his (the deceased's) arms. It was
at this juncture when his co-accused Marcelino Mario stabbed the
deceased at his left breast above the nipple with his dagger (Exh.
C). Under the circumstances, it is clear that appellant is a principal
to the commission of the crime of murder, as he cooperated in the
execution thereof by another act, without which, it would not have
been committed. (Art. 17(3), R.P.C.) (People v. Mario, 108 Phil. 574,
577; People v. Labis, No. L-22087, November 15, 1967, 21 SCRA 875,
885)
Liability of conspirators who took turns in raping a girl.

In the case of U.S. v. Javier, the act of cooperation is the forcible
taking of the girl to the place where the rape was committed by the
other accused. In rape, the act of execution is the sexual intercourse
with the woman against her will.

Four persons each took turns in having sexual intercourse with
a girl by force. It was held that each of them is responsible, not only
for the act of rape committed personally by him, but also for the rape

554

555

Art. 17

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Criminal Law

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 18

committed by the others, because while one of them was having sexual
intercourse with the girl, the others were holding her, so that each
one of them cooperated in the consummation of the rape committed by
the others by acts without which it could not have been accomplished.
Four sentences were imposed on each accused. (People v. Villa, 81 Phil.
193, 197; People v. Alfaro, 91 Phil. 404, 408-409; People v. Fernandez,
G.R. No. 62116, March 22, 1990, 183 SCRA 511, 517)

party who inflicted the fatal wound would be the only one responsible
as principal for the crime of homicide; the other two would be held
liable only for less serious physical injuries. (December Sup. Ct. of
Spain, June 2, 1874,11 Jr. Crim. 11-14; 1 Vada, Cod. Pen., 342-343;
People v. Martinez, 42 Phil. 85, 89; People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38,
44-45)

Collective criminal responsibility.

Art. 18. Accomplices. - Accomplices are the persons who,
not being included in Article 17, cooperate in the execution
of the offense by previous or simultaneous acts.

There is collective criminal responsibility when the offenders
are criminally liable in the same manner and to the same extent.
The penalty to be imposed must be the same for all.
Principals by direct participation have collective criminal
responsibility. Principal by induction, except that who directly forced
another to commit a crime, and principal by direct participation
have collective criminal responsibility. Principal by indispensable
cooperation has collective criminal responsibility with the principal
by direct participation.
Individual criminal responsibility.

In the absence of previous conspiracy, unity of criminal purpose
and intention immediately before the commission of the crime, or
community of criminal design, the criminal responsibility arising from
different acts directed against one and the same person is individual
and not collective, and each of the participants is liable only for the
act committed by him. (U.S. v. Magcomot, 13 Phil. 386, 390; U.S. v.
Abiog, 37 Phil. 137, 139-140)
Where there is no pretension that there was any conspiracy
between the accused nor concerted action pursuant to a common
criminal design between them, each is responsible only for the
consequences of his own acts. (Araneta, Jr. v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 43527, July 3, 1990, 187 SCRA 123, 133)

Quasi-collective criminal responsibility.

Between collective criminal responsibility and individual
criminal responsibility, there is the so-called quasi-collective criminal
responsibility.
In quasi-collective criminal responsibility, some of the offenders
in the crime are principals and the others are accomplices.
The participation of an accomplice presupposes the commission
of the crime by the principal by direct participation.

The principal element of every punishable complicity consists
in the concurrence of the will of the accomplice with the will of the
author of the crime (People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 49), and the accomplice
cooperates by previous or simultaneous acts in the execution of the
offense by the principal.
"Not being included In Article 17."

Example of individual responsibility.

But the participation or cooperation of the accomplice is not
any one of those mentioned in Article 17, which defines the three
concepts of principals. An accomplice does not fall under any of the
three concepts defined in Article 17. (People v. Ubina, 97 Phil. 515)

The deceased was the one who assaulted a group of three
individuals with a knife, and in the course of an incomplete selfdefense, two of them caused less serious physical injuries upon the
assailant, while the third inflicted the fatal wound. In this case, the

When there is no conspiracy between or among the defendants
but they were animated by one and the same purpose to accomplish the
criminal objective, those who cooperated by previous or simultaneous
acts but cannot be held liable as principals are accomplices.

656

557

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Where there Is doubt as to whether accused acted as principal or
as accomplice, accused should be held liable only as accomplice.

An accomplice does not have previous agreement or understanding
or is not in conspiracy with the principal by direct participation.

In case of doubt, the participation of the offender will be
considered that of an accomplice rather than that of a principal.

An accomplice does not enter into a conspiracy with the principal
by direct participation. He does not have previous agreement
or understanding with the principal to commit a crime. But he
participates to a certain point in the common criminal design. (People
w. Aplegido, 76 Phil. 571, 576)

In the case of appellants Carlos and Pascual Clemente, while
they joined their brother in the pursuit of the fleeing Matnog, and
in the attack on him as he fell, yet the prosecution eyewitness was
unable to assert positively that the two managed to hit the fallen
man. There being no showing of conspiracy, and the extent of their
participation in the homicide being uncertain, they should be given
the benefit of the doubt, and consequently, they are declared to be
mere accomplices in the crime. (People v. Clemente, G.R. No. L-23463,
September 28, 1967, 21 SCRA 261, 270-271)
Mere presence at the scene of the incident, knowledge of the
plan and acquiescence thereto are not sufficient grounds to hold a
person as a conspirator. Lacking sufficient evidence of conspiracy
and there being doubt as to whether appellant acted as a principal
or just a mere accomplice, the doubt should be resolved in his favor
and is thus held liable only as an accomplice.
Where the quantum of proof required lo establish conspiracy
is lacking, the doubt created as lo whether the appellant acted as
principal or as accomplice will always be resolved in favor of the
milder form of criminal liability - that of a mere accomplice. (People
v. Ballesta, G.R. No. 181632, September 25, 2008, 566 SCRA 400)
When the participation of an accused Is not disclosed, he is only
an accomplice.
A person who assists one who commits the crime of arson and
who knows the latter's purpose, but whose participation in the arson
is not disclosed, may not be considered as a principal, because his
acts are neither direct nor absolutely necessary for the commission
of the offense, nor do they induce the said commission. (2 Viada, pp.
369-370, cited in People v. Ubina, 97 Phil. 515, 533)

TITLE TW O

Art. 18

If there is conspiracy, all the conspirators are equally liable for
the crime actually committed by any one of them. The same penalty
shall be imposed on each and every one of them.
On the other hand, the accomplice gets a penalty one degree
lower than that provided for the principal in a consummated felony.
(Art. 52)
Distinction between accomplice and conspirator.
Conspirators and accomplices have one thing in common: they
know and agree with the criminal design. Conspirators, however,
know the criminal intention because they themselves have decided
upon such course of action. Accomplices come lo know about it after
the principals have reached the decision, and only then do they agree
to cooperate in its execution. Conspirators decide that a crime should
be c6mmitted; accomplices merely concur in it. Accomplices do not
decide whether the crime should be committed; they merely assent to
the plan and cooperate in its accomplishment. Conspirators are the
authors of a crime; accomplices are merely instruments who perform
acts not essential to the perpetration of the offense. (People v. de Vera,
G.R. No. 128966, August 18, 1999)
May a co-conspirator be held liable as an accomplice only?
The fact that the role of a malefactor in the perpetration of the
homicide or murder was of a minor character is of no consequence,
since having been in conspiracy with the others, the act of one is the
act of all. (People v. Mendoza, 91 Phil. 58, 63)

In criminal cases, the participation of the accused must be
established by the prosecution by positive and competent evidence.
It cannot be presumed.

"Community of design" should be distinguished from
"participation in the criminal resolution" of two or more offenders.
The first does not necessarily mean that there is conspiracy, although
it may develop into a conspiracy; the second implies conspiracy.

558

559

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 18

If a malefactor entered with the others into an agreement
concerning the commission of a felony and the decision to commit
it, the malefactor and the others participated in the criminal
resolution. Such agreement and decision may be inferred from the
facts and circumstances of the case. If there was no such agreement
and decision, but, knowing the criminal design of the others, the
malefactor merely concurred in their criminal purpose, there is only
community of design. The malefactor, whose role in the perpetration
of the homicide or murder is of a minor character, may properly be
held liable as accomplice.
In order that a person may be considered an accomplice, the
following requisites must concur.
1.

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

of robbery committed by the convicts? No. When the sentry
permitted the convicts to go at large, the sentry had no knowledge
of their intention to commit any crime. (U.S. v. Bello, supra)
But the driver of a taxicab who, knowing that his co-accused were
going to make a hold-up, permitted them to use the taxicab driven by
him in going to a store where his said co-accused staged the holdup,
and waited for them until after the holdup, is an accomplice in the
crime of robbery. (People v. Lingad, 98 Phil. 5, 12)
How an accomplice acquires knowledge of the criminal design of the
principal.
1.

That there be community of design; that is, knowing the
criminal design of the principal by direct participation, he
concurs with the latter in his purpose;

2.

That he cooperates in the execution of the offense by
previous or simultaneous acts, with the intention of
supplying material or moral aid in the execution of the
crime in an efficacious way; and

3.

That there be a relation between the acts done by the
principal and those attributed to the person charged as
accomplice. (People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 49)

Mariano Tadeo accompanied Crispino Tangbaoan
from Tayum, Abra, to barrio Bacooc, Lagangilang, and on
arriving there, Crispino revealed to Mariano that he was
going to kill one Guilay. It is likely that out of friendship
and companionship, Mariano did not leave Crispino after
Mariano learned of Crispino's intention. Mariano was with
Crispino when the latter killed Guilay. It was held that
Mariano was an accomplice in the crime committed by
Crispino. (People v. Tangbaoan, 93 Phil. 686, 691)

Note that before there could be an accomplice, there must be
a principal by direct participation. But the principal originates the
criminal design. The accomplice merely concurs with the principal
in his criminal purpose.

Thus, the sentry is not liable as accomplice in this case:
The sentry improperly permitted certain convicts to go out
ofjail, accompanied by the corporal of the guards. The convicts
committed robbery. Was the sentry an accomplice in the crime
660

When the principal informs or tells the accomplice of the
former's criminal purpose.
Thus, when the master told his servant that he would
abduct (abduction with consent) a girl under 18 years of age
and instigated his said servant to induce the girl to leave
her home for immoral purposes, and the servant assisted
in the commission of the crime by so inducing the girl, the
master was the principal by direct participation and the
servant was an accomplice. (U.S. v. Sotto, 9 PhL. 231, 236)

First requisite:

The cooperation which the law punishes is the assistance which
is knowingly or intentionally given and which is not possible without
previous knowledge ofthe criminal purpose. (People v. Cruz, G.R. No.
74048, November 14, 1990, 191 SCRA 377, 385, citing People v. Bello,
11 Phil. 526 and People v. Ortiz, 55 Phil. 993)

Art. 18

2.

When the accomplice saw the criminal acts of the principal.
In a quarrel, Ramon was choking the deceased. Then,
Jose ran up and delivered a blow with a bamboo stick on the
head of the deceased. After the blow struck by Jose, which
Ramon saw, the latter continued to choke the deceased
until life was extinct. The choking by Ramon was not the
cause of death. It was the blow delivered by Jose which
caused the death of the deceased.
561

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Held: Ramon is an accomplice. The reason is that
after the deceased had received the fatal injury, Ramon
continued to hold and choke the deceased until after life
was extinct. It shows that Ramon approved of the blow
struck by Jose, thereby showing his participation in the
criminal design of Jose, and this is sufficient to make
Ramon responsible as an accomplice. (People v. Tamayo,
44 Phil. 38, 42, 49, 54-55)
Another case: Jovito Cagalingan stabbed the deceased
after Alfredo Cagalingan had stabbed said deceased at the
back, while Victor Romina, Jr. stabbed the same deceased
while the latter was already lying prostrate on the ground.
While the acts of Jovito Cagalingan and Victor Romina,
Jr. show a community of design with the principal, Alfredo
Cagalingan, who inflicted the fatal wound, and Jovito and
Victor cooperated in hastening the victim's death, their
acts were not absolutely indispensable in the commission
of the crime. A person who assails a victim already fatally
wounded by another is only regarded as accomplice. Jovito
Cagalingan and Victor Romina, Jr. arc only accomplices.
(People v. Cagalingan, G.R. No. 79168, August 3, 1990,
319-320)
Where one of the accused embraced the victim and
rendered him helpless to stop him from further hitting
the other accused, the first accused should be held liable
as accomplice where he did not stop his co-accused from
further hitting the victim.
There is no showing that the attack was agreed upon
between the two accused beforehand. No motive for it was
shown other than the provocation given by the deceased;
and such motive was true only insofar as the other accused
was concerned. The circumstances indicate that if the
accused embraced the deceased and rendered him helpless,
it was to stop him from further hitting the other accused
with his fists. However, even after the first knife thrust
had been delivered, he did not try to stop the other accused,
either by word or overt act. Instead, the accused continued
to hold the deceased, even forced him down on the bamboo
bed with the other accused still pressing the attack. If the
initial intent of the accused was free from guilt, it became
562

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 18

tainted after he saw the first knife thrust delivered. (People
v. Manansala, No. L-23514, February 17, 1970, 31 SCRA
401,405)
The criminal design to be considered in case there is
no conspiracy or unity of criminal purpose and intention
between two or among several accused charged with a crime
against persons, is the criminal intent entertained by the
accused who inflicted the more or most serious wound on the
victim. In the case of People • Tamayo, supra, it was Jose
who had the criminal intent, which is to kill the deceased.
Such intent to kill can be inferred from the nature of the
weapon used and the part of the body which was injured.
When a bamboo stick was used in delivering a blow on the
head, death to the victim can be expected.
Concurrence with the criminal purpose of another may make one a
co-principal.
Even if only one of the offenders originated the criminal design
and the other merely concurred with him in his criminal purpose,
but before the actual commission of the crime both of them agreed
and decided to commit it, the other is not merely an accomplice. He
is also a principal, because having agreed and decided to commit a
felony with another, he becomes a co-conspirator.
No knowledge of the criminal design of the principal - not an
accomplice.
Sixto and Cosme were partners in the trade of raising and selling
hogs. Ireneo Ibanez was not directly involved in the business between
the two. A quarrel between Sixto and Cosme sprang simultaneously
out of a business discussion. Ireneo obtruded into the discussion to
support the interest of his brother Sixto. In the course of the quarrel,
one of the trio mentioned the word "fight." Whereupon Cosme started
to run towards his house. lreneo and Sixto pursued Cosme. When
they caught up with Cosme, Sixto held Cosme's neck from behind and
proceeded to tighten his grip. At this juncture, Ireneo stabbed Cosme
in such a sudden and unexpected manner that the eyewitnesses did
not even notice that Ireneo's blow carried a dagger with it. And Sixto
showed surprise when later he saw the bloodstained dagger of Ireneo,
und asked him, "What did you do?" Sixto immediately loosened his
grip on Cosme's neck.
563

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Criminal Law
Held: While it is true that the act ofSixto coincided with Ireneo's
act of stabbing, simultaneousness does not of itself demonstrate the
concurrence of will nor the unity of action and purpose which are the
bases of the responsibility of two or more individuals.
There is no proof that they pursued Cosme because they had
accepted a challenge coming from him. Apparently, their intention
was only to prevent him from taking from his house a weapon with
which to carry out an attack. They were, therefore, just advancing a
legitimate defense by preventing an illegitimate aggression. Sixto's
act of holding Cosme's neck from behind is no proof of intention to
kill. At that time, he did not know yet what his brother's intention
was. It was not shown that Sixto knew that his brother was armed.
(People v. Ibanez, 77 Phil. 664)
Ciriaco Limbo was an employee of the Bureau of Printing. He
stole several blank certificates used for the registration oflarge cattle
from the bookbinding department of that Bureau and sold them to
one of his co-defendants, Pedro Flores, for the sum of P15.00 each.
These registration certificates were used by Flores in effecting a sale
of the two horses for the theft of which they were convicted.
Limbo took no part, direct or indirect, either in the stealing of
the horses or in selling them after they had been stolen. He had no
knowledge of the commission of the crime of theft by his co-defendants.
He did not enter into any conspiracy or arrangement with them
looking to the commission of the crime of theft of the horses. He did
not receive any share of the proceeds of the sale of the horses.
Held: Limbo was liable only for the theft of the blank certificates,
but he was neither a principal, an accomplice, nor an accessory in the
crime of theft of the horses committed by the other defendants. (U.S.
v. Flores, 25 Phil. 595, 597)
The accomplice Intends by his acts, to commit or take part In the
execution of the crime.
Carino v. People

(G.R. No. L-14752, April 20, 1963)

TITLE TW O
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 18

illnesses free of charge, and appellant believed that his wife and children
owe their lives to Dr. Lava. One night in 1946, Dr. Lava arri ved in the house
of the appellant asking for shelter. Appellant gave Lava accommodation for
the night. The next time that appellant heard from Dr. Lava was in May
1949, when he received a note from the latter asking for some cigarettes,
powdered milk and canned goods. Appellant furnished in as small amounts
as he could send. It also appears that appellant, as a ranking employee of
the National City Bank of New York, helped the Huks to open accounts and
changed dollars to Philippine money for the Huks. The Court of Appeals
found him guilty as an accomplice in the crime of rebellion.
Held: There are two elements required, in accordance with the definition
of the term accomplice given in the R.P.C. (Art. 18), in order that a person
may be considered an accomplice to a criminal act, namely, (1) that he takes
part in the execution of the crime by previous or simultaneous acts and (2)
that he intends by said acts to commit or take part in the execution of the
crime. The crime of rebellion is committed by rising publicly and taking up
arms against the Government for any of the purposes mentioned in Art icle
134 of the R.P.C. Appellant did not take up arms against the Government.
He did not openly take part in the commission of the crime of rebellion by
any other act without which said crime would not have been committed.
The act of sending cigarettes and food supplies to a famous Huk does not
prove intention to help him in committing rebellion or insurrection. Neither
is the act of having dollars changed to pesos or in helping the Huks to open
accounts, by themselves show an intent or desire to participate or help in
an uprising or rebellion. Appellant was a public relations officer of the bank
of which he was an employee and the work above indicated performed by
him was a part of his functions as an employee of the bank. Goo d faith is to
be presumed. No presumption of the existence of a criminal intent can arise
from the above acts which are in themselves legitimate and legal. Said acts
are by law presumed to be innocent acts while the opposite has not been
proved. In the crime of treason, any act of giving comfort or moral aid may
be criminal, but such is not the case with rebellion where the Penal Code
expressly declares that there must be a public uprising and taking up of
arms in rebellion or insurrection. Granting for the sake of argument that
appellant had the criminal intent of aiding the communists in their unlawful
designs to overthrow the Government, the assistance thus extended may not
be considered efficacious enough to help in the successful prosecution of the
crime of insurrection or rebellion so as to make him an accomplice therein.

Community of design.

Facts: It appears that appellant is a close friend of Dr. Jesus Lava, a top
leader of the Communists, who was bis classmate in the high school, and who
later on became the godfather of appellant's first child. Appellant's wife and
children were treated successfully by Dr. Lava in 1939 and 1943 for various

In this case, the accused facilitated the commission of the
crime by providing his own house as the venue thereof. His presence
throughout the commission of the heinous offense, without him doing

664

565

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Criminal Law

anything to prevent the malefactors or help the victim, indubitably
show community of design and cooperation, although he had no direct
participation in the execution thereof. Accused is guilty as accomplice
in the crime ofrape with homicide. (People v. Maliao, et al., G.R. No.
178058, July 31, 2009)
The community of design need not be to commit the crime actually
committed. It Is sufficient if there was a common purpose to commit
a particular crime and that the crime actually committed was a
natural or probable consequence of the intended crime.
1.

In the case of People v. Largo, 99 Phil. 1061, it appears
that Crispin Verzo caused Amadeo Salazar and Gavino
Largo to load a time bomb in a PAL plane, which carried
Fructuoso Suzara. Verzo was the paramour of Suzara's
wife. The bomb exploded when the plane was in mid-air.
The plane fell into the sea. All of its 13 passengers and
crew members were killed. It was held that Salazar and
Largo were accomplices in the crime of which Crispin
Verzo was found guilty as principal, "because although
they cooperated in the execution of the criminal act with
knowledge that something illicit or forbidden was being
done, there is no evidence that they knew that the act
would, or was intended to, cause the destruction of the
plane and its passengers."

2.

In the case of U.S. v. De Jesus, 2 Phil. 514, three men
entered the house of Ramon Osete for the purpose of
abducting his daughter, but instead of accomplishing the
abduction, they killed Osete. While the homicide was being
perpetrated, two other men remained in the street in front
of the victim's house, standing by the carriage which had
brought them to the scene of the crime. It was held that
the two men who were on the street ready to overcome any
opposition wh.ich they might meet were accomplices.
Where the accomplices consent to aid in the
commission of forcible abduction (a crime in which the
use of force is involved), they will be responsible as such
accomplices for the resulting homicide, the commission of
wh.ich might reasonably have been regarded as a possibility
in attempting to carry out the abduction, and this even if
566

Art. 18

it appears that the purpose to commit the homicide on the
part of the principal was unknown to the accomplices.
When the owner of the gun knew that It would be used to kill a
particular person, and the principal used it to kill another person,
the owner of the gun Is not an accomplice as to the killing of the
other person.
Although Serapio got the carbine from Sulpicio, the latter
cannot be considered a principal by indispensable cooperation or
an accomplice. There is no evidence at all that Sulpicio was aware
Serapio would use the rifle to kill Casiano. Presumably, he gave the
carbine to Serapio for him to shoot Rafael only as per their agreement.
Neither is there concrete proof that Sulpicio abetted the shooting of
Casiano. Sulpicio might have been liable if after the shooting of Rafael,
Serapio returned the carbine to him but upon seeing Casiano fleeing,
immediately asked again for the carbine and Sulpicio voluntarily
gave it to him. Serapio's criminal intention then would be reasonably
apparent to Sulpicio and the latter's giving back of the rifle would
constitute his assent thereto. But such was not the case. Sulpicio,
therefore, must be acquitted for the killing of Casiano Cabizares.
(People v. De la Cerna, G.R. No. L-20911, October 30, 1967, 21 SCRA
569, 586-587)
Second requisite:
Like the principal by cooperation under par. 3 of Article 17, the
accomplice cooperates with the principal by clirect participation. But
the cooperation of an accomplice is only necessary, not indispensable.
However, if there is conspiracy between two or among several
persons, even if the cooperation of one offender is only necessary, the
latter is also a principal by conspiracy. The nature of the cooperation
becomes immaterial.
Examples of cooperation by accomplice:
a.

By previous acts.
The example of cooperation by previous act is the
lending of a dagger or pistol to the murderer, knowing the
latter's criminal purpose.
567

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
In the crime of rape, the pharmacist who, knowing
the criminal purpose of another, furnishes him the drug
with which he will put his victim to sleep in order to rape
her, is also an accomplice in the crime. (U.S. u. Flores, 25
Phil. 595, 597-598)

b.

By simultaneous acts.
The defendant who held one of the hands of the victim
and tried to take away the latter's revolver, while his
co-defendant was attacking him, is an accomplice, for he
cooperated in the execution of the crime by simultaneous
acts without any previous agreement or understanding
with his co-defendant. (People v. Escarro, 89 Phil. 520, 524)
The three persons who actually detained the offended
woman were principals in the crime of illegal detention and
the three other accused who held the victim's companion,
in order to prevent the latter from rendering any help to
the victim, were accomplices, there being no conspiracy
among them. (People u. Crisostomo, 46 Phil. 775, 784)

The cooperation of an accomplice is not due to a conspiracy.
People v. Francisco

(G.R. No. L-6270, February 28, 1955)
Facts: Francisco, then Mayor of Cordon, lsabela, accompanied by his
co-accused Berganio, Badua, Dasalia and Tagasa, brought along with them
in a jeep, Ricardo Corpus, whose hands were tied at his back and proceeded

to the PC detachment where Francisco told the officer of the day that he was
leaving Corpus under the custody of the constabulary because he was a bad

man and wanted to take his life. The Corporal told him that he could not
accept Corpus, because there was no detention cell there. Francisco and his
co-accused left with Corpus. Corpus disappeared and was not seen anymore.

The evidence shows that Francisco was the only one who had the criminal
intention to kidnap Corpus.
Held: The companions of Francisco (Berganio, Badua, Dasalla and
Tagasa) cannot be convicted as principals because of the failure of the
prosecution to prove the existence ofconspiracy between them and Francisco.

But they are not entirely free from criminal liability for the reason that
they helped Francisco in bringing Corpus from the municipal building to
the PC detachment and ultimately to Barrio Raniag. These acts constitute
cooperation by "simultaneous or previous acts" under Article 18of the R.P.C.
568

TITLE TWO

Art. 18

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies
Once it is postulated that one of three accused had conspired with his
co-accused to kill the victim, he cannot be regarded only as an accomplice.

(People v. Manzano, Nos. L-33643-44, July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA 250, 259)
The complicity of the accused to the crime was their part in
the mauling incident and in acceding to the instructions of Castro
to go to the vicinity of Bautista Hospital and then to an area near
the Aglipay Church in Caridad to collect the money then being
demanded by Castro. The participation of appellants, standing alone,
without conspiracy being established, neither could be described
as constitutive of the crime of kidnapping for ransom nor as being
indispensable to its commission. Accused are accomplices in the crime
of kidnapping for ransom. (People v. Castro, G.R. No. 132726, July
23, 2002)
When the acts of the accused are not indispensable in the killlng,
they are merely accomplices.

As to appellants Emigdio and Alfredo, the evidence as a whole
would show that they were not entirely free from participation in
the killing of the deceased. The numerous contusions inflicted on the
deceased support the assertion that they threw stones at the deceased,
but the throwing of the stones was done during the struggle between
Marciano and the deceased, after the latter had attacked the former
with the iron pipe. Absolutely no evidence exists to prove that any
stone thrown by either Emigdio or Alfredo inflicted any mortal injury
on Felix Jugo, nor docs it appear that they joined Marciano in hitting
the deceased after the latter crashed to the ground from Marciano's
blows. Thus, the form and manner of assistance by Emigdio and
Alfredo do not safely disclose that unity of purpose and design and
compulsion by a common motive that would make them co-principals
with the actual slayer, Marciano. The nature of the killing as an
offshoot of a spontaneous turn of events not a previously conceived
ambush - is seen by the use of stones by Emigdio and Alfredo,
weapons unlikely to be chosen in the cool calculation ofa treacherous
ambuscade. At most, they could only be held liable as accomplices, in
that they cooperated in the execution of the offense by simultaneous
acts which were not indispensable. (People u. Villegas, et al., 59 O.G.
7060, 7064)
The act of one, blocking people coming to the aid of the victim
while being assailed is undoubtedly one of help and cooperation to the
569

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

assailants. But, it is not indispensable to the stabbing of the victim.
Hence, he is merely an accomplice. (People v. Resayaga, No. L-49536,
March 30, 1988, 159 SCRA 426, 432; People v. Anin, No. L-39046,
June 30, 1975, 64 SCRA 729, 736 [hitting the victim's companion
with a piece of wood, apparently to dissuade him from going to the
succor of the victim))

a person responsible as an accomplice in the crime committed. It
should be noted that the accused's presence and company were not
indispensable and essential to the perpetration of the kidnapping for
ransom; hence, she is only liable as an accomplice. (People v. Gamboa,
G.R. No. 172707, October 1, 2013)

One who acted as a look-out or guard and also assisted in taking
the stolen articles in the crime of robbery with homicide, absent a
conspiracy. (People v. Parcon, Nos. L-39121-22, December 19, 1981,
110 SCRA 425, 434, 435)

The wounds Inflicted by an accomplice in crimes against persons
should not have caused the death of victim.

The accomplice merely supplies the principal with material or moral
aid without conspiracy with the latter.

Where the evidence does not prove that appellant conspired with
the malefactors, he cannot be considered as a principal. However, in
going with them, knowing their criminal intention, and in staying
outside of the house with them while the others went inside the
store to rob and kill the victim, the appellant effectively supplied
the criminals with material and moral aid, making him guilty as an
accomplice. (People v. Balli, No. L-14044, August 5, 1966, 17 SCRA
892, 898; People v. Doctolero, G.R. No. 34386, February 7, 1991, 193
SCRA 632, 645)
The act of one of the accused in inflicting wound upon the victim
several times with a small knife only after the latter had fallen to the
ground seriously wounded, if not already dead, is not necessary and
indispensable for the consummation of the criminal assault but merely
a "show-off or expression of sympathy or feeling ofcamaraderie with
the other accused. For such act, the accused should be found guilty
only as accomplice. (People v. Vicente, No. L-26241, May 21, 1969, 28
SCRA 247, 256-257)
While the accused claims that she just came to the resort
thinking it was a swimming party, it was inevitable that she acquired
knowledge of the criminal design of the principals when she saw Chan
being guarded in the room. A rational person would have suspected
something was wrong and would have reported such incident to the
police. The accused, however, chose to keep quiet, and even spent
the night at the cottage. It has been held before that being present
and giving moral support when a crime is being committed will make
670

Art. 18

The person charged as an accomplice should not have inflicted
a mortal wound. (People v. Aplegido, 76 Phil. 571) if he inflicted a
mortal wound, he becomes a principal by direct participation.
Thus, when Z cut the deceased on the neck with a bolo and
afterwards R likewise gave the deceased another blow on the neck,
both wounds inflicted being mortal, even if only R originated the
intention to assault the deceased while Z did no more than to assist
the action of the initiator of the crime, the two must be considered
as co-principals and therefore both are responsible for the crime
perpetrated. (U.S. • Zalsos, 40 Phil. 96)
In the following cases, the other accused were held to be
accomplices only, because the wounds inflicted by them were not the
cause of death:
1.

People v. Azcona, 59 Phil. 580, because the wounds inflicted
by the accused did not materially contribute to the death
of the deceased.

2.

People v. Tamayo, 56 Phil. 587, because the wound inflicted
by the accused was not of a character that would have
resulted in the death of the deceased.

3.

People v. Cortes, 55 Phil. 143, because the accused who
were armed with clubs merely struck the victim, as he fell
by the fatal blow made by the principal, without causing
the victim serious injuries.

4.

People v. Antonio, 73 Phil. 421, stoning the victim already
mortally wounded by other accused, the stoning not being
the cause of death.

571

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TWO

Criminal Law

Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

People v. Azcona
(59 Phil. 580)
Facts: Azcona induced the other accused to kill Cabili. The one who
fired the shot which killed Cabili was the principal by direct participation
and Azcona was the principal by induction. The two other accused inflicted
wounds after the fatal shot by the principal by direct participation, when
Cabili was either dead or in the throes of death.
Held: The two other accused are merely accomplices.

3.

Art. 18

The accomplice in crimes against persons does not inflict
the more or most serious wounds.

Problem: A gave a fist blow on the face of B. Seeing what A had
done to B,C stabbed B to death. Is A an accomplice? No. The one
who had the original criminal design was C, the wound inflicted by
C being the more serious. A could not have concurred in the criminal
purpose of C, because A was the first to strike B and A did nothing
more after Chad stabbed B.

People v. Antonio
(73 Phil. 421)

The criminal responsibility of A and C will be individual, that
is, each is responsible for the act actually performed by him.

Facts: One of the accused attacked and wounded the deceased, inflicting
upon the latter, lacerated wounds on the forehead and on the neck. When the
deceased was already prostrated on the ground mortally wounded, accused
Faustino Divina threw stones against the wounded man, inflicting contusions
on his body. The cause of death were the wounds on the forehead and neck.

But if C stabbed B first, and as B was in a dying condition, A
gave a first blow on B's face, then A is an accomplice.

Held: Faustino Divina is only an accomplice.

In these cases, the following rules are indicated:
1.

2.

The one who had the original criminal design is the person
who committed the resulting crime.

Reason: When A gave a fist blow on the face of B after the latter
had been mortally wounded by C, it shows that A concurred in the
criminal purpose of C.
Being present and giving moral support when a crime is being
committed will make a person responsible only as accomplice in
the crime committed.

Thus, in the Tamayo ease, the son was the one who
entertained the original criminal design, because it was he
who caused the death of the victim which gave rise to the
crime of homicide.

Absent knowledge of the criminal purpose of the principal, giving
aid or encouragement, either morally or materially, in the commission
of the crime, mere presence at the scene of the crime does not make
one an accomplice. (People u. Toling, No. L-28548, July 13, 1979, 91
SCRA 382, 400)

The father, who continued choking the victim after
the fatal blow was given, merely concurred in the criminal
purpose of his son.

People v. Ubifia
(97 Phil. 515)

The accomplice, after concurring in the criminal purpose
of the principal, cooperates by previous or simultaneous
acts.

Facts: Tomas Ubiia, who was defeated by Aureliano Carag for the
mayorship of Solana, Cagayan, and whom Carag had insulted, conspired
with five persons to kill Carag. These five persons brought along Romero
Pagulayan, Pascual Escote, and Pablo Binayug to the place where Carag was

When the cooperation is by simultaneous act, the
accomplice takes part while the crime is being committed
by the principal by direct participation or immediately
thereafter.

killed, but the actual killing was perpetrated by the said five persons. Their

Thus, in the cases mentioned, the principal had
already attacked the victim before the accomplice struck
the said victim.

Held: Other than being present and, perhaps, giving moral support,
no act of Pagulayan, Escote, and Binayug may be said to constitute a direct
participation in the acts of execution. Neither did they induce in any manner,

572

participation in the act of killing Carag was limited to being present and
staying around the premises, while the five conspirators fired at the victim
and carried out their purpose.

573

Art. 18

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Criminal Law
the commission of the offense; they joined the conspirators after the latter had
decided to commit the act. Their presence and company was not indispensable
and essential to the perpetration of the murder. They are only accomplices.

criminal act of the principal by direct participation and that of the
person charged as accomplice.
People v. De la Cruz
(61 Phil. 162)

The moral aid may be through advice, encouragement or agreement

But the complicity which is penalized requires a certain degree
of cooperation whether moral, - through advice, encouragement,
or agreement, or material
through external acts. In the case of
accused Romana, there is no evidence of moral or material cooperation,
and none of an agreement to commit the crime in question. Her
mere presence and silence, while they are simultaneous acts, do not
constitute cooperation, for it does not appear that they encouraged
or nerved her co-accused Martin to commit the crime of arson; her
failure to give alarm, being a subsequent act, does not make her liable
as an accomplice. (People v. Silvestre and Atienza, 56 Phil. 353,358)
The responsibility of the accomplice is to be determined by
acts of aid and assistance, either prior to or simultaneous with the
commission of the crime, rendered knowingly for the principal therein,
and not by the mere fact of having been present at its execution,
unless the object of such presence was to encourage the principal or
to apparently or really increase the odds against the victim.
Such an intent, concurring with some overt act, must be
specifically shown by the evidence of the prosecution. (Decision of
Supreme Court of Spain, June 25, 1886, cited in U.S. v. Guevara, 2
Phil. 528, 532)
But the advice, encouragement or agreement should not be the
determining cause of the commission of the crime by the principal
by direct participation; otherwise, the one who gave the advice or
encouragement or the one who entered into the agreement would be
a principal by inducement. When the accomplice gives an advice or
encouragement to, or enters into an agreement with the principal,
he knows the principal is going to commit the crime.
Third requisite:
There must be a relation between the criminal act of the principal
and the act of the one charged as accomplice.

It is not enough that a person entertains an identical criminal
design as that of the principal. There must be a relation between the
674

Art. 18

Facts: A young lady was attacked by Reyes, her suitor, by throwing her
on the ground and passing his hand over her body. When they learned of the
incident, the parents of both parties agreed that the father of Reyes would
punish him. In the meantime, the brother of the young lady, not knowing of
such agreement, armed himself with a pistol and looked for Reyes to avenge
the honor of his sister. In the house of the young lady, where Reyes was about

to be punished, she immediately stabbed him on the chest with a pen-knife.
At the time, the brother of the young lady was under the house, again with
his pistol, waiting for Reyes to come down in order to kill him. For the death
of Reyes, the brother of the young lady was accused as accomplice.
Held: There can be no liability by reason of complicity if there is no
relation between the criminal act of the principal by direct participation and
that of the person charged as accomplice. The most that could be said against
the brother of the young lady, is that he intended to kill the deceased but,
even then, he did nothing in connection with his sister's act of attacking and
killing said deceased.
An accomplice may be liable for a crime different from that which
the principal committed.

1.

A attacked B with treachery, the attack being sudden and
unexpected. When B was mortally wounded, C, father ofA,
appeared, placed himself upon B's abdomen, and held his
hands. Later, D also appeared and held both knees of B,
C and D made it possible for A to search the body of B for
the latter's revolver. It was not shown that C and D knew
of the manner A attacked B. What they knew was that A
had unlawfully attacked and wounded B. It was held that
A was guilty of murder qualified by treachery (Art. 248)
and C and D were guilty as accomplices in the crime of
homicide. (Art. 249) Article 62, paragraph 4, provides that
the circumstances which consist in the material execution
of the act or in the means employed to accomplish it
(among them being treachery), shall serve to aggravate the
liability (or qualify the crime) only of those persons who
had knowledge of them at the time of the execution of the
act or their cooperation therein. (See People v. Babiera, 52
Phil. 98)
575

Art. 18

2.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
A, a NARIC guard, asked C to help him (A) remove from
the NARJC warehouse some sacks of rice belonging to the
NARIC, and sold them to D.
The qualifying circumstance of grave abuse of
confidence which in the case of A makes the crime
qualified theft (Art. 310) does not apply to C, who was not
in confidential relations with the NARIC. C is guilty as
accomplice in the commission of the crime of simple theft
(Art. 308) only. (See People v. Valdellon, 46 Phil. 245,252)
Where the appellants may be said to have joined
only in the plan to rob, by providing the banca used in the
robbery, which makes them accomplices, they arc not liable
for the killing committed by the principals in the course
of the robbery. Having been left in the banca, they could
not have tried to prevent the killing, as is required of one
seeking relief from liability for assaults committed during
the robbery. (People v. Doble, No. L-30028, May 31, 1982,
114 SCRA 131, 148, 149)
Article 62, paragraph 3, provides that aggravating
circumstances which arise from the private relations of
the offender with the offended party shall aggravate the
liability (or qualify the crime) of the principals, accomplices
and accessories as to whom such circumstances are
attendant.

Distinguish accomplice from principal in general.

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

a previous act which, however, cannot be considered indispensable for
the reason that even though the offender did not lend his dagger or
pistol, the murderer could have obtained it somewhere else or from
some other person. In such a case, the participation of the offender is
that of an accomplice by virtue of the provisions of this article. (See
1 Viada, Cod. Pen., 370)
Where the accused struck the deceased on the forehead with a
piece of wood, rendering the latter unconscious, thereby facilitating
the subsequent slaying of the deceased by the other accused, the
former must be deemed responsible as an accomplice in the killing.
(People • Templonuevo, 106 Phil. 1003, 1007)
Note:

Distinguish an accomplice from a principal by cooperation.
The participation of the offender in a case of complicity, although
necessary, is not indispensable as in the case of a co-principal by
cooperation. For example: if one lends his dagger or pistol to a
murderer fully knowing that the latter will commit murder, he
undoubtedly cooperates in the commission of the crime of murder with
676

The accused who struck the deceased on the forehead
must have knowledge ofthe intention of the other accused
to kill the deceased before he struck the deceased. If
he had no such knowledge, he is not an accomplice in
the killing of the deceased. He is principal by direct
participation in the crime he personally committed, say,
physical injuries.

While the act of holding the victim by Romeo was one of help and
cooperation, it is not indispensable for the commission of the offense
by the others who boloed the victim, as the hacking could have been
committed just the same without his holding the victim. Romeo is
only an accomplice. (People v. Geronimo, No. L-35700, October 15,
1973, 53 SCRA 246,259)
Note:

An accomplice is one who does not take a direct part in the
commission of the act, who does not force or induce others to commit
it, or who does not cooperate in the commission of the crime by
another act without which it would not have been accomplished, yet
cooperates in the execution of the act by previous or simultaneous
actions. (People v. Silvestre, 56 Phil. 353, 356)

Art. 18

If there was conspiracy between Romeo and the others,
he would be liable as principal, notwithstanding the fact
that his cooperation was not indispensable.

Distinguish an accomplice from a principal by direct participation.
(1)

In both, there is community of criminal design.
By the overwhelming weight of authority, the same
community of purpose and intention is necessary to justify
the conviction of an accused person in the character of
accomplice that is necessary to sustain conviction in the
character of principal. (People v. Tamayo, 44 Phil. 38, 49)
We must hear in mind that unity of purpose and of
action must exist, not only among the principals themselves,
577

Art. 19

but also between the principals and the accomplices, and
that what distinguishes the latter from the former is that
the accomplices cooperate in the execution of the offense
by previous or simultaneous acts other than those which
would characterize them as principals, pursuant to Article
17 of the R.P.C. (People vu. Manalac, C.A., 46 0.G. 11D)
The person who entertains the owner of a house
while robbers are assaulting it, so that he will not return
thereto until after the robbery has been consummated, is
an accomplice in the crime, inasmuch as he cooperated
therein by simultaneous act, although not an indispensable
one for its accomplishment. (I Viada 370, cited in U.S. w.
Diris, 133, 136)
This case implies that the owner of the house was
entertained at some distance from the place where the
robbery was committed. If that person was in the same
place, say under the house, talking with the owner of the
house in order to distract his attention from what was gomng
on upstairs, he was a principal by direct participation,
serving as guard to warn his companions in case there
should arise any necessity for giving an alarm.
2)

(3)

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

As to the acts performed, there is no clear-cut distinction
between the acts of the accomplice and those of the
principal by direct participation. That is why, in case of
doubt, it shall be resolved in favor of lesser responsibility,
that is, that of mere accomplice.
Between or among principals liable for the same offense,
there must be conspiracy; but between the principals and
the accomplices, there is no conspiracy. (People v. Aplegido,
76 Phil. 571, 575)

Art. 19.Accessories. - Accessories are those who, having
knowledge of the commission of the crime, and without having
participated therein, either as principals or accomplices, take
part subsequent to its commission in any of the following
manners:
1.
By profiting themselves or assisting the offender to
profit by the effects of the crime;

Art. 19

2.
By concealing or destroying the body of the crime
or the effects or instruments thereof, in order to prevent its
discovery;
3.
By harboring, concealing, or assisting in the escape
of the principal of the crime, provided the accessory acts with
abuse of his public functions or whenever the author of the
crime is guilty of treason, parricide, murder, or an attempt
to take the life of the Chief Executive, or is known to be
habitually guilty of some other crime.

An accessory does not participate in the criminal design, nor
cooperate in the commission of the felony, but, with knowledge of the
commission of the crime, he subsequently takes part in three ways: (a)
by profiting from the effects of the crime; (b) by concealing the body,
effects or instruments of the crime in order to prevent its discovery;
and (c) by assisting in the escape or concealment of the principal of
the crime, provided he acts with abuse of his public functions or the
principal is guilty of treason, parricide, murder, or an attempt to take
the life of the Chief Executive, or is known to be habitually guilty of
some other crime. (People v. Verzola, No. L-35022, December 21, 1977,
80 SCRA 600, 608)

IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRAS ES IN ARTICLE 19.
1.

"Having knowledge."
An accessory must have knowledge of the commission of
the crime, and having that knowledge, he took part subsequent
to its commission.

Knowledge of the commission of crime may be acquired subsequent
to the acquisition of stolen property.
U.S. v. Montano
(3 Phil. 110)
Facts: The robbers took and carried away carabaos belonging to another.
These animals were found in the possession of A who acquired them without
knowing that they had been illegally taken. When the owners of the carabaos
informed A that they were illegally deprived of their animals, A demanded
the payment of one-half of what he had paid for them. The owners promised
to come back with the money. When the owners came back, A informed them

578
579

Art. 19

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

that he had returned the animals to the persons from whom he had bought
them.

4.

that he should have acquired the property, knowing at that time that it had
been stolen. It is sufficient that after acquiring that knowledge, he concealed
or disposed of the property, thereby depriving the owner thereof.

When a person knew that his co-accused had no legitimate
business; that some of the goods were taken to him as early as 5:00
to 6:00 o'clock in the morning; and that said co-accused was neither
a barber nor the owner of a sari-sari store such as would induce in
him a rational belief that the latter's possession of said goods (among
them barber's utensils) was legitimate; the conclusion is that he had
knowledge of their illegal source. (People v. Dalena, CA-G.R. Nos.
11387-R and 11388-R, October 25, 1954)
2.

"Commission of the crime."
The crime committed by the principal must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt.
Thus, where it is doubtful whether a woman killed her
husband maliciously, as it is possible that she might have acted
in self-defense, the fact that their servant took part in the burial
of the deceased in a secluded place would not make the servant
an accessory in parricide, an offense which was not conclusively
proven. (See People v. Pardito, G.R. No. L-3234, March 1, 1952
[Unrep.])

3.

"Without having participated therein either as principals or
accomplices."
A attacked and fatally wounded B. Seeing B fall to the
ground as a result of the fatal blow made by A, C, and D hit B
with a piece of wood each was carrying. When B died, A, C, and
D buried the corpse to prevent the authorities from discovering
the crime.
Can A be held liable as an accessory? No, because he already
participated as principal. Are C and D accessories? No, because
they already participated as accomplices.
580

"Take part subsequent to its commission."
The accessory takes part after the crime has been
committed. Note that paragraphs 1,2, and 3 of Article 19, which
describe the different acts of the accessory, refer to those acts
performed after the crime had been committed.

Held: To declare the accused guilty as accessory, it is not necessary

Knowledge of the commission of crime may be established by
circumstantial evidence.

Art. 19

Specific acts of accessories.
1.

By profiting themselves or assisting the offender to profit by the
effects of the crime.
The crime committed by the principal under this paragraph
may be any crime, provided it is not a light felony.
a.

By profiting themselves by the effects of the crime.
Examples: A person who received any property from
another, and used it, knowing that the same had been
stolen, is guilty of the crime of theft as an accessory. (People
v. Tanchoco, 76 Phil. 463, 467)
In murder, one who shared in the reward given for
the commission of the crime (U.S. v. Empainado, 9 Phil.
613) profited by the effects of the crime.
But one who received P200.00 from the owner of a
stolen jeep, as a reward for locating it in the possession of
someone who had bought it, is not an accessory, because
the amount of P200.00 was in the nature of a reward and
not fruits or effects of the crime. (People v. Yatco, C.A., 51
O.G. 260)
The accessory should not take the property without the
consent of the principal.
In profiting by the effects of the crime, the accessory
must receive the property from the principal. He should
not take it without the consent of the principal. If he
took it without the consent of the principal, he is not an
accessory but a principal in the crime of theft. Theft may be
committed by taking with intent to gain, personal property
from one who stole it, without the latter's consent.
581

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 19

When is profiting by the effects of the crime punished as the
act ofprincipal, and not the act of accessory'

Examples of concealing the body of the crime.
a.

When a person knowingly acquired or received
property taken by the brigands. (Art. 307, R.P.C.)
b.

In kidnapping for ransom, those who acted as runners
or couriers in obtaining the ransom money (People v.
Magsino, G.R. No. L-3649, January 29, 1954) assisted the
offenders to profit by the effects of the crime.
One who takes part in cattle rustling by profiting
himself by its effects with knowledge of the crime is only
an accessory after the fact. (Taer v. Court ofAppeals, G.R.
No. 85204, June 18, 1990, 186 SCRA 598, 604-605)
An accessory should not be in conspiracy with the principal.
A conspired with others to steal certain goods in the
customhouse. A agreed to pay, as in fact he paid them,
a substantial sum of money upon delivery of the stolen
goods in his warehouse from the wagons on which his coconspirators loaded the goods at the customhouse. It was
held that A was guilty of the crime of theft as a principal
and not merely as an accessory. (U.S. v. Tan Tiap Co., 35
Phil. 611)
By concealing or destroying the body of the crime to prevent its
discovery.
The crime committed by the principal under this paragraph
may be any crime, provided it is not a light felony.
"Body of the crime."
Same as "corpus delicti."
It means that a specific offense was in fact committed by
someone. (People v. Marquez, 43 O.G. No. 5)
582

Those who assist in the burial of the victim of a homicide to
prevent the discovery of the crime incur the responsibilities
of accessories. (U.S. v. Leal, 1 Phil. 118)

In homicide or murder, it is necessary to prove that a
particular person is the victim. The victim must be properly
identified. Thus, if the body of the victim cannot be found,
the crime cannot be proved. Hence, the concealing of the
body of the victim is in effect concealing the crime itself.

Assisting the offender to profit by the effects of the crime.
Examples: A person who receives any property from
another, which he knows to have been stolen, and sells the
same for the thief to whom he gives the proceeds of the
sale, is guilty of the crime of theft, as an accessory. ( U.S.
v. Galanco, 11 Phil. 575)

2.

Art. 19

Criminal Law

b.

Furnishing the means to make it appear that the deceased
was armed, by placing a weapon in his hand when already
dead, and that it was necessary to kill him on account of
his resistance to the constabulary men; or making it appear
that the deceased who had been arrested ran away. (U.S. v.
Cuison, 20 Phil. 433; People v. Saladino, G.R. No. L-11893,
May 23, 1958)

This example may serve to illustrate "destroying the body
of the crime."
The mere act of a person of carrying the cadaver of one
unlawfully killed, when it was buried to prevent the discovery of
the crime, is sufficient to make him responsible as an accessory
under paragraph 2 of Article 19. (People v. Galleto, 78 Phil. 820)
There must be an attempt to hide the body of the crime.
With respect to appellant A.R., he should be acquitted.
According to his affidavit the only evidence against him - he
was merely ordered to board the jeepney, not knowing, not even
suspecting, the reason or purpose of the ride. He did not take
part in the killing, neither did he profit by it, nor try to conceal
the same from the authorities. It is true that he helped his
companions in removing the two dead bodies from the jeepney
and throwing them into the ditch; but there was no attempt
to bury or hide said bodies, not even cover them with grass
or bushes. In fact, the evident design and plan of the culprits
as unfolded during the trial was not to hide the bodies, but to
just leave them on the roadside so as to make it appear that
the two victims were killed by Huks in an encounter with the
Government forces. (People v. De la Cruz, 100 Phil. 624, 633)
683

Art, 19

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Criminal Law

Art. 19

Concealing or destroying the effects or instruments of the crime
to prevent its discovery.

Is a person who merely received a property knowing it to be stolen
liable as an accessory?

A person who received personal property knowing that it
had been stolen, for the purpose of concealing the same, as in
fact he concealed it, is guilty of the crime of theft as an accessory.
(U.S. v. Villaluz, 32 Phil. 376)

In People v. Tanchoco, 76 PhiL. 463, it was held: "A person who
receives any property from another, knowing that the same had
been stolen, is guilty of the crime of theft, as an accessory after the
fact (encubridor). A person who receives any property from another,
which he knows to have been stolen, for the purpose of selling the
same and to share in the proceeds of the sale, is guilty of the crime
of theft, as an accessory after the fact. (U.S. v. Galanco, 11 Phil. 575)
In the same manner that a person who receives stolen property for
the purpose of concealing the same, is likewise guilty of the crime of
theft as an accessory after the fact." (U.S. w. Villaluz, 32 Phil. 376)

He is guilty of the crime of homicide as an accessory, under
paragraph 2 of Article 19, who received a pistol or a knife,
knowing that it had been used in killing the deceased, and
concealed it.
The stolen property is the effect of the crime. The pistol or
knife is the instrument of the crime.

A person who destroyed the ladder which he knew had
been used by another in climbing the wall of the house where
the latter had committed robbery, is guilty of the same crime
as accessory. The ladder is an instrument of the crime.
"To prevent its discovery."
The pronoun "its" refers to the word "crime." In the case of
U.S. • Villaluz, 32 Phil. 376, 380, the Supreme Court stated:
"Such facts also show that her concealment of said articles was
for the purpose of preventing and defeating the discovery of the
crime."

3.

Two classes of accessories are contemplated In paragraph 3 of
Article 19.
a.

Public officers who harbor, conceal or assist in the escape of the
principal of any crime (not light felony) with abuse ofhis public
functions.
Requisites:

Note that the concealing or destroying of the body of the
crime, the effects or instruments thereof, must be done in order
to prevent the discovery of the crime. Note also that what is
concealed is the body of the crime, the effects or instruments
thereof, not the principal who committed the crime. If the
principal is concealed, paragraph 3 of Article 19 applies.
Simply assisting the principal in bringing the body down
the house to the foot of the stairs and leaving said body for anyone
to see, cannot be classified as an attempt to conceal or destroy
the body of the crime. The concealing or destroying of the body
of the crime, the effects or instruments thereof, must be done to
prevent the discovery of the crime. In this case, the body was left
at the foot of the stairs at a place where it was easily visible to
the public. (People v. Verzola, No. L-35022, December 21, 1977,
BO SCRA 600, 609)

By harboring, concealing or assisting in the escape of the
principal of the crime.

b.

(1)

The accessory is a public officer.

(2)

He harbors, conceals, or assists in the escape of the
principal.

(3)

The public officer acts with abuse of his public functions.

(4)

The crime committed by the principal is any crime, provided
it is not a light felony.

Private persons who harbor, conceal or assist in the escape of
the author of the crime - guilty of treason, parricide, murder,
or an attempt against the life of the President, or who is known
to be habitually guilty of some other crime.
Requisites:
(1)

That the accessory is a private person;

584
585

Art. 19

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

(2)

That he harbors, conceals or assists in the escape of the
author of the crime; and

(3)

That the crime committed by the principal is either: (a)
treason, (b) parricide, (c) murder, (d) an attempt against
the life of the President, or (e) that the principal is known
to be habitually guilty of some other crime.

"Habitually guilty of some other crime."
Thus, if a person was previously punished three times for less
serious physical injuries and now commits estafa, the one who helps
in his escape is liable as an accessory although the accessory is a
private individual.
But the accessory must have knowledge of the principal being
habitually guilty of some other crime, because the law says "or is
known to be habitually guilty of some other crime."

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 19

authorities and thus to prevent the detection of the guilty parties
and to aid them in escaping discovery and arrest, he is liable as an
accessory. (U.S. v. Romulo, 15 Phil. 408,415)
Where the accused was present when her husband was shot,
but she did not only enjoin her daughter not to reveal to anyone
what the latter knew, but also warned her daughter that she would
kill her if she would tell it to somebody, and when the peace officers
who repaired to their house to investigate what had happened asked
her, she (the accused) claimed that she had no suspects in mind, the
accused thereby concealed or assisted in the escape of the principal in
the crime, which made her liable as an accessory, under paragraph 3 of
Article 19 of the R.P.C., to the crime of murder. (People v. Talingdan,
No. L-32126, July 6, 1978, 84 SCRA 19, 35)
Accessories' liability is subordinate and subsequent.

Abusing his public office, the president of the town of Cabiao
refused to prosecute the crime of homicide and thus made it
possible for the principal offender to escape. He refused to make an
investigation of the serious occurrence, of which complaint was made
to him. The municipal president was found guilty as accessory. (U.S.
v. Yacat, I Phil. 443)

Where the alleged incendiary was acquitted, it is neither proper
nor possible to convict the defendant as accessory. The responsibility
of the accessory is subordinate to that of the principal in a crime,
because the accessory's participation therein is subsequent to its
commission, and his guilt is directly related to that of the principal
delinquent in the punishable act. If then the facts alleged are not
proven in the prosecution instituted, or do not constitute a crime, no
legal grounds exist for convicting a defendant as an accessory after
the fact for a crime not perpetrated. (U.S. v. Mendoza, 23 Phil. 194,
196)

One who kept silent with regard to the crime he witnessed Is not
an accessory.

When Is conviction of accessory possible, even if principal is
acquitted?

A person who saw the commission of a crime, say murder, by
another whom he knew, kept silent with regard to it, and did not
report it to any of the authorities is not liable even as an accessory.
(U.S. v. Caballeros, 4 Phil. 350; U.S. v. Callapag, 21 Phil. 262)

Conviction of an accessory is possible notwithstanding the
acquittal of the principal, if the crime was in fact committed, but the
principal was not held criminally liable, because of an exempting
circumstance (Art. 12), such as insanity or minority. In exempting
circumstances, there is a crime committed. Hence, there is a basis
for convicting the accessory.

A mayor who refused to prosecute offender Is an accessory.

The reason for this ruling is that such an omission is not one
of the different acts enumerated in Article 19 of the Code. Such
omission is not harboring, or concealing or assisting in the escape of
the principal. (Art. 19, par. 3)
But if that person went to the authorities and volunteered false
information which tended affirmatively to deceive the prosecuting
686

Thus, if a minor, eight years old, stole a ring worth P500.00 and
B, knowing that it has been stolen, buys it for P200.00, B is liable as
accessory in the crime of theft, even if the principal (the minor) is
exempt from criminal liability. (See U.S. u. Villaluz, 32 Phil. 376)
587

Art. 19

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Apprehension and conviction of the principal Is not necessary for
the accessory to be held criminally liable.

after the commission of the crime, which was clearly one of murder. Billon
also admitted that he assisted in the escape of Advincula. Billon was found
guilty as accessory instead of as principal. On appeal, he contended that he
could not be declared as an accessory because Advincula, the principal, was
not yet tried and found guilty.
Held: Article 19, paragraph 3, is stated in Spanish as follows:
3. Albergando, ocultando o proporcionando en fuga al autor del
delito, cuando el encubridor lo hace con abuso de funciones publicas o cuando
aquel lo fuere de traicion, parricidio, asesinato, atentado contra la vida del
Jefe Ejecutivo, o reo conocidamente habitual de otro delito." (las cursivas
nuestras.)
From the wordings of the above quoted legal provision, it is not necessary
that the principal should be first declared guilty before the accessory can be
made liable as such. Apparently, the opposite is the rule, as contended by
the appellant's counsel, following the English text of the law.
3.
By harboring, concealing, or assisting in the escape of the
principal of the crime, provided the accessory acts with abuse of his
public functions or whenever the author of the crime isguilty oftreason,
parricide, murder, or an attempt to take the life of the Chief Executive,
or is known to be habitually guilty of some other crime." (Italics ours.)

Art.19

Even if the principal is still unknown or at large, the accessory
may be held responsible provided the requisites prescribed by law for
the existence of the crime are present and that someone committed
it.
May the trial of an accessory proceed without awaiting the
result of the separate charge against the principal? The answer is in
the affirmative. The corresponding responsibilities of the principal,
accomplice and accessory are distinct from each other. As long as
the commission of the offense can be duly established in evidence,
the determination of the liability of the accomplice or accessory can
proceed independently of that of the principal. (Vino v. People, G.R.
No. 84163, October 19, 1989, 178 SCRA 626, 632)
When the alleged principal Is acquitted, may the accessory be
convicted?
In United States v. Villaluz, supra, a case involving the crime
of theft, it was ruled that notwithstanding the acquittal of the
principal due to the exempting circumstance of minority or insanity,
the accessory may nevertheless be convicted if the crime was in fact
established.
Corollary to th.is is United States v. Mendoza, supra, where it
was held in an arson case that the acquittal of the principal must
likewise result in the acquittal of the accessory where it was shown
that no crime was committed inasmuch as the fire was the result
of an accident. Hence, there was no basis for the conviction of the
accessory.
Where the commission of the crime and the responsibility of
the accused as an accessory are established, the accessory can be
convicted, notwithstanding the acquittal of the principal. (Vino v.
People, supra, at 632-634)
People v. Billon
(C.A., 48 O.G. 1391)
Facts: Felicisimo Billon alias Guillermo Billon was prosecuted, together
with Gorgonio Advincula who was not brought to trial for being at large, in the
Court of First Instance of Pangasinan for murder. Billon positively testified
that it was Advincula who shot De Castro to death. On the other hand, he
admitted that he had harbored him at his house on 861 B. Hidalgo, Manila,
588

However, the Spanish text should prevail.
Can there be an accessory even after the principal was convicted?
Yes. By presenting oneself to serve out the sentence in lieu of
the real culprit. But the crime committed by the real culprit must
be treason, parricide, murder, or an attempt to take the life of the
President, that he is known to be habitually guilty of some other
crime, because this is possible only when the accessory is a private
individual.
Heavy penalties for accessories in robbery and theft.

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1612
ANTI-FENCING LAW OF 1979
SECTION l. Title. - This decree shall be known as the Anti-Fencing
Law.

SEC. 2. Definition of Terms. - The following terms shall mean as
follows:
a.
"Fencing" is the act of any person who, with intent to gain
for himself or for another, shall buy, receive, possess, keep, acquire,
589

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 19

Criminal Law
conceal, sell or dispose of, or shall buy and sell, or in any other manner
deal in any article, item, object or anything of value which he knows,

or should be known to him, to have been derived from the proceeds of
the crime of robbery or theft.
b.
"Fence" includes any person, firm, association, corporation
or partnership or other organization who/which commits the act of

fencing.
SEC. 3. Penalties. - Any person guilty of fencing shall be punished
as hereunder indicated:

a.
The penalty ofprision mayor, if the value of the property
involved is more than P12,000.00 pesos but not exceeding P22,000.00
pesos; if the value of such property exceeds the latter sum, the penalty
provided in this paragraph shall be imposed in its maximum period,

adding one year for each additional P10,000.00 pesos, but the total
penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed twenty years. In such
cases, the penalty shall be termed reclusion temporal and the accessory
penalty pertaining thereto provided in the R.P.C. shall also be imposed.
b.
The penalty of prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods, if the value of the property robbed or stolen is more

than P6,000.00 pesos but not exceeding P12,000.00 pesos.

Art. 19

SEC. 6. Clearance/Permit to Sell/Used Second Hand Articles. For purposes of this Act, all stores, establishments or entities dealing in the
buy and sell of any good, article, item, object or anything of value obtained
from an unlicensed dealer or supplier thereof, shall before offering the same
for sale to the public, secure the necessary clearance or permit from the

station commander ofthe Integrated National Police in the town or city where
such store, establishment or entity is located. The Chief of Constabulary/
Director General, Integrated National Police shall promulgate such rules
and regulations to carry out the provisions of this section. Any person who
fails to secure the clearance or permit required by this section or who violates
any of the provisions of the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
shall upon conviction be punished as fence.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. All laws or parts thereof, which are
inconsistent with the provisions ofthis Decree are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.
SEC. 8. Effectivity. - This Decree shall take effect upon approval.
Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of Our
Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINANDE. MARCOS
President of the Philippines

c.
The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum and
medium periods. if the value of the property involved is more than

P200.00 pesos but not exceeding P6,000.00 pesos.

Accessory in robbery and theft is a principal in fencing.

d.
The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period to prision
correccional in its minimum period, if the value of the property involved

Before P.D. No. 1612, a fence could only be prosecuted for and
held liable as an accessory, as the term is defined in Article 19 of the
R.P.C. The penalty applicable to an accessory is obviously light under
the rules prescribed in Articles 53, 55, and 57 of the R.P.C., subject
to the qualification set forth in Article 60 thereof. Noting, however,
the reports from law enforcement agencies that "there is rampant
robbery and thievery of government and private properties" and that
"such robbery and thievery have become profitable on the part of the
lawless elements because of the existence ofready buyers, commonly
known as fence, of stolen properties," P.D. No. 1612 was enacted to
"impose heavy penalties on persons who profit by the effects of the
crimes of robbery and theft." Evidently, the accessory in the crimes
of robbery and theft could be prosecuted as such under the R.P.C.
or under P.D. No. 1612. However, in the latter case, he ceases to be
a mere accessory but becomes a principal in the crime of fencing.
Elsewise stated, the crimes of robbery and theft, on the one hand,

is over P50.O0 pesos but not exceeding P200.00 pesos.
e.

The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period if such

value is over five pesos (P5.00) but not exceeding P50.00 pesos.
f.

The penalty of arresto mayor in its minimum period, if such

value does not exceed five (P5.00) pesos.
SEC. 4. Liability of Officials of Juridical Persons.

Ifthe fence is

a partnership, frm, corporation or association, the president or the manager
or any officer thereof who knows or should have known the commission of

the offense shall be liable.
SEC. 5. Presumption of Fencing. - Mere possession of any goods,
article, item, object, or anything ofvalue which has been the subject ofrobbery
or thievery shall be prima facie evidence of fencing.

690

591

Art. 20

and fencing, on the other, are separate and distinct offenses. (People
v. Hon. de Guzman, G.R. No. 77368, October 5, 1993) The state may
thus choose to prosecute him either under the R.P.C. or P.D. No.
1612, although the preference for the latter would seem inevitable
considering that fencing is a malum prohibitum, and P.D. No. 1612
creates a presumption offencingand prescribes a higher penalty based
on the value of the property. (Dizon-Pamintuan v. People, G.R. No.
111426, July II, 1994)
Accessory distinguished from principal and from accomplice.
1.
2.

3.

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 20

Ground for exemption.
The exemption provided for in this article is based on the ties
of blood and the preservation of the cleanliness of one's name, which
compels one to conceal crimes committed by relatives so near as those
mentioned in this article.
Principals related to accessories exempt from criminal liability.
An accessory is exempt from criminal liability, when the
principal is his

The accessory does not take direct part or cooperate in, or
induce, the commission of the crime.

(1)

spouse, or

(2)

ascendant, or

The accessory does not cooperate in the commission of
the offense by acts either prior thereto or simultaneous
therewith.

(3)

descendant, or

(4)

legitimate, natural or adopted brother, sister or relative
by affinity within the same degree.

The participation of the accessory in all cases always takes
pince after the commission of the crime.
An accessory does not participate in the criminal
design, nor cooperate in the commission of the felony,
but, with knowledge of the commission of the crime, he
subsequently takes part in any of the three ways mentioned
in Article 19. (People v. Verzola, No. L-35022, December 21,
1977, 80 SCRA 608)

Art. 20. Accessories who are exempt from criminal
liability. - The penalties prescribed for accessories shall not
be imposed upon those who are such with respect to their
spouses, ascendants, descendants, legitimate, natural, and
adopted brothers and sisters, or relatives by affinity within the
same degrees, with the single exception of accessories falling
within the provisions of paragraph 1 of the next preceding
article.

592

Even if only two of the principals guilty of murder are the
brothers of the accessory and the others are not related to him, such
accessory is exempt from crimin al liability. It appeared that some time
after the crime was committed, the accused (accessory) accompanied
some of the other accused to the place where the bodies of the victims
were concealed on the night of the murder, and helped them to remove
and bury these bodies at another and more remote spot. ( U.S. v.
Abanzado, 37 Phil. 658, 669)
Relationship by affinity between surviving spouse and blood
relatives of the deceased spouse survives even after the death of
the deceased spouse.
The relationship by affinity created between the surviving spouse
and the blood relatives of the deceased spouse survives the death of
either party to the marriage which created the affinity. (The same
principle applies to the justifying circumstance of defense of one's
relatives under Article 11(2] of the R.P.C., the mitigating circumstance
of immediate vindication of grave offense committed against one's
relatives under Article 13(5] of the same Code and the absolutory
cause of relationship in favor of accessories under Article 20 also
of the same Code.) (Intestate Estate of Manolita Gonzales Vda. de
Carungcong v. People, G.R. No. 181409, February 11, 2010)
593

Art. 20

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Nephew or niece not included among such relatives.

A nephew, who had witnessed the killing by his uncle of the
deceased, helped in burying the dead body. Is the nephew criminally
liable as an accessory? Yes. The relationship of uncle and nephew is
not included in Article 20.
In the case of U.S. v. Insierto, 15 Phil. 358, it was held that
the relationship between uncle and niece does not come within any
of the degrees of relationship of spouse, or ascendant, descendant,
legitimate, natural, or adopted brother or sister, or relative by affinity
in the same degree.
Accessory is not exempt from criminal liability even if the principal
Is related to him, if such accessory (1) profited by the effects of the
crime, or (2) assisted the offender to profit by the effects of the crime.

The last part of Article 20 says, "with the single exception of
accessories falling within the provisions of paragraph 1 of the next
preceding article." The preceding article is Article 19.
Paragraph 1 of Article 19, covers the accessories who take part
subsequent to the commission of the crime in any of the following
manners:
l.

By profiting by the effects of the crime.

2.

By assisting the offender to profit by the effects of the crime.

If the accessory has performed any of those acts, he is liable,
even if the principal is his spouse, ascendant, descendant, brother
or sister, or father-in-law, or son-in-Jaw, or brother-in-law, because
such acts are prompted not by affection but by a detestable greed.
The daughter stole the earrings and the mother pawned them
as a pledge for her debt.

TITLE TWO
Persons Criminally Liable for Felonies

Art. 20

Only accessories under paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 19 are exempt
from criminal liability if they are related to the principals.

A son who helps his father bury the body of a person whom the
latter has murdered, in order to prevent its discovery; a grandson who,
having knowledge of the commission of robbery by his grandfather,
conceals or destroys the body of the crime, or the effects or instruments
thereof, in order to prevent its discovery; and a person who harbors,
conceals, or assists in the escape of his brother who committed treason,
do not incur any liability, because the acts of the accessories in those
cases are covered by paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 19. Not one of them
falls under paragraph 1 of Article 19, because none of those accessories
profits or assists the offender to profit by the effects of the crime.
Does the concealing of the effects of the crime, not to prevent its
discovery, but to obtain gain, fall under paragraph 2 of Article 19?

Paragraph 2 of Article 19 requires that the purpose of the
concealment is to prevent the discovery of the crime. On the other
hand, paragraph 1 says, "by profiting themselves by the effects of the
crime." Does paragraph 1 mean that the accessory should actually
profit from the effects of the crime? That seems to be the meaning.
But suppose a husband conceals the property stolen by his wife in
order to profit from it later, is he liable as accessory?
It would seem that he may be held liable as accessory, because
his said act is prompted not by affection but by a detestable greed.
In that case, his purpose in concealing the stolen property is not to
prevent the discovery of the crime.
. But suppose A, who committed parricide by killing his wife, went
to his adopted brother to hide in the latter's house and his adopted
brother harbored and concealed A because he gave his adopted brother
Pl,000.00, is the adopted brother an accessory? Is he criminally liable?

Held: The mother is an accessory for although she had no part
in stealing the earrings, she took steps to obtain gain and profit from
the effects of the crime. The relationship does not exempt her from
liability, because she assisted in obtaining profit from the theft. (U.S.
v. Deuda, 14 Phil. 595, 601)

He is an accessory, because knowing that A committed parricide,
he harbored and concealed him. But he is not criminally liable,
because he did not profit by the effects of the crime. The Pl,000.00
received by him from A was not the effect of the crime of parricide.

694

595

Art. 20

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Liability of a public officer when related to the principal.
Is a public officer who, with evident abuse of his office, furnished
the means of escape to his brother who had committed murder
criminally liable as accessory?

Title Three
PENALTIES

Such a public officer does not incur any criminal liability. Ties
of blood or relationship constitutes a more powerful incentive than
the call of duty.
Furthermore, Article 20 does not grant the benefits of exemption
only to accessories who profited or helped the offender profit by the
effects of the crime. This is the only case where the accessory who is
related to the offender incurs criminal liability.

Chapter One
PENALTIES IN GENERAL
Penalty, defined.
Penalty is the suffering that is inflicted by the State for the
transgression of a law.
Concept of penalty.
Penalty in its general sense signifies pain; especially considered
in the juridical sphere, it means suffering undergone, because of
the action of human society, by one who commits a crime. (Pessina,
Elementos de Derecho Penal, pp. 375-376)
Different Juridical conditions of penalty:
1.

Must be productive ofsuffering, without however affecting
the integrity of the human personality.

2.

Must be commensurate with the offense - different crimes
must be punished with different penalties.

3.

Must be personal
crime of another.

4.

Must be legal - it is the consequence of a judgment
according to law.

no one should be punished for the

5.

Must be certain- no one may escape its effects.

6.

Must be equal for all.

7.

Must be correctional.

These are the juridical conditions of penalty according to the
classical school on which the Code is mainly based.
696

697

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

What Is the purpose of the State in punishing crimes?
To secure justice. The State has an existence of its own to
maintain, a conscience of its own to assert, and moral principles to
be vindicated. Penal justice must therefore be exercised by the State
in the service and satisfaction of a duty, and rests primarily on the
moral rightfulness of the punishment inflicted. (Albert)
Theories Justifying penalty:
(a)

Prevention -- The State must punish the criminal to
prevent or suppress the danger to the State arising from
the criminal acts of the offender.

(b)

Self-defense - The State has a right to punish the criminal
as a measure of self-defense so as to protect society from
the threat and wrong inflicted by the criminal.

(c)

Reformation The object of punishment in criminal cases
is to correct and reform the offender.

(d)

Exemplarity - The criminal is punished to serve as an
example to deter others from committing crimes.

(e)

Justice - That crime must be punished by the State as
an act of retributive justice, a vindication of absolute right
and moral law violated by the criminal.

Social defense and exemplarity justify the penalty of death.
When a person has proved himself to be a dangerous enemy of
society, the latter must protect itself from such enemy by taking his
life in retribution for his offense and as an example and warning to
others. (People v. Carillo, 85 Phil. 611, 635)
The penalty under this Code has three-fold purpose.
(a)

Retribution or expiation - The penalty is commensurate
with the gravity of the offense.

(b)

Correction or reformation
as shown by the rules which
regulate the execution of the penalties consisting in
deprivation of liberty.

(c)

Social defense - shown by its inflexible severity to
recidivists and habitual delinquents.
598

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 21

Constitutional restriction on penalties.
The Constitution directs that "excessive fines shall not be
imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishment inflicted."
The punishment is "cruel and unusual" when it is so disproportionate to the offense committed as to shock the moral sense of
all reasonable men as to what is right and proper under the circumstances.
Example: Those inflicted at the whipping post, or in pillory,
burning at the stake, breaking on the wheel, and the like. (People
v. De la Cruz, 92 Phil. 906, 908)
Fines and imprisonment are not cruel and unusual punishment.
Appellant, who has been tried, convicted, and sentenced to suffer
one month imprisonment for collecting without legal authority bets
for a daily double race, an offense penalized by R.A. No. 3063 by "a
fine of not less than One thousand pesos nor more than Two thousand
pesos or by imprisonment for not less than one month or more than
six months, or both, in the discretion of the court," maintains that the
penalty as applied to his offense infringes the constitutional provision
against excessive or cruel and unusual punishment.
Held: Neither fines nor imprisonment constitute in themselves
cruel and unusual punishment, for the constitutional stricture has
been interpreted as referring to penalties that are inhuman and
barbarous, or shocking to the conscience (Weems v. U.S., 217 U.S. 349)
and fines or imprisonment are definitely not in this category. (People
v. Dionisio, G.R. No. L-25513, March 27, 1968, 22 SCRA 1299, 1301)

Art. 21. Penalties that may be imposed. - No felony shall
be punishable by any penalty not prescribed by law prior to
its commission.
Article 21 simply announces the policy of the State as regards
punishing crimes.
This article is general in its provisions and in effect prohibits
the Government from punishing any person for any felony with any
penalty which has not been prescribed by the law.
699

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

It has no application to any of the provisions of the R.P.C. for
the reason that for every felony defined in the Code, a penalty has
been prescribed.

of another's literary work. At that time, we had no copyright law. Can
A be punished for such act? No, because there was no law at that time
defining and penalizing the act. (U.S. v. Yam Tung Way, 21 Phil. 67)

The provisions of Article 21 can only be invoked when a person
is being tried for an act or omission for wh.ich no penalty has been
prescribed by law.

Subsidiary penalty for a crime cannot be imposed, if It was "not
prescribed by law prior to its commission."

Art. 21

Article 21 is not a penal provision. It neither defines a crime nor
provides a punishment for one. It has simply announced the policy of
the Government with reference to the punishment of alleged criminal
acts. It is a guaranty to the citizen of this country that no act of his,
will be considered criminal until the Government has made it so by
law and has provided a penalty. It is a declaration that no person
shall be subject to criminal prosecution for any act of his until after
the State has defined the crime and has fixed a penalty therefor.(U.S.
v. Parrone, 24 Phil. 29, 35)
Reason for the provision.

An act or omission cannot be punished by the State if at the
time it was committed there was no law prohibiting it, because a law
cannot be rationally obeyed unless it is first shown, and a man cannot
be expected to obey an order that has not been given.
There is no crime if there is no law punishing it.
The omission to indicate what kind of taxes the Tax Numeric
Codes (TNCs) stand for was not a criminal act. Employees of the
BIR were expected to know what the TNCs stand for. If they do
not, there is a "Handbook of Tax Numeric Code of Revenue Sources"
which they can consult. With this, petitioner should not be required
to describe in words the kinds of tax for which each TNC used stands
for. Precisely, the purpose of introducing the use of tax numeric
codes in the Bureau was to do away with these descriptive words, in
order to expedite and facilitate communications among the different
divisions therein. Applicable here is the familiar maxim in criminal
law: Null um crimen nulla poena sine Lege. There is no crime where
there is no law punishing it. (Evangelista v. People, G.R. Nos. 10813536, August 14, 2000)

Art. 22

U.S. v. Macasaet
(11 Phil. 447)

Facts: Macasaet was charged with and convicted of a violation of the
Internal Revenue Law (Act No. 1189) punishable by a fine. That law did not
provide imprisonment for failure to pay the fine by reason of insolvency. While
the case was pending trial, Act No. 1732 took effect. This new law provides
subsidiary imprisonment for failure to pay the fine under the old law (Act No.
1189). 'The court in imposing the payment of the fine also imposed subsidiary
imprisonment in view of the provisions of the new law.

Held: Inasmuch as Act No. 1732 did not go into force until after the
commission of the crime by Macasaet, subsidiary imprisonment cannot be
lawfully imposed.

Art. 22. Retroactive effect of penal laws. - Penal laws
shall have a retroactive effect insofar as they favor the person
guilty of a felony, who is not a habitual criminal as this term
is defined in Rule 5 of Article 62 of this Code, although at the
time of the publication of such laws a final sentence has been
pronounced and the convict is serving the same.

Article 22 is not applicable to the provisions of the Revised Penal
Code.

A was charged with "fraud or infringement of literary rights or
property," because A allegedly reproduced and sold fraudulent copies

This provision clearly has no direct application to the provisions
of the R.P.C. Its application to the R.P.C. can only be invoked where
some former or subsequent law is under consideration. It must
necessarily relate: (d) to penal laws existing prior to the R.P.C., in
which the penalty was less severe than those of the Code; or (2) to
laws enacted subsequent to the R.P.C., in which the penalty is more
favorable to the accused.

600

601

Art. 22

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE

It is not believed, therefore, that the Legislature in enacting
Article 10 (first clause) of the R.P.C. intended to provide that Article
22 should not be applicable to special laws.

as it may be given retroactive effect under Article 22 of the Revised
Penal Code. (People v. Avecilla, G.R. No. 117033, February 15, 2001)

If by an amendment to the R.P.C. or by a later special law, the
punishment for an act is made less severe than by the provisions of
the Code, then the accused person might invoke the provisions of
Article 22. (See U.S. v. Parrone, 24 Phil. 29, 35-36)
General rule is to give criminal laws prospective effect.
Before Article 365 of the R.P.C. was amended, slight physical
injuries (a light felony) through reckless imprudence was not
punishable. On September 21, 1954, the offended party suffered slight
physical injuries through the reckless imprudence of the accused.
On June 21, 1957, before the case against the accused could be
finally decided, R.A. No. 1790 was approved, amending Article 365
and making slight physical injuries through reckless imprudence
punishable. It was held that since the act involved occurred long before
the enactment of the amendatory legislation, it cannot be applied as
it is axiomatic that a criminal law may not be given retroactive effect.
(People u. Changco, CA., 54 O.G. 6749)
Exception - to give them retroactive effect when favorable to the
accused.
Facts: On June 21, 1994, accused-appellant was convicted of
Qualified Illegal Possession of Firearm. On July 6, 1994, P.D. No.
1866, the law on illegal possession of firearms, was amended by R.A.
No. 8294 which provides that where murder or homicide results from
the use of an unlicensed firearm, the crime is no longer qualified illegal
possession, but murder or homicide, as the case may be. In such a
case the use of the unlicensed firearm is not considered as a separate
crime but shall be appreciated as a mere aggravating circumstance.
In view of the amendments introduced by R.A. No. 8294 to P.D. No.
1866, separate prosecutions for homicide and illegal possession are
no longer in order. Instead, illegal possession of' firearms is merely
to be taken as an aggravating circumstance in the homicide case.
Held: Inasmuch as the amendatory law is favorable to accusedappellant in this case, the same may be retroactively applied. This
new law applies even to violations that occurred prior to its effectivity

Art. 22

Penalties

Republic Act No. 9346 given retroactive effect.
Republic Act No. 9346 which was enacted on June 24, 2006
prohibited the imposition of the death penalty.
Section 2 of R.A. No. 9346 which provides that the penalty
of reclusion perpetua shall be imposed in lieu of the death penalty
likewise affects death sentences, whether or not already affirmed by
the Supreme Court. As Justice Callejo, Sr. points out in his ponencia
in People v. Quiachon, Article 22 of the R.P.C. mandates that "[plenal
laws shall have a retroactive effect insofar as they favor the persons
guilty of a felony, who is not a habitual criminal x x x although at
the time of the publication of such laws, a final sentence has been
pronounced and the convict is serving the same." Persons previously
convicted by final judgment to death should enjoy the beneficial
retroactive effect of R.A. No. 9346 which is reduction of the death
penalty to either life imprisonment or reclusion perpetua, as the case
may be. The conclusion is confirmed by Section 3 of the law, which
makes reference to "persons whose sentences will be reduced to
reclusion perpetua, by reason of this Act." x x x (Concurring Opinion
in People v. Tubongbanua, G.R. No. 171271, August 31, 2006)
Republic Act No. 10592 given retroactive effect.
Inmates of the Neu Bilibid Prison v. De Lima
(G.R. Nos. 212719 and 215637, June 25, 2019)
Facts: Petitioners, who are inmates of the New Bilibid Prison, assail
the validity of Section 4, Rule 1 ofR.A. No. 10592 that directs the prospective
application of the grant of good conduct time allowance (GCTA), time
allowance for study, teaching and mentoring (TASTM), and special time
allowance for loyalty (STAL), mainly on the ground that it violates Article
22 of the R.P.C.

Held: Section 4, Rule 1 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of
R.A. No. 10592 is declared invalid insofar as it provides for the prospective
application of the grant of good conduct time allowance, time allowance for
study, teaching and mentoring, and special time allowance for loyalty. The
Director General of the Bureau of Corrections and the Chief of the Bureau of
Jail Management and Penology are required to re-compute with reasonable

602
603

Art. 22

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

dispatch the time allowances due to petitioners and all those who are similarly
situated and, thereafter, to cause their immediate release from imprisonment
in case of full service of sentence, unless they are being confined thereat for
any other lawful cause.

The exception applies to a law dealing with prescription of
crime.
Article 22 applies to a law dealing with prescription of an offense
which is intimately connected with that of the penalty, for the length
of time for prescription depends upon the gravity of the offense. (People
v. Moran, 44 Phil. 387, 400)
When the new law reduces the period of prescription of
criminal actions or establishes easier requirements to give the
prescription effect, the reduction conceded by the new law implies
an acknowledgment on the part of the sovereign power that the more
severe requirements of the former law were unjust in regard to the
essence of the criminal action. (People v. Parel, 44 Phil. 437, 442)
Reason for the exception.
The sovereign, in enacting a subsequent penal law more
favorable to the accused, has recognized that the greater severity
of the former law is unjust. The sovereign would be inconsistent if
it would still enforce its right under conditions of the former law,
which has already been regarded by conscientious public opinion as
juridically burdensome. (People v. Moran, 44 Phil. 387, 414)
The new law may provide otherwise.
The rule that criminal laws have retroactive effect when
favorable to the accused has no application where the new law is
expressly made inapplicable to pending actions or existing causes of
action. (Tavera v. Valdez, 1 Phil. 468, 470-471)
Thus, R.A. No. 4661, reducing the period of prescription of
criminal action for libel from two years to one year, specifically
provides that, "The provisions of this amendatory Act shall not apply
to cases of libel already filed in court at the time of approval of this
amendatory Act."

604

TITLE THREE

Art. 22

Penalties

Revised Penal Code was not given retroactive effect.
People v. Carballo
(62 Phil. 651)
Facts: On January 12, 1929, the accused who had been convicted of
bigamy accepted a conditional pardon extended to him by the Governor
General. During that year, he committed violations of the Revised Ordinances
of Manila and was convicted thereof by final judgment on March 18, 1931.
Prior to January 1, 1932, when the R.P.C. took effect, there was no law
punishing the violation of a conditional pardon as a crime.

Held: The provisions of the R.P.C. cannot be given retroactive effect.
Giving a law retroactive effect, if unfavorable to accused, will violate
the constitutional inhibition as to ex post facto laws.
An act which when committed was not a crime, cannot be made
so by statute without violating the constitutional inhibition as to e:c
post facto laws. (People v. Carballo, 62 Phil. 651, 653)
An e:c post facto law is one which: (1) makes criminal an act
done before the passage of the law and which was innocent when
done, and punishes such an act; (2) aggravates a crime, or makes it
greater than it was, when committed; (3) changes the punishment
and inflicts a greater punishment than the law annexed to the crime
when committed; (4) alters the legal rules of evidence, and authorizes
conviction upon less or different testimony than the law required at
the time of the commission of the offense; (5) assuming to regulate civil
rights and remedies only, in effect imposes penalty or deprivation of
a right for something which when done was lawful; and (6) deprives
a person accused of a crime of some lawful protection to which he
has become entitled, such as the protection of a former conviction
or acquittal, or a proclamation of amnesty. (Mejia v. Pamaran, Nos.
L-56741-42, April 15, 1988, 160 SCRA 457, 472)
"Although atthe time of the publication ofsuch laws a final sentence
has been pronounced and the convict is serving the same."
The provision of Article 22 that penal laws shall have a
retroactive effect insofar as they favor the person guilty of a felony is
applicable even if the accused is already serving sentence. (Escalante
v. Santos, 56 Phil. 483, 485)
605

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 22

Illustration:
Under the old Penal Code, plea of guilty was not a
mitigating circumstance. A person accused of estafa under the
old Penal Code pleaded guilty upon arraignment. He began to
serve sentence. While serving sentence, the R.P.C. took effect.
In the petition for habeas corpus, the Supreme Court took into
account the mitigating circumstance of plea of guilty provided
for in Article 13, paragraph 7, of the R.P.C., as such mitigating
circumstance had the effect of decreasing the penalty already
imposed. (Rodriguez u. Director ofPrisons, 57 Phil. 133, 135-136)
The favorable retroactive effect of a new law may find the
defendant in one of these three situations:
1.

The crime has been committed and prosecution begins;

2.

Sentence has been passed but service has not begun;

3.

The sentence is being carried out. (Escalante u. Santos,
supra)

In any case, the favorable new statute benefits him and should
apply to him.
"Who is not a habitual criminal?"
But when the culprit is a habitual delinquent, he is not entitled
to the benefit of the provisions of the new favorable statute. (People
v. Alcaraz, 56 Phil. 520, 522)
A person shall be deemed to be a habitual delinquent if within
a period of ten years from the date of his release or last conviction of
the crimes of serious or less serious physical injuries, robbery, theft,
estafa, or falsification, he is found guilty of any said crimes a third
time or oftener. (last paragraph of Rule 5, Art. 62)
Not applicable to civil liability.

5

J3

Art. 22

who committed the crime before the new law is enacted demand that
he be allowed to pay only Pl,000.00, instead of P3,000.00 as provided
in the Civil Code? Since this question refers to civil liability, the new
law even if favorable to him cannot be given retroactive effect.
No retroactive effect of penal laws as regards jurisdiction of court

i

People u. Pegarum
(58 Phil. 715)

l

Facts: A committed estafa involving an amount of 1'94.35. Under the
law then in force, the penalty for that crime was arresto mayor in its medium
period to prision correccional minimum. This penalty cannot be imposed by

I

the justice of the peace court. The Court of First Instance has jurisdiction

i

l
l

l1

I

5

t

over the case. At the time the complaint was fled, the R.P.C. took effect. The
penalty now for that crime is arresto mayor in its medium and maximum
periods, a penalty which the justice of the peace court can impose.
Held: The justice of the peace court has jurisdiction.
The jurisdiction of a court to try a criminal action is to be
determined by the law in force at the time of instituting the action,
not at the time of the commission of the crime. (People v. Romualdo,
90 Phil. 739, 744; Azarcon v. Sandiganbayan, 268 SCRA 747, 757
[1997] citing People u. Magallanes, 249 SCRA 212, 227 [1995])
Jurisdiction ofcourts in criminal cases is determined by the allegations
of the complaint or information.
The jurisdiction of the courts in criminal cases is determined
by the allegations of the complaint or information, and not by the
findings the court may make after trial. (People v. Mission, 87 Phil.
641, 642)
Rule applied to special laws.
The provisions of this article are applicable even to special
laws which provide more favorable conditions to the accused. (U.S.
v. Soliman, 36 Phil. 5)

The principle that criminal statutes are retroactive so far as they
favor the culprit does not apply to the latter's civil liability, because
the rights of offended persons or innocent third parties are not within
the gift of arbitrary disposal of the State.

Both laws must refer to the same deed or omission, having the
same end.

Suppose the indemnity in favor of the heirs of the person
unlawfully killed is reduced to Pl,000.00 by a new law, may the accused

In order that a subsequent statute may have a retroactive effect,
it must in the first place refer to the same deed or omission penalized

606

607

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE

by the former statute and must seek the same end and purpose. (U.S.
v. Macasaet, 11 Phil. 447, 449)

Held: The intention of the Legislature in embodying this provision of
Article 366 in the R.P.C. was to insure that the elimination from this Code of

Art. 22

Articles 22 and 366 compared.
Article 366. Application of laws enacted prior to this Code.
Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Article 22 of this
Code, felonies and misdemeanors committed prior to the date of
effectiveness of this Code shall be punished in accordance with the
Code or Acts in force at the time of their commission.
Article 22. Retroactive effect of penal laws. Penal laws shall
have retroactive effect insofar as they favor the person guilty of a
felony, who is not a habitual criminal, xx x although at the time of
the publication of such laws a final sentence has been pronounced and
the convict is serving the same.
These two articles mean that while felonies and misdemeanors
committed prior to the date of effectiveness of the R.P.C. shall be
punished in accordance with the Code or Acts in force at the time of
their commission, the same should not be the case if such Code or
Acts are unfavorable to the guilty party, for the general principle on
the retroactivity of favorable penal laws, recognized in Article 22,
should then apply.
Lagrimas case and Tamayo case compared.
Lagrimas • Director ofPrisons
(57 Phil. 249)
Facts: Thi s is a petition for habeas corpus. The petitioner slapped end
use offensive language to a teacher in the public school. The accused, now
petitioner, was found guilty of assault upon a public official and sentenced
to the penalty of Article 251 of the old Penal Code. Article 149 of the R.P.C.
does not prescribe a penalty for the crime penalized by Article 251 of the old
Code.
Article 251 of the old Penal Code is concordant to Article 149 of the
R.P.C. with the difference that the latter contains no penal sanction for the
offense of laying hands upon agents of the authorities or upon public officials.
Question: Whether the petitioner, who was sentenced under the
provision of the former Code, may be set at liberty on the ground that the
R.P.C. provides no penalty for the crime committed under the former Code.
608

Art. 22

Penalties

certain crimes penalized by former acts before the enforcement of this Code
should not have the effect of pardoning guilty persons who were serving their
sentences for the commission of such crimes. Petition denied.

Dissenting: If the new law totally eliminates the penalty, it is decidedly
favorable to the accused and the new Jaw should be applied in accordance
with Article 22.
People v. Tamayo
(61 Phil. 226)

Facts: The accused was convicted in the Justice of the Peace Court
for the violation of Section 2, Municipal Ordinance No. 5, Series of 1932, of
Magsingal, Ilocos Sur. While his appeal was pending, the Municipal Council
repealed Section 2 in question, with the result that the act complained of was
no longer a crime. The accused moved for the dismissal of the action.

Held: A person cannot be prosecuted, convicted, and punished for acts
no longer criminal. The case was dismissed.

It would seem that in the Lagrimas case, the Legislature reenacted in the R.P.C. the provision of Article 251 of the old Penal
Code, with the difference that Article 149 of the R.P.C. does not
punish an assault upon a public school teacher. If this is the case,
Article 149 of the R.P.C. did not absolutely repeal Article 251 ofthe old
Code. On the other hand, in the Tamayo case, the repeal (completely
eliminating Section 2 of the Ordinance under which the accused was
being prosecuted) was absolute. When the repeal is by reenactment,
the court has jurisdiction to try and punish an accused person under
the old law. (U.S. v. Cuna, 12 Phil. 241, 247)
Criminal liability under former law Is obliterated when the repeal
is absolute.
Section 2 of R.A. No. 8368, otherwise known as the "AntiSquatting Law Repeal Act of 1997," provides:
"SEC. 2. Repeal. - Presidential Decree No. 772, entitled
'Penalizing Squatting and Other Similar Acts' is hereby
repealed."
The repeal of P.D. No. 772 under Section 2 of R.A. No. 8368 is
explicit, categorical, definite and absolute. As such, the act that was
609

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 22

Criminal Law

penalized by P.D. No. 772, i.e., squatting, ceases to be criminal under
R.A. No. 8368, and the previous offense is obliterated. (Tuates v. Hon.
Bersamin, G.R. No. 138962, October 4, 2002)
Criminal liability under the repealed law subsists:
(1)

When the provisions of the former law are reenacted; or

(2)

When the repeal is by implication; or

(3)

When there is a saving clause. (U.S. v. Cuna, 12 Phil. 241,
supra; Wing v. U.S., 218 U.S. 272)

Reenactme nt.
The right to punish offenses committed under an old penal law
is not extinguished if the offenses are still punished in the repealing
penal law. (U.S. v. Cuna, supra; People v. Rosenthal, 68 Phil. 328)
Where the repealing act reenacts the former statute and
punishes the act previously penalized under the old law, the act
committed before the reenactment continues to be an offense in
the statute books and pending cases are not affected, regardless
of whether the new penalty to be imposed is more favorable to the
accused.(People v. Concepcion, 44 Phil. 126, 132, citing US v. Cuna,
12 Phil. 241; Ong Chang Wing and Kwong Fok v. United States, 40
Phil. 1046; and People v. Concepcion, 43 Phil. 653)
Illustration:
Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local
Government Code of 1991, which repealed B.P. Blg. 337,
reenacted in its Section 89 the legal provision of Section 41
of B.P. Blg. 337 under which private respondent Bunao was
charged and penalizes the same act previously penalized
under the repealed law, such that the act committed before the
reenactment continuous to be a crime. Hence, prosecution will
proceed under the provisions of Section 89 in relation to Section
514 ofR.A. No. 7160. (People v. Hon. Toledano, G.R.No.110220,
May 18, 2000)
Repeal by implication.
An implied repeal transpires when a substantial conflict
exists between the new and the prior laws. In the absence of an
610

Art. 22

express repeal, a subsequent law cannot be construed as repealing
a prior law unless an irreconcilable inconsistency and repugnancy
exist in the terms of the new and the old laws. (Bank of Commerce
v. Planters Development Bank, 681 SCRA 521, 545)
Saving clause.

A saving clause operates to except from the effect of the
repealing law what would otherwise be lost under the new law.
(Ibanez de Aldecoa v. Hongkong && Shanghai Bank, 30 Phil. 228,
246)
Example: Circular Nos. 1318 and 1353, both contain a
saving clause, expressly providing that the repeal of Circular
No. 960 shall have no effect on pending actions for violation of
the latter Circular. The respective saving clauses of Circular
Nos. 1318 and 1353 clearly manifest the intent to reserve
the right of the State to prosecute and punish offenses for
violations of the repealed Circular No. 960, where the cases
are either pending or under investigation. (Benedicto v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 125359, September 4, 2001)
No implied revival of repealed law.
When a law which expressly repeals a prior law itselfrepealed,
the law first repealed shall not be thereby revived unless expressly
so provided. (Sec. 21, Administrative Code of 1987)
Revival of law impliedly repealed.
When a law which impliedly repeals a prior law is itself repealed,
the prior law shall thereby be revived, unless the repealing law
provides otherwise. (Sec. 22, Administrative Code of 1987)
Illustration:
Section 3 of Act No. 1697, which defined and penalized
the crime of perjury, repealed the provisions of the Penal Code
defining and penalizing the crime of perjury, not expressly,
but by implication. The repeal of Act No. 1697 revived those
provisions of the Penal Code. (U.S. v. Soliman, L-11555,
January 6, 1917)
611

Art. 23

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

What penalty may be imposed for the commission of a felony?
Only that penalty prescribed by law prior to the commission of
the felony may be imposed. (Art. 21)

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 23

A contract stipulating for the renunciation of the right to
prosecute an offense or waiving the criminal liability is void. The
consideration or subject-matter is illegal. (See Arts. 1306, 1352, and
1409 of the new Civil Code)

Felonies are punishable under the laws in force at the time of
their commission. (Art. 366)

"Except as provided In Article 344 of this Code."

But the penalty prescribed by a law enacted after the commission
of the felony may be imposed, if it is favorable to the offender.
(Art. 22)

The offended party in the crimes of adultery and concubinage
cannot institute criminal prosecution, if he shall have consented or
pardoned the offenders. (Art. 344, par. 2)
The pardon here may be implied, as continued inaction of the
offended party after learning of the offense.

Art. 23. Effect ofpardon by the offended party. - A pardon
by the offended party does not extinguish criminal action
except as provided in Article 344 of this Code; but civil liability
with regard to the interest of the injured party is extinguished
by his express waiver.

"A pardon by the offended party does not extinguish criminal
action."
Even ifthe injured party already pardoned the offender, the fiscal
can still prosecute the offender. Such pardon by the offended party is
not even a ground for the dismissal of the complaint or information.
Reason: A crime committed is an offense against the State. In
criminal cases, the intervention of the aggrieved parties is limited to
being witnesses for the prosecution. (People v. Despavellador, 53 O.G.
21797) Only the Chief Executive can pardon the offenders. (Art. 36)
Compromise does not extinguish criminal liability.
It is well-settled that criminal liability for estafa is not affected
by compromise, for it is a public offense which must be prosecuted
and punished by the Government on its own motion even though
complete reparation should have been made of the damage suffered
by the offended party. (People v. Benitez, 59 O.G. 1407)
There may be a compromise upon the civil liability arising from
an offense; but such compromise shall not extinguish the public action
for the imposition of the legal penalty. (Art. 2034, Civil Code)
612

The second paragraph of Article 344 requires also that both
offenders must be pardoned by the offended party. (People v. Infante,
57 Phil. 138, 139)
In the crimes of seduction, abduction, rape, or acts of
lasciviousness, there shall be no criminal prosecution if the offender
has been expressly pardoned by the offended party or her parents,
grandparents, or guardian, as the case may be. The pardon here must
be express.
Pardon under Article 344 must be made before Institution of criminal
prosecution.
But the pardon afforded the offenders must come before the
institution of the criminal prosecution. (People v. Infante, 57 Phil.
138 - adultery; People v. Miranda, 57 Phil. 274 -- seduction)
Thus, when the complaint for adultery, concubinage or seduction,
rape, acts of lasciviousness, or abduction has already been filed in
court, a motion to dismiss based solely on the pardon by the offended
party, given after the filing of the complaint, will be denied by the
court.
The only act that, according to Article 344, extinguishes the
penal action after the institution of criminal action, is the marriage
between the offender and the offended party.
Pardon under Article 344 is only a bar to criminal prosecution.
Even under Article 344, the pardon by the offended party
does not extinguish criminal liability; it is only a bar to criminal
613

Art. 24

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

prosecution. Article 89, providing for total extinction of criminal
liability, does not mention pardon by the offended party as one of the
causes of totally extinguishing criminal liability.
"But civil liability with regard to the Interest of the injured party ls
extinguished by his express waiver."
As a general rule, an offense causes two classes of injuries: (1)
social injury, produced by the disturbance and alarm which are the
outcome of the offense; and (2) personal injury, caused to the victim of
the crime who suffered damage either to his person, to his property,
to his honor or to her chastity.
The social injury is sought to be repaired through the imposition
of the corresponding penalty. The State has an interest in this class of
injury. The offended party cannot pardon the offender so as to relieve
him of the penalty.
But since personal injury is repaired through indemnity, which
is civil in nature, the offended party may waive it and the State has
no reason to insist in its payment.
The waiver, however, must be express.

Art. 24. Measures of prevention or safety which are not
considered penalties. - The following shall not be considered
as penalties.
1.
The arrest and temporary detention of accused
persons, as well as their detention by reason of insanity or
imbecility, or illness requiring their confinement in a hospital.
2.
The commitment of a minor to any of the institutions
mentioned in Article 80 and for the purpo ses specified therein.
3.
Suspension from the employment or public office
during the trial or in order to institute proceedings.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 24

Why are they not considered penalties?
They are not penalties, because they are not imposed as a result
of judicial proceedings. Those mentioned in paragraphs 1, 3, and 4
are merely preventive measures before conviction of offenders.
Paragraph 1-"As well as their detention by reason of Insanity or
Imbecility."
This paragraph does not refer to the confinement of an insane or
imbecile who has not been arrested for a crime. It refers to "accused
persons" who are detained "by reason of insanity or imbecility." The
word "their" in the second clause of paragraph l, refers to "accused
persons" in the first clause.
Paragraph 2- Commitment of minor to any of the institutions
"mentioned in Article 80."
With the repeal of Article 80 of the R.P.C. by R.A. No. 9344, as
amended by R.A. No. 10630, referral of the child to a youth care facility
or 'Bahay Pag-asa' managed by local government units or licensed
and/or accredited non-governmental organizations monitored by the
DSWD may be required, in his or her best interest. (Sec. 20, R.A. No.
9344)
Paragraph 3- Suspension from employment or public office.
Preventive suspension pending investigation is not a penalty. It
is a measure intended to enable the disciplining authority to
investigate charges against respondent by preventing the latter from
intimidating or any way influencing witnesses against him. If the
investigation is not finished and a decision is not rendered within
that period, the suspension will be lifted and the respondent will
automatically be reinstated. If after investigation, respondent is found
innocent of the charges and is exonerated, he should be reinstated.

5.
Deprivation of rights and the reparations which the
civil law may establish in penal form.

The preventive suspension of civil service employees charged
with dishonesty, oppression or grave misconduct, or neglect of duty
is authorized by the Civil Service Law. It cannot, therefore, be
considered "unjustified," even iflater the charges are dismissed so as
to justify the payment of salaries to the employee concerned. It is one
of those sacrifices which holding a public office requires for the public
good. For this reason, it is limited to 90 days unless the delay in the

614

615

4.
Fines and other corrective measures which, in
the exercise of their administrative or disciplinary powers,
superior officials may impose upon their subordinates,

Art. 24

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

conclusion of the investigation is due to the employee concerned. After
that period, even if the investigation is not finished, the law provides
that the employee shall be automatically reinstated. (Gloria v. Court
ofAppeals, 306 SCRA 287)

Chapter Two

Paragraph 4 - Fines should not be Imposed by the court.
The "fines" mentioned in paragraph 4 are not imposed by the
court, because when imposed by the court, they constitute a penalty.
(See Art. 25)
Paragraph 5- Deprivation of rights established In penal form.

CLASSIFICATION OF PENALTIES
Art. 25. Penalties which may be imposed. - The penalties
which may be imposed, according to this Code, and their
different classes, are those included in the following:

The deprivation of rights established in penal form by the civil
laws is illustrated in the case of parents who are deprived of their
parental authority if found guilty of the crime of corruption of their
minor children, in accordance with Article 332 of the Civil Code.

SCALE
PRINCIPAL PENALTIES
Capital punishment:
Death

Afflictive penalties:
Reclusion perpetua
Reclusion temporal
Perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification
Perpetual or temporary special disqualification

Prision mayor
Correctional penalties:
Prision correccional
Arresto mayor
Suspension
Destierro

Light penalties:
Arresto menor
Public censure

Penalties common to the three preceding classes:
Fine,and
Bond to keep the peace.
616

617

Art. 25

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
ACCESSORY PENALTIES

Perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification
Perpetual or temporary special disqualification
Suspension from public office, the right to vote and be voted
for, the profession or calling
Civil interdiction
Indemnification
Forfeiture or confiscation of instruments and proceeds of the
offense
Payment of cost.

"The penalties which may be imposed, according to this Code,
x xx are those included" in Article 25 only.
A sentence of "fve years in Bili bid" is defective, because it does
not specify the exact penalty prescribed in the R.P.C. (U.S. v. Avillar,
28 Phil. 131, 134-135)
The penalty of hard labor in addition to imprisonment cannot be
imposed, because it is not authorized by the R.P.C. (U.S. v. Mendoza,
14 Phil. 198, 203; People v. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35, 43-44)
The penalty of life imprisonment or cadena perpetua imposed
by the trial court is an erroneous designation. The correct term is
reclusion perpetua. The penalty ofcadena perpetua was abolished by
the R.P.C. (People v. Abletes, No. L-33304, July 31, 1974, 58 SCRA
241, 248)
"Life imprisonment" should be denominated reclusion perpetua
since that technical term is the penalty that carries with it the
imposition of the accessory penalties. (People v. De la Cruz, No.
L-45485, September 19, 1978, 85 SCRA 285, 292)
Republic Act No. 9346 which was signed into law on June 24,
2006 prohibited the imposition of the death penalty, and provided for
the imposition of the penalty of reclusion perpetua in lieu of death,
when the law violated makes use of the nomenclature of the penalties
of the R.P.C. (Secs. 1 and 2, R.A. No. 9346)

618

Art. 25

Reclusion perpetua Is not the same as life imprisonment.
In Administrative Circular No. 6-A-92, the Supreme Court
enjoined justices and judges to observe the substantial difference
between Reclusion Perpetua under the Revised Penal Code and Life
Imprisonment when imposed as a penalty by special law, reproducing
therein the decision in People v. Penillos, 205 SCRA 546, citing People
v. Baguio, 196 SCRA, which held:
The R.P.C. docs not prescribe the penalty of life
imprisonment for any of the felonies therein defined, that
penalty being invariably imposed for serious offenses penalized
not by the R.P.C. but by special law. Reclusion perpetua entails
imprisonment for at least 30 years after which the convict
becomes eligible for parole. It also carries with it accessory
penalties, namely: perpetual special disqualification, etc. It is
not the same as life imprisonment which, for one thing, does not
appear to have any definite extent or duration.
Note:

The duration of reclusion perpetua is now 40 years,
or 30 years if the accused had undergone preventive
imprisonment.

Article 25 classifies penalties Into principal and accessory.
This article classifies penalties into:
1.

Principal penalties - those expressly imposed by the court
in the judgment of conviction.

2.

Accessory penalties - those that are deemed included in
the imposition of the principal penalties.

The principal penalties may be classified:
According to their divisibility.
1.

Divisible.

2.

Indivisible.

Indivisible penalties are those which have no fixed duration.
The indivisible penalties are:
1.

Death.

2.

Reclusion perpetua.
619

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 25

Criminal Law

3.

Perpetual absolute or special disqualification.

4.

Public censure.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 26

the power to mete out punishment; a finding of guilt must precede
the punishment. (Gomez v. Concepcion, 47 Phil. 717, 723)

Divisible penalties are those that have fixed duration and are
clivisible into three periods.

Court acquitting the accused may criticize his acts or conduct in
connection with the transaction out of which the accusation arose.

Classification of penalties according to subject-matter:

There is no law prescribing what a judge may say and what he
may not say in his decision. Such a law or rule would make the judge
a mere phonograph, whereas common sense dictates that he be given
complete liberty to express his opinion. un restrained by any fear
that a higher court might call him down. The judge may find, for
instance, that the acts proven to have been committed by the accused
although unethical, immoral, or otherwise reprehensible -- do not
constitute a crime within the purview of our penal law, and hence
the court is constrained to acquit him. In such a case, we think the
court may with unquestionable propriety express its disapproval or
reprehension of those acts to avoid the impression that by acquitting
the accused, it approves or admires his conduct.

1.

Corporal (death).

2.

Deprivation of freedom (reclusion, prision, arresto).

3.

Restriction of freedom (destierro).

4.

Deprivation of rights (disqualification and suspension).

6.

Pecuniary (fine).

Classification of penalties according to their gravity:
1.

Capital,

2.

Afflictive,

3.

Correctional,

4.

Light.

This classification corresponds to the classification of the felonies
in Article 9, into grave, less grave, and light.
Public censure is a penalty.

If an attorney or a litigant may permit himself to criticize the
conduct of his opponent and of the Court itself, it does not seem
unreasonable if the Court should, in a temperate and dignified
manner, permit itself to pass judgment or express an opinion, whether
adverse or favorable, upon the conduct of an accused relating to the
accusation. (People v. Meneses, 74 Phil. 125, 127)
Penalties that are either principal or accessory.

People v. Abellera
(69 Phil. 623, 625)
Facts: Abellera was accused of infidelity in the custody of ballot boxes
but was acquitted by the trial court. However, in acquitting him, the judge
took occasion to reprimand him for misconduct as Clerk of Court, consisting

of misreading some ballots during the hearing of the election case to favor
one of the contestants, and of accepting free transportation and meals from

one ofthe litigants. He appealed from that part ofthe decision reprimanding
him.

Perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification, perpetual or
temporary special disqualification, and suspension may be principal
or accessory penalties, because they fall under the two general classes.
Article 236, punishing the crime of anticipation of duties of a
public office, provides for suspension as a principal penalty.
Articles 226, 227, and 228, punishing infidelity of public
officers in the custody of documents, provide for temporary special
disqualification as a principal penalty.

Held: Censure, being a penalty is not proper for acquittal.
In a criminal case, there is only one issue, viz.: whether the
accused is guilty or not guilty. Ifhe is found guilty, the court acquires
jurisdiction to impose a penalty; ifhe is found not guilty, no court has

Art. 26. Fine - When afflictive, correctional, or light
penalty.
A fine, whether imposed as a single or as an

620

621

alternative penalty, shall be considered an afflictive penalty,

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

if it exceeds One million two hundred pesos (P1,200,000); a
correctional penalty, if it does not exceed One million two
hundred pesos (P1,200,000) but is not less than Forty thousand
pesos (P40,000); and a light penalty, if it be less than Forty
thousand pesos (P40,000). (As amended by RA. No. 10951)

light penalty if the amount of the fine imposed is less than P40,000.00,
and it is a correctional penalty if it is not less than P40,000.00 and
does not exceed P1,200,000.00 (Art. 26). If the fine prescribed by the
law for a felony is exactly P40,000.00, is it a light felony or a less
grave felony? It is a light felony because Article 9, paragraph 3, which
defines light felony should prevail.

"Whether Imposed as a single or as an alternative penalty."

Fine Is:

Art. 26

Fines are imposed in many articles of this Code as an
alternative penalty. Example: In Article 144, punishing disturbance
of proceedings, the penalty is arresto mayor or a fine ranging from
P40,000.00 to P200,000.00.
Penalties cannot be imposed in the alternative.
Facts: The defendants were charged with a violation of the
Opium Law. After hearing the evidence, the following sentence was
rendered: "The accused, Chong Ting and Ha Kang, having been found
guilty as charged, are sentenced each to pay a fine of P300.00 or to
three months' imprisonment."

1.

Afflictive - over P1,200,000.00

2.

Correctional - P40,000.00 to P1,200,000.00

3.

Light penalty

less than P40,000.00

Bond to keep the peace Is by analogy:
1.

Afflictive - over P1,200,000.00

2.

Correctional - P40,000.00 to P1,200,000.00

3.

Light penalty - less than P40,000.00

Held: Sentences should not be in the alternative. There is
nothing in the law which permits courts to impose sentences in the
alternative. While a judge has the discretion of fixing one or another
penalty, he cannot impose both in the alternative. He must fix
positively and with certainty the particular penalty. (U.S. v. Chong
Ting and Ha Kang, 23 Phil. 120, 124, 125)
Article 26 merely classifies fine and has nothing to do with the
definition of light felony.
While Article 90 provides that light offense prescribe in two
months, it does not define what is meant by "light offenses," leaving
it to Article 9 to fix its meaning. Article 26, on the other hand, has
nothing to do with the definition of offenses, but merely classifies
fine, when imposed as a principal penalty, whether singly or in the
alternative into the categories of afflictive, correctional, and light
penalties. (People • Yu Hai, L-9598, August 15, 1956)
A felony punishable by arresto menor or a fine not exceeding
P40,000.00 is a light felony (Art. 9, par. 3) while a felony punishable
with a correctional penalty is a less grave felony. (Art. 9, par. 2) It is a
622

623

Art. 26

TITLE THREE
Penalties
3.

Prision mayor and temporary disqualification- 6 yrs. and
1 day to 12 yrs., except when clisqualification is accessory
penalty, in which case its duration is that of the principal
penalty.

4.

Prision correccional, suspension, and destierro
6 mos.
and 1 day to 6 yrs., except when suspension is an accessory
penalty, in which case its duration is that of the principal
penalty.

Chapter Three
DURATION AND EFFECT OF PENALTIES
Section One. - Duration of penalties
Art. 27. Reclusion perpetua. - The penalty of reclusion
perpetua shall be from twenty years and one day to forty years.
Reclusion temporal. - The penalty of reclusion temporal
shall be from twelve years and one day to twenty years.
Prision mayor and temporary disqualification. - The
duration of the penalties of prision mayor and temporary
disqualification shall be from six years and one day to twelve
years, except when the penalty of disqualification is imposed
as an accessory penalty, in which case, its duration shall be
that of the principal penalty.
Prision correccional, suspension, and destierro. --- The
duration of the penalties of prision correccional, suspension,
and destierro shall be from six months and one day to six years,
except when suspension is imposed as an accessory penalty, in
which case, its duration shall be that of the principal penalty.
Arresto mayor. --- The duration of the penalty of arresto
mayor shall be from one month and one day to six months.
Arresto menor. -- The duration of the penalty of arresto
menor shall be from one day to thirty days.
Bond to keep the peace. -- The bond to keep the peace
shall be required to cover such period of time as the court
may determine. (As amended by R.A. No. 7659, approved on
December 13, 1993)
Duration of each of different penalties.
1.

Reclusion perpetua - 20 yrs. and 1 day to 40 yrs.

2.

Reclusion temporal -- 12 yrs. and 1 day to 20 yrs.
624

Art. 27

5.

Arresto mayor

l mo. and 1 day to 6 mos.

6.

Arresto menor

l day to 30 days.

7.

Bond to keep the peace - the period during which the bond
shall be effective is cliscretionary on the court.

Temporary disqualification and suspension, when imposed as
accessory penalties, have different durations
they follow the
duration of the principal penalty.
Thus, if the penalty imposed is arresto mayor, the duration of
the accessory penalty of suspension of the right to hold office and the
right of suffrage (Art . 44) shall be that of arresto mayor.
Note the clauses in paragraphs 3 and 4 which say "except
when the penalty (of disqualification or suspension) is imposed as
an accessory penalty, in which case its duration shall be that of the
principal penalty."
ln what cases is destierro imposed?
In the following:
1.

Serious physical injuries or death under exceptional
circumstances. (Art . 247)

2.

In case of failure to give bond for good behavior. (Art . 284)

3.

As a penalty for the concubine in concubinage. (Art . 334)

4.

In cases where after reducing the penalty by one or more
degrees destierro is the proper penalty.

625

Art. 28

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Bond to keep the peace is not specifically provided as a penalty for any
felony and therefore cannot be imposed by the court.
Since according to Article 21 no felony shall be punishable by
any penalty not prescribed by law prior to its commission, and bond
to keep the peace is not specifically provided for by the Code for any
felony, that penalty cannot be imposed by the court.
Bond for good behavior under Article 284 of the Code, which is
required of a person making a grave or light threat, is not required
to be given in cases involving other crimes.

Art. 28. Computation of penalties. - If the offender
shall be in prison, the term of the duration of the temporary
penalties shall be computed from the day on which the
judgment of conviction shall have become final.
If the offender be not in prison, the term of the duration
of the penalty consisting of deprivation of liberty shall be
computed from the day that the offender is placed at the
disposal of the judicial authorities for the enforcement of the
penalty. The duration of the other penalties shall be computed
only from the day on which the defendant commences to serve
his sentence.

If the accused, who was in custody, appealed, his service of
sentence should commence from the date of the promulgation of the
decision of the appellate court, not from the date the judgment of the
trial court was promulgated. (Ocampo v. Court of Appeals, 97 Phil.
949 [Unrep.], No. L-7469, May 6, 1955)
The service of a sentence of one in prison begins only on the
day the judgment of conviction becomes final. (Baking v. Director of
Prisons, No. L-30603, July 28, 1969, 28 SCRA 851, 856)
The accused could not be considered as committed or placed
in jail by virtue of the decision of the Court of Appeals, although he
was already in jail when that judgment was received. The fact of
his custody as a mere appellant pending appeal continued, and the
receipt of the decision of the Court of Appeals did not change the
detention of the accused into service of the judgment. The reading
of the sentence of the Court of Appeals to the accused was still a
necessary step previous to the actual commitment of the accused.
(People v. Enriquez, 107 Phil. 201, 207)
Computation of duration.
Article 13 of the Civil Code provides that a year consists of 365
days and a month consists of30 days and that in computing a period,
the first day shall be excluded and the last day included.
Examples of temporary penalties:
(1)

Temporary absolute disqualification.

Rules for the computation of penalties.

(2)

Temporary special disqualification.

The prison authorities should compute the penalties imposed
upon the convicts, observing the following rules:

(3)

Suspension.

1.

When the offender is in prison - the duration of temporary
penalties is from the day on which the judgment of
conviction becomes final.

2.

When the offender is not in prison - the duration ofpenalty
consisting in deprivation ofliberty, is from the day that the
offender is placed at the disposal ofjudicial authorities for
the enforcement of the penalty.

3.

The duration of other penalties - the duration is from the
day on which the offender commences to serve his sentence.
626

Art. 28

Rules in cases of temporary penalties.
If an offender is under detention, as when he is undergoing
preventive imprisonment, Rule No. 1 applies.
If not under detention, because the offender has been released
on bail, Ruic No. 3 applies.
Examples of penalties consisting in deprivation of liberty:
(1)

Imprisonment.

(2)

Destierro.
627

Art. 29

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Rules In cases of penalties consisting in deprivation of liberty.
When the offender is not in prison, Rule No. 2 applies.
If the offender is undergoing preventive imprisonment, the
computation of the penalty is not from the day that the offender is
placed at the disposal of the judicial authorities for the enforcement
of the penalty. Rule No. 3 applies, that is, the duration of the penalty
shall be computed from the day on which the defendant commences
to serve his sentence.
But the offender is entitled to a deduction of full time or fourfifths (4/5) of the time of his detention.
Reason for Rule No. 1.
The duration of temporary penalties shall be computed only
from the day the judgment of conviction becomes final, and not from
the day of his detention, because under Article 24 the arrest and
temporary detention of the accused is not considered a penalty.

Art. 29. Period of preventive imprisonment deducted
from term of imprisonment. - Offenders or accused who
have undergone preventive imprisonment shall be credited
in the service of their sentence consisting of deprivation of
liberty, with the full time during which they have undergone
preventive imprisonment if the detention prisoner agrees
voluntarily in writing after being informed of the effects
thereof and with the assistance of counsel to abide by the
same disciplinary rules imposed upon convicted prisoners,
except in the following cases:
1.
When they are recidivists, or have been convicted
previously twice or more times of any crime; and
2.
When upon being summoned for the execution of
their sentence they have failed to surrender voluntarily.
If the detention prisoner does not agree to abide by the
same disciplinary rules imposed upon convicted prisoners,
he shall do so in writing with the assistance of a counsel and
shall be credited in the service of his sentence with fourfifths of the time during which he has undergone preventive
imprisonment.
628

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 29

Credit for preventive imprisonment for the penalty of
reclusion perpetua shall be deducted from thirty (30) years.
Whenever an accused has undergone preventive
imprisonment for a period equal to the possible maximum
imprisonment of the offense charged to which he may be
sentenced and his case is not yet terminated, he shall be
released immediately without prejudice to the continuation
of the trial thereof or the proceeding on appeal, if the same
is under review. Computation of preventive imprisonment
for purposes of immediate release under this paragraph shall
be the actual period of detention with good conduct time
allowance: Provided, however, That if the accused is absent
without justifiable cause at any stage of the trial, the court
may motu proprio order the rearrest of the accused: Provided,
finally, That recidivists, habitual delinquents, escapees and
persons charged with heinous crimes are excluded from the
coverage of this Act. In ease the maximum penalty to which
the accused may be sentenced is destierro, he shall be released
after thirty (30) days of preventive imprisonment. (As amended
by RA. Nos. 10592 and 6127, and E.O. No. 214)

When is there preventive imprisonment?
The accused undergoes preventive imprisonment when the
offense charged is nonbailable, or even if bailable, he cannot furnish
the required bail.
The full time or four-fifths of the time during which offenders have
undergone preventive imprisonment shall be deducted from the
penalty imposed.
(1) Full Time of Preventive Imprisonment: if the detention
prisoner agrees voluntarily in writing, after being informed of the
effects thereof, and with the assistance of counsel, to abide by the
same disciplinary rules imposed upon convicted prisoners.

(2) Four-Fifths of Time of Preventive Imprisonment: If the
detention prisoner does not agree to abide by the same disciplinary
rules imposed upon convicted prisoners, he shall do so in writing with
the assistance of a counsel.
629

Art. 29

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The appellant should be credited with the full time of his
preventive imprisonment upon a showing that he agreed to abide
by the same disciplinary rules imposed upon convicted prisoners;
otherwise, he shall be credited with four-fifths of the time of such
preventive imprisonment. (People v. Herila, No. L-32785, May 21,
1973, 51 SCRA 31, 39; People v. Abanes, No. L-30609, September
28, 1976, 73 SCRA 44, 48; People v. Lingao, No. L-28506, January
31, 1977, 75 SCRA 130, 135-136; People v. Clementer, No. L-33490,
August 30, 1974, 58 SCRA 742, 749)
Illustration of the application of this article.
A was accused of homicide punishable by reclusion temporal.
Because he could not put a bail ofP15,000.00,A was detained pending
his trial which lasted for two years. If after trial, A was found guilty
and sentenced to an indeterminate penalty of from six years and
one day to 12 years and one day, the full period of A's preventive
imprisonment of two years shall be deducted from 12 years and one
day, ifhe agreed voluntarily in writing before or during the time of his
temporary detention to abide by the same disciplinary rules imposed
upon convicted prisoners. But ifA did not agree to abide by the same
disciplinary rules imposed upon convicted prisoners, only 4/5 of the
two years during which he has undergone preventive imprisonment
will be deducted from 12 years and one day.
Credit for preventive imprisonment for the penalty of rec/us/on
perpetua shall be deducted from 30 years.
Credit for preventive imprisonment for the penalty of reclusion
perpetua shall be deducted from 30 years.
This was included by R.A. No. 10592. This amendment clarified
that the crediting of preventive imprisonment shall likewise extend to
those who have been sentenced to reclusion perpetua and that credit
shall be deducted from 30 years.
The credit is given in the service of sentences "consisting of
deprivation of liberty."
Thus, if the offense for which the offender is undergoing
preventive imprisonment is punishable by imprisonment or a fine,
and upon conviction the court imposed on him only a fine, there is no
credit to be given.
630

Art. 29

Illustration:

A was accused of a violation of Article 143 of the R.P.C.
(Acts tending to prevent the meeting of Congress). The penalty
provided for in that Article is prision correccional or a fine from
P40,000.00 to P400,000.00, or both. During the pendency of his
trial, A was detained for ten days. Having been found guilty, A
was sentenced to pay a fine of P40,000.00. Can A successfully
claim that his fine should be reduced because of his preventive
imprisonment for 10 days?
No, because his sentence does not consist in deprivation of
liberty.
Computation of preventive imprisonment for purposes of immediate
release shall be the actual period of detention with good conduct
time allowance.
If the prisoner is convicted, he would enjoy good conduct time
allowance for the actual period of detention. Thus, the computation of
maximum possible imprisonment for purposes of immediate release
should be the actual period of detention plus good conduct time
allowance. If good conduct time allowance is granted to convicted
prisoners, this benefit should also be extended to the detention
prisoner.
Destierro constitutes "deprivation of liberty."
Although destierro does not constitute imprisonment (which
is a typical example of deprivation of liberty), it is nonetheless a
deprivation of liberty. It follows that Article 29 is applicable when
the penalty is destierro. 'The accused should be credited with the time
during which he has undergone preventive imprisonment. (People v.
Bastasa, No. L-32792, February 2, 1979, 88 SCRA 184, 193)

If the maximum penalty to which the accused may be sentenced
Is destlerro, he shall be released after 30 days of preventive
imprisonment.
Illustration:
A is accused of a crime punishable by a penalty from
arresto menor to destierro (six months and one day to six years).
A has been detained for 30 days since his arrest. In that case,
631

Art. 29

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

A should be released immediately after 30 days from his arrest
and detention, even if the duration of destierro, the maximum
penalty to which he may be sentenced, is from six months and
one day to six years. The reason for this is that in destierro, the
accused sentenced to that penalty does not serve it in prison. He
is free, only that he cannot enter the prohibited area specified
in the sentence.
Convict to be released immediately If the penalty Imposed after trial
is less than the full time or four-fifths of the time of the preventive
Imprisonment.

Thus, ifA has been detained for five months and 10 days pending
his trial for less serious physical injuries and after trial he is sentenced
to four months of arresto mayor, he should be released immediately.
(See People v. Quiosay, 103 Phil. 1160 [Unrep.J)
The accused need not serve the penalty of destierro, for having
satisfied the conditions laid down in Article 29 of the R.P.C., he
should be entitled to credit for the preventive imprisonment which
he has undergone since August 1970. (People v. Salik Magonawal,
No. L-35783, March 12, 1975, 63 CRA 106, 113)
Accused shall be released immediately whenever he has undergone
preventive imprisonment for a period equal to the possible maximum
Imprisonment for the offense charged.

graduate, college degree, primary or secondary education, vocational/
technical skill or values development programs, there shall be
an additional 15 days deduction for each month of confinement.
(Chapter 5, Sec. 1, Uniform Manual on Time Allowances and Service
of Sentence)
Child In conflict with law, credited with full time spent In confinement.

Under Section 41 of R.A. No. 9344, the child in conflict with the
law shall be credited in the service of his/her sentence with the full
time spent in actual commitment and detention.
Off enders not entitled to the full time or four-fifths of the time of
preventive imprisonment.

The following offenders are not entitled to be credited with the
full time or four-fifths of the time of preventive imprisonment:
1.

Recidivists or those convicted previously twice or more
times of any crime.

2.

Those who, upon being summoned for the execution oftheir
sentence, failed to surrender voluntarily.

3.

Habitual delinquents or those who, within a period often
years from the date of his release or last conviction of the
crimes or serious or less serious physical injuries, robbery,
theft, estafa or falsification, is found guilty of any of said
crimes a third time or oftener;

4.

Escapees;

5.

Persons charged with heinous crimes.

Illustration:
A is accused of the crime of less serious physical injuries
punishable by imprisonment from one month and one day to
six months. He has been under detention in jail for six months,
pending his trial. In that case,A should be released immediately,
but the trial of his case will continue.
Time allowance for study, teaching, or mentoring.

It is a privilege of 15 days granted for each month of studying,
teaching, and mentoring service. (Chapter 2, Uniform Manual on
Time Allowances and Service of Sentence)
If the person deprived of liberty is engaged at any time in a
recognized study, teaching or mentoring activity, pursuing a post632

Art. 29

"They have failed to surrender voluntarily."

This does not refer to failure to surrender voluntarily after the
commission of the crime. It refers to failure to surrender voluntarily
after being summoned for the execution of their sentence.
Example: A was arrested for serious physical injuries
inflicted on B and, pending his investigation and trial, he was
detained for one year. He was able to go out on bail after one
year. Later, he was summoned for the execution of his sentence,
633

Arts. 30-31

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

he having been found guilty. Because he failed to appear, the
court issued an order for his arrest and confiscation of his bond.
Although, he is not covered by paragraph 1 of Article 29, as
amended, A will not be credited in the service of his sentence
for serious physical injuries with one year or four-fifths of one
year preventive imprisonment.
Escapees.
Escapees are those who have escaped from confinement from a
penal establishment.

Section Two. - Effects of the penalties according
to their respective nature
Art. 30. Effects of the penalties ofperpetual or temporary
absolute disqualification. -- The penalties of perpetual or
temporary absolute disqualification for public office shall
produce the following effects:
1.
The deprivation of the public offices and employments
which the offender may have held, even if conferred by
popular election.
2.
The deprivation of the right to vote in any election
for any popular elective office or to be elected to such office.
3.
The disqualification for the offices or public
employments and for the exercise of any of the rights
mentioned.
In case of temporary disqualification, such disqualification
as is comprised in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall last
during the term of the sentence.
4.
The loss of all rights to retirement pay or other
pension for any office formerly held.

Art. 31. Effects of the penalties ofperpetual or temporary
special disqualification. -- The penalties of perpetual or
634

TITLE THREE

Arts. 32-34

Penalties

temporary special disqualification for public office, profession,
or calling shall produce the following effects:
1.
The deprivation of the office, employment, profession
or calling affected.
2.
The disqualification for holding similar offices or
employments either perpetually or during the term of the
sentence, according to the extent of such disqualification.
Art. 32. Effects of the penalties ofperpetual or temporary
special disqualification for the exercise ofthe right ofsuffrage.
- The perpetual or temporary special disqualification for the
exercise of the right of suffrage shall deprive the offender
perpetually or during the term of the sentence, according to
the nature of said penalty, of the right to vote in any popular
election for any public office or to be elected to such office.
Moreover, the offender shall not be permitted to hold any
public office during the period of his disqualification.

Art. 33. Effects of the penalties of suspension from any
public office, profession, or calling, or the right of suffrage.
- The suspension from public office, profession, or calling,
and the exercise of the right of suffrage shall disqualify
the offender from holding such office or exercising such
profession or calling or right of suffrage during the term of
the sentence.
The person suspended from holding public office shall
not hold another having similar functions during the period
of his suspension.

Art. 34, Civil interdiction. -- Civil interdiction shall
deprive the offender during the time of his sentence of the
rights of parental authority, or guardianship, either as to the
person or property of any ward, of marital authority, of the
right to manage his property, and of the right to dispose of
such property by any act or any conveyance inter vivas,

635

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Arts. 30-35

Criminal Law

Art. 35. Effects of bond to keep the peace. - It shall be the
duty of any person sentenced to give bond to keep the peace, to
present two sufficient sureties who shall undertake that such
person will not commit the offense sought to be prevented,
and that in case such offense be committed they will pay the
amount determined by the court in its judgment, or otherwise
to deposit such amount in the office of the clerk of the court
to guarantee said undertaking,
The court shall determine, according to its discretion,
the period of duration of the bond.

2.

3.

Should the person sentenced fail to give the bond as
required he shall be detained for a period which shall in no
case exceed six months, if he shall have been prosecuted for
a grave or less grave felony, and shall not exceed thirty days,
if for a light felony.

Outline of the effects of penalties under Articles 30 to 35.
1.

4.

The penalties of perpetual or temporary absolute
disqualification for public office produce the following
effects:

Arts. 30-35

The penalties of perpetual or temporary special
disqualification for public office, profession or calling
produce the following effects:
a.

Deprivation of the office, employment, profession or
calling affected.

b.

Disqualification for holding similar offices or
employments perpetually or during the term of the
sentence. (Art. 31)

The penalties ofperpetual or temporary special disqualification for the exercise of the right of suffrage produce the
following effects:
a.

Deprivation of the right to vote or to be elected to any
public office.

b.

Cannot hold any public office during the period of
disqualification. (Art. 32)

The penalties ofsuspension from public office, profession or
calling or the right ofsuffrage produce the following effects:
a.

Disqualification from holding such office or exercising
such profession or calling or right of suffrage during
the term of the sentence.

b.

If suspended from public office, the offender cannot
hold another office having similar functions during
the period of suspension. (Art. 33)

a.

Deprivation of public offices and employments, even
if by election.

b.

Deprivation of right to vote or to be elected.

c.

Disqualification for the offices or public employments
and for the exercise of any of the rights mentioned.

d.

Loss of right to retirement pay or pension for any
office formerly held. (Art. 30)

a.

Deprivation of the rights of parental authority or
guardianship of any ward.

Note: Perpetual absolute disqualification is
effective during the lifetime of the convict and even
after the service of the sentence. Temporary absolute
disqualification lasts during the term of the sentence,
and is removed after the service of the same, except
(1) deprivation of the public office or employment;
and (2) loss of all rights to retirement pay or other
pension for any office formerly held. (See Art. 30, par.
following No. 3.)

b.

Deprivation of marital authority.

c.

Deprivation of the right to manage his property and
of the right to dispose of such property by any act or
any conveyance inter vivas. (Art. 34)

636

5.

Civil interdiction shall produce the following effects:

Note: But he can dispose of such property by will
or donation mortis causa.

637

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Arts. 30-35

Criminal Law

6.

Bond to keep the peace.
a.

The offender must present two sufficient sureties who
shall undertake that the offender will not commit
the offense sought to be prevented, and that in case
such offense be committed they will pay the amount
determined by the court; or

b.

The offender must deposit such amount with the clerk
of court to guarantee said undertaking; or

c.

The offender may be detained, if he cannot give the
bond, for a period not to exceed six months if prosecuted for grave or less grave felony, or for a period
not to exceed 30 days, if for a light felony. (Art. 35)

E

Art. 36

antecedents; thus, the word "perpetually" refers to the perpetual
kind of special disqualification, while the phrase "during the term
of the sentence" refers to the temporary special disqualification. The
duration between the perpetual and the temporary (both special) are
necessarily different because the provision, instead of merging their
durations into one period, states that such duration is "according to
the nature of said penalty" - which means according to whether the
penalty is the perpetual or the temporary special disqualification.
(Lacuna v. Abes, supra, at 784)
What suspension from exercise of profession covers.
Suspension, which deprives the offender of the right of exercising
any kind of profession or calling, covers such calling or trade as for
instance that of broker, master plumber, etc.

Disqualification is withholding of privilege, not a denial of right
The manifest purpose of the restrictions upon the right of
suffrage or to hold office is to preserve the purity of elections. The
presumption is that one rendered infamous by conviction of felony, or
other base offenses indicative of moral turpitude, is unfit to exercise
the privilege of suffrage or to hold office. The exclusion must for this
reason be adjudged a mere disqualification, imposed for protection
and not for punishment, the withholding of a privilege and not the
denial of a personal right. (People v. Corral, 62 Phil. 945, 948)
In this case, the accused, who was sentenced in 1910 by final
judgment to suffer eight years and one day of prision mayor for an
offense and who was not granted plenary pardon, voted at the general
elections held on June 5, 1934. It was held that the right of the State
to deprive persons of the right of suffrage by reason of their having
been convicted of crime, is beyond question.

Civil Interdiction.
The crime of adultery does not carry the accessory penalty of
civil interdiction which deprives the person of the rights to manage
her property and to dispose of such property inter vivos. (Maquilan
v. Maquilan, G.R. No. 155409, June 8, 2007)
Bond to keep the peace is not bail bond.
Bond to keep the peace or for good behavior is imposed as a
penalty in threats. (Art. 284) This is different from a bail bond (Rule
114, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure) to secure the provisional
release of an accused person after his arrest or during trial but before
final judgment of conviction.

The accessory penalty of temporary absolute disqualification
disqualifies the convict for public office and for the right to vote, such
disqualification to last only during the term of the sentence. (Lacuna
v. Abes, No. L-28613, August 27, 1968, 24 SCRA 780, 784)

Art. 36. Pardon; its effects. - A pardon shall not work
the restoration of the right to hold public office, or the right
of suffrage, unless such rights be expressly restored by the
terms of the pardon.

"Perpetually or during the term of the sentence, according to the
nature of said penalty."

A pardon shall in no case exempt the culprit from the
payment of the civil indemnity imposed upon him by the
sentence.

The word "perpetually" and the phrase "during the term of
the sentence" should be applied distributively to their respective
638

639

Art. 36

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law
Effects of pardon by the President.

1.

A pardon shall not restore the right to hold public office or
the right of suffrage.
Exception: When any or both such rights is or are
expressly restored by the terms of the pardon.

2.

It shall not exempt the culprit from the payment of the
civil indemnity. The pardon cannot make an exception to
this rule.

Limitations upon the exercise of the pardoning power:

1.

That the power can be exercised only after conviction;

2.

That such power does not extend to cases of impeachment
(Art. VII, Sec. 19, 1987 Constitution) and cases involving
violation of election laws rules, and regulations when there
is no favorable recommendation from the COMELEC (Art.
IX-C, Sec. 5, 1987 Constitution)

Pardon may be granted only "after conviction by final Judgment."

The "conviction by final judgment" limitation under Section 19,
Article VII of the present Constitution prohibits the grant of pardon,
whether full or conditional, to an accused during the pendency of his
appeal from his conviction by the trial court. Any application therefor,
if one is made should not be acted upon nor the process toward its
grant be commenced unless the appeal is withdrawn. Accordingly,
the agencies or instrumentalities of the Government concerned must
require proof from the accused that he has not appealed from his
conviction or that he has withdrawn his appeal. Such proof may be
in the form of a certification issued by the trial court or the appellate
court, as the case may be. The acceptance of the pardon shall not
operate as an abandonment or waiver of the appeal, and the release of
an accused by virtue of a pardon, commutation of sentence, or parole
before the withdrawal of an appeal shall render those responsible
therefor administratively liable. (People v. Salle, Jr., 250 SCRA 592)
Pardon granted in general terms does not include accessory penalty.

When the principal penalty is remitted by pardon, only the
effect of that principal penalty is extinguished, but not the accessory
penalties attached to it.
640

Art. 36

Penalties

For instance, a person sentenced to prision mayor (which carries
with it the accessory penalty of perpetual special disqualification from
the right of suffrage) is pardoned by the President. Such pardon does
not restore to the ex-convict the right to vote, unless such right be
expressly restored by the terms of the pardon.
Exception:
(1) When an absolute pardon is granted after the term
of imprisonment has expired, it removes all that is left of the
consequences of conviction. (Cristobal u. Labrador, supra)

(2) Although the rule is that a pardon does not restore the right
to hold public office or the right of suffrage, unless expressly stated in
the pardon, the exception is where the facts and circumstances of
the case already show that the purpose of the Chief Executive
is precisely to restore those rights. For instance, when it appears
that the respondent mayor-elect committed the offense more than
25 years ago; that he was granted conditional pardon in 1915; that
thereafter he exercised the right of suffrage, was elected councilor for
the period from 1918 to 1921; that he was elected municipal president
three times in succession (1922 to 1931); that he was elected mayor in
1940; it is evident that the purpose in granting him absolute pardon,
after the election of 1940 but before the date fixed by law for assuming
office, was to enable him to assume the position in deference to the
popular will. (Pelobello • Palatino, 72 Phil. 441, 443; Cristobal o.
Labrador, supra)
When civil and political rights are restored.

Risos-Vidal v. Comelee
(G.R. No. 206666, January 21, 2015)
The pardon granted by former President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo
to former President Estrada on October 25, 2007 states, in part: In view
hereofand pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by the Constitution,
I hereby grant executive clemency to Joseph Ejereito Estrada, convicted by
the Sandiganbayan of Plunder and imposed a penalty ofReclusion Perpetua.
He is hereby restored to his civil and political rights."
Is former President Estrada qualified to vote and be voted for in public
office as a result oftbe pardon granted to him?
Held: Former President Estrada was granted an absolute pardon that
fully restored all his civil and political rights, which naturally includes the
641

Art. 37

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

right to seek public elective offce. 'The pardon granted to former President
Estrada was absolute, meaning, it was not only unconditional, it was
unrestricted in scope, complete and plenary in character, as the term "political
rights" adverted to has a settled meaning in law and jurisprudence.

Pardon after serving 30 years does not remove perpetual absolute
disqualification.
Suppose a pardon is granted upon a convict undergoing life
imprisonment after serving 30 years. Is the convict likewise pardoned
from the penalty of perpetual absolute disqualification which is an
accessory to life imprisonment?
No, because Article 30 is silent as to the maximum duration of
perpetual disqualification and Article 36 expressly provides that a
pardon shall not work the restoration of the right to hold public office
or the right of suffrage, unless such rights be expressly restored by
the terms of the pardon. (Guevara)
Pardon by the Chief Executive distinguished from pardon by the
offended party.
1.

Pardon by the Chief Executive extinguishes the criminal
liability of the offender; such is not the case when the
pardon is given by the offended party.

2.

Pardon by the Chief Executive cannot include the civil
liability imposed; but the offended party can waive the
civil liability imposed.

3.

In cases where the law allows pardon by the offended
party (Art. 344), the pardon should be given before the
institution of criminal prosecution and must be extended
to both offenders; whereas, pardon by the Chief Executive
is granted only after conviction and may be extended to
any of the offenders.

Art. 37. Costs -- What are included. Costs shall include
fees and indemnities in the course of the judicial proceedings,
whether they be fixed or unalterable amounts previously
determined by law or regulations in force, or amounts not
subject to schedule.

642

Art. 38

The following are included in costs:
1.

Fees; and

2.

Indemnities, in the course ofjudicial proceedings.

Costs are chargeable to the accused in case of conviction.
Costs which are expenses of litigation are chargeable to the
accused only in cases of conviction. In case of acquittal, the costs are
de oficio, each party bearing his own expenses.
Thus, of three accused, two were convicted while the third was
acquitted. Only one of the two convicted appealed. His conviction
was affirmed. He was ordered to pay one-third of the costs. (People
v. Bongo, No. L-26909, February 22, 1974, 55 SCRA 547, 548, 555)
No costs against the Republic, unless the law provides the contrary.
No costs shall be allowed against the Republic of the Philippines,
unless otherwise provided by law. (Rule 142, Sec. 1, Rules of Court)
Payment of costs Is discretionary.
The payment of costs is a matter that rests entirely upon the
discretion of courts. Appeal will hardly lie to interfere with the
discretion. (Roque v. Vda. de Cogan, 40 O.G., 10th Supp., 35; BacolodMurcia Planters' Assn., Inc. v. Chua, 84 Phil. 596, 599)
Whether costs should be assessed against the accused lie within
the discretion of the court. The Government may request the court to
assess costs against the accused, but not as a right. No attorney's fees
shall be taxed as cost against the adverse party, except as provided
by the rules of civil law. (Rule 142, Sec. 6, Rules of Court)

Art. 38. Pecuniary liabilities - Order ofpayment. - In
case the property of the offender should not be sufficient for
the payment of all his pecuniary liabilities, the same shall be
met in the following order:
l.

The reparation of the damage caused.

2.

Indemnification of the consequential damages.
643

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 38

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 39

3.

The fine.

Courts cannot disregard the order ofpayment.

4.

The costs of the proceedings.

When respondent judge permitted the accused to pay the
P500.00 fine ahead and postponed the payment of the indemnity of
P1,900.00 to some other date, he obviously deviated from the express
mandates of the law. Indemnity is No. 2 and fine is No. 3 in the order
of payment. What was done was exactly the opposite of what the law
ordained. What the court should have done was to commit the accused
to jail for a period not exceeding six months (Art. 39, par. 2) upon the
nonpayment on the date scheduled for its execution of the indemnity
imposed by the sentence. (Domalaon v. Yap, C.A., 59 O.G. 6675)

What are the pecuniary liabilities of persons criminally liable?
They are:
1.

The reparation of the damage caused.

2.

Indemnification of the consequential damages.

3.

Fine.

4.

Costs of proceedings.

There is reparation in the crime of rape when the dress of the woman
was torn.

When is Article 38 applicable?
It is applicable "in case the property of the offender should not
be sufficient for the payment of all his pecuniary liabilities." The order
of payment is provided in this article.
Hence, if the offender has sufficient or no property, there is no
use for Article 38.
The order of payment of pecuniary liabilities In Article 38 must be
observed.

In a case where the accused was convicted of rape, that part of
the judgment ordering the defendant to pay the value of the woman's
tom garments is reparation for the damage caused to her property
and is distinct from indemnity. (U.S. w. Yambao, 4 Phil. 204, 206)
Liability of conjugal partnership assets.
Fines and indemnities imposed upon either husband or wife may
be enforced against the partnership assets after the responsibilities
enumerated in Article 161 of the Civil Code have been covered, if the
spouse who is bound should have no exclusive property or ifit should
be insufficient, which presupposes that the conjugal partnership is
still ex.isting. (People v. Lagrimas, No. L-25355, August 28, 1969, 29
SCRA 153, 158)

Thus, in robbery with violence against persons, A inflicted
upon B serious physical injuries and took the latter's watch and ring
worth P1,250.00. As a result of the physical injuries inflicted, B was
hospitalized and was not able to attend to his work for one month. For
hospital bills, he paid P500.00. For his failure to earn his salary for
one month, he lost P300.00. If A, after conviction, had only property
not exempt from execution worth P1,000.00, it shall be applied to the
payment of the watch and ring, which could not be returned, because
they are covered by the "reparation of the damage caused" and it is
No. 1 in the order of payment.

Art. 39. Subsidiary Penalty. --- If the convict has no
property with which to meet the fine mentioned in paragraph 3
of the next preceding article, he shall be subject to a subsidiary
personal liability at the rate of one day for each amount
equivalent to the highest minimum wage rate prevailing in
the Philippines at the time of the rendition of judgment of
conviction by the trial court, subject to the following rules:

The hospital bills in the amount of 1'500.00 and the salary
which he failed to earn in the sum of P300.00 are covered by the
"indemnification of the consequential damages" which is only No. 2
in the order of payment.

I.
If the principal penalty imposed be prision
correccional or arresto and fine, he shall remain under
confinement until his fine referred in the preceding paragraph
is satisfied, but his subsidiary imprisonment shall not exceed

644

645

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

one-third of the term of the sentence, and in no case shall it
continue for more than one year, and no fraction or part of a
day shall be counted against the prisoner.

Judgment of conviction must impose subsidiary Imprisonment.

Art. 39

2.
When the principal penalty imposed be only a fine,
the subsidiary imprisonment shall not exceed six months, if
the culprit shall have been prosecuted for a grave or less grave
felony, and shall not exceed fifteen days, if for a light felony.
3.
When the principal penalty imposed is higher than
prision correccional, no subsidiary imprisonment shall be
imposed upon the culprit.
4.
I the principal penalty imposed is not to be executed
by confinement in a penal institution, but such penalty is
of fixed duration, the convict, during the period of time
established in the preceding rules, shall continue to suffer
the same deprivations as those of which the principal penalty
consists.
5.
The subsidiary personal liability which the convict
may have suffered by reason of his insolvency shall not relieve
him from the fine in case bis financial circumstances should
improve. (As amended by R.A. Nos. 10951 and 5465)

What is subsidiary penalty?
It is a subsidiary personal liability to be suffered by the convict
who has no property with which to meet the fine. at the rate of one
day for each amount equivalent to the highest minimum wage rate
prevailing in the Philippines at the time of the rendition ofjudgment
of conviction by the trial court, subject to the rules provided for in
Article 39.
Rate of subsidiary imprisonment per day Increased to the highest
minimum wage rate In the NCR at the time of rendition of judgment
of conviction by the trial court.

Art. 39

An accused cannot be made to undergo subsidiary imprisonment
in case of insolvency to pay the fine imposed upon him when the
subsidiary imprisonment is not imposed in the judgment ofconviction.
(Ramos v. Gonong, No. L-42010, August 31, 1961, 72 SCRA 559, 565)
The judgment of conviction did not provide subsidiary
imprisonment in case of failure to pay the penalty of fine. Thus,
subsidiary imprisonment may not be imposed without violating the
R.P.C. and the constitutional provision on due process. (People v.
Alapan, G.R. No. 199527, January 10, 2018)
No subsidiary penalty for nonpayment of other pecuniary liabilities.
As Article 39 is now worded, there is no subsidiary penalty
for nonpayment of: (1) the reparation of the damage caused; (2)
indemnification of the consequential damages; and (3) the costs of
the proceedings. (See Ramos v. Gonong, supra, at 566)
"If the convict has no property with which to meet the fine."
Article 39 applies only when the convict has no property with
which to meet the fine mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 38.
It would seem that the convict, who has property enough to meet
the fine and not exempt from execution, cannot choose to serve the
subsidiary penalty, instead of paying for the fine.
A fine, whether imposed as a single or as an alternative penalty,
should not and cannot be reduced or converted into a prison term.
There is no rule for transmutation of the amount of a fine into a term
of imprisonment. (People v. Dacuycuy, G.R. No. 45127, May 5, 1989,
173 SCRA 90, 101)
The word "principal" should be omitted.
The word "principal" referring to the penalty imposed is not
the correct translation. The words used in Spanish "cuando la pena
impuesta" (when the penalty imposed) should be controlling. (People
v. Concepcion, 59 Phil. 518, 522)
Subsidiary Imprisonment is not an accessory penalty.

Republic Act No. 10159 increased the rate of subsidiary
imprisonment for one day from P8.00 to an amount equivalent to the
highest minimum wage rate in the National Capital Region.

Subsidiary imprisonment is not an accessory penalty. That
subsidiary imprisonment is a penalty, there can be no doubt, for

646

647

Art. 39

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

according to Article 39, it is imposed upon the accused and served by
him in lieu of the fine which he fails to pay on account of insolvency.
Therefore, the culprit cannot be made to undergo subsidiary
imprisonment unless the judgment expressly so provides. (People v.
Fajardo, 65 Phil. 539, 542)

Art. 39

the same deprivations as those of the principal penalty,
under the same rules as in Nos. 1, 2, and 3 above.
5.

In case the financial circumstances of the convict should
improve, he shall pay the fine, notwithstanding the fact
that he has already served subsidiary imprisonment.

Examples of the application of the rules (using the highest minimum
wage rate of P538):

Illustration:
A was convicted of bribery and sentenced to two months and one
day of arresto mayor as minimum, to one year, eight months and 21
days ofprision correccional, as maximum, to pay a fine of P40.00, with
the accessories of the law, and to pay the costs. Since the decision does
not provide for subsidiary imprisonment in the event of inability of
A to pay the fine of P40.00, A cannot be required to serve subsidiary
imprisonment, ifhe appears to be insolvent.
Article 73 of the R.P.C. provides that "Whenever the courts shall
impose a penalty which, by provision of law, carries with it other
penalties, according to the provisions of Articles 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, and
45 of this Code, it must be understood that the accessory penalties
are also imposed upon the convict." Subsidiary imprisonment is not
covered by any of those articles. (People v. Jarumayan, C.A., 52 O.G.
244)
Rules as to subsidiary imprisonment:

1.

Ifthe penalty imposed is prision correccional or arresto and
fine - subsidiary imprisonment shall not exceed 1/3 of the
term of the sentence, and shall not continue for more than
one year. Fraction or part of a day, not counted.

2.

When the penalty imposed is fine only - subsidiary
imprisonment shall not exceed six months, if the culprit is
prosecuted for grave or less grave felony; shall not exceed
15 days, if prosecuted for light felony.

3.

When the penalty imposed is higher than prision
correccional - no subsidiary imprisonment.

4.

If the penalty imposed is not to be executed by confinement,
but offixed duration
subsidiary penalty shall consist in
648

(1)

Rule 1 (Applicable only when the penalty imposed is
imprisonment not exceeding six years): A is convicted
of falsification by private individual (Art. 172) and
sentenced to four years, nine months and 10 days ofprision
correccional, as the maximum term of the indeterminate
penalty, and to pay a fine of P200,000.00.
if A has no property with which to meet the fine, he
will have to suffer subsidiary imprisonment at the rate of
one day for each P500.00 which he cannot pay, but not to
exceed 365 days, computed as follows:
365

days in one year

4 years
1,460
270 101,740 580

days in 4 years
days in 9 months
days
days in 4years, 9 months and IO days
days, which represent 1/3 of the
penalty imposed
P538.00/P200,000 amount of fine
371 - days
A will not only serve 365 days as subsidiary imprisonment cannot
exceed one year.
Rule 1 applies only to light and correctional penalties where
imprisonment does not exceed six years. Under Art. 25, a fine classified
as a correctional penalty does not exceed P1,200,000.00. Assuming
that a person is sentenced to a maximum of six years of prision
correccional and to pay a fine of P100,000.00, then the maximum
number of days of subsidiary imprisonment is only 185 days since
P100,000.00/P538.00 is 185.87 days and a fraction of a day is not
counted against the prisoner. Thus, the conditions that "subsidiary
649

Art. 39

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

When the fine provided by the Code, as the penalty
for the offense, is exactly P40,000.00, apply Article 9 in
determining the classification of the felony, because that
article, in defining light felony, states that the fine is "not
exceeding P40,000.00." When the amount of the fine fixed
by the Code as the penalty for the offense is more than
P40,000.00, apply Art. 26 to determine the classification
of the felony.

imprisonment shall not exceed one-third of the term of the sentence"
and "in no case shall it continue for more than one year" have no
application.
No subsidiary imprisonment if the fine is less than the highest
minimum wage rate in the National Capital Region.
Since no fraction or part of a day shall be counted against the
prisoner, and subsidiary personal liability is at the rate of one day
for each amount equivalent to the highest minimum wage rate at the
time ofrendition of the judgment of conviction by the trial court, then
no subsidiary imprisonment should be imposed if the fine imposed is
less than the h.ighest minimum wage rate at the time of conviction.
Thus, in cases decided when the rate of subsidiary personal
liability was at one day for each P8.00, it was held that ifthe indemnity
which the accused should pay is less than P8.00, no subsidiary
imprisonment should be imposed for its non-payment. (See People v.
Abad, C.A., 36 O.G. 653 and U.S. v. Ballesteros, 1 Phil. 208)
(2)

Rule 2 (Applicable when the penalty imposed is fine only):
A is sentenced to pay a fine of P1,800.00 for a crime
punishable by a fine not exceeding P2,000.00. In case of
insolvency, A shall suffer subsidiary imprisonment at the
rate of one day for every P538.00 which he cannot pay. To
divide P1,800.00 by P538.00 will be three days. Since A is
prosecuted for a less grave felony, the fine provided by law
being not less than P200.00 and not more than P6,000.00
(Art. 26), the duration ofh.is subsidiary imprisonment shall
be three days.
If A is sentenced to pay a fine of Pl60.00 for a crime
punishable by a fine not exceeding P200.00, then subsidiary
imprisonment cannot be imposed since it is less than the
minimum wage rate.

When the penalty is fine only, the phrases, "if the culprit shall have
been prosecuted for a grave or less grave felony" and "if for a light
felony," are controlling.
When the penalty prescribed by the Code for the crime
is fine only, the duration of the subsidiary penalty is based
on the classification of the felony.
650

Art. 39

(3)

Rule 4: A is sentenced to four years, nine months and 10
days of destierro and to pay a fine of P4,000.00. If A has
no money with wh.ich to pay the fine, he shall suffer an
additional period of destierro at the same rate of one day
for every P538.00. The same rule is to be applied when the
principal penalty is suspension and fine.

The penalty Imposed must be (1) prision correccional, (2) arresto
mayor, (3) arresto menor, (4) suspension, (5) destierro, or (6) fine
only.
Hence, if the penalty imposed by the court is not one of them,
subsidiary penalty cannot be imposed. There is no subsidiary penalty,
if the penalty imposed by the court is prision mayor, reclusion
temporal, or reclusion perpetua.
Six years and one day is prision mayor.
Will there be subsidiary imprisonment if the penalty imposed
is six years and one day?
No. When one day is added to six years, it raises the prison
sentence from prision correccional to prision mayor; hence, no
subsidiary imprisonment. (Rosares v. Director of Prisons, 85 Phil.
730, 731)
Additional penalty for habitual delinquency should be included in
determining whether or not subsidiary penalty should be imposed.
Even if the penalty imposed is not higher than prision
correccional, if the accused is a hahitual delinquent who deserves
an additional penalty of 12 years and one day of reclusion temporal,
there is no subsidiary imprisonment. (People v. Concepcion, 59 Phil.
518,522)
651

Art. 39

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

"If the principal penalty imposed."
When the penalty prescribed for the offense is imprisonment, it
is the penalty actually imposed by the Court, not the penalty provided
for by the Code, which should be considered in determining whether
or not subsidiary penalty should be imposed.
Thus, even if the penalty provided for by the Code for the crime
is prision mayor but there are two mitigating circumstances without
any aggravating circumstance (Art. 64, par. 5), and the court imposes
two years, 11 months and 11 days ofprision correccional, subsidiary
penalty may be imposed for nonpayment of the fine.
Penalty not to be executed by confinement, but has fixed duration.
Under Article 236, the penalty of suspension and fine from
P40,000.00 to Pl00,000.00 shall be imposed upon any person who
shall assume the performance of the duties and powers of any public
office without first being sworn in or having given bond required by
law. Such suspension shall last until he shall have complied with the
formalities. If he cannot pay the fine, although he already complied
with the formalities required by said Article 236, his suspension shall
continue until the amount of the fine is covered at the rate of one day
suspension for every P538.00.
Penalty not to be executed by confinement and has no fixed
duration.
Example:
The penalty is fine not exceeding P40,000.00 and censure. (Art.
365, par. 4)

If the accused cannot pay the fine, there is no subsidiary liability,
because the penalty of censure has no fixed duration and is not to be
executed by confinement.
Rule No. 1, Article 39, specifically mentions the penalty of
"prision correccional or arresto and fine"; Rule No. 2 of the same
article speaks of fine only; and Rule No. 4 mentions penalty of "fixed
duration." Hence, when fine goes with a penalty not to be executed by
imprisonment or destierro and which has no fixed duration, there is
no subsidiary penalty for nonpayment of the fine. (People v. Laure,
19 CAR [2s} 977, 984)
652

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 39

In a case where the accused was charged with the crime of slight
physical injuries and was sentenced by the trial court to pay a fine
of P30.00 and public censure, with subsidiary imprisonment in case
of insolvency, the Court of Appeals held that the trial court is not
authorized to impose subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.
(People v. Garcia, CA-G.R. No. 25764-R, 56 0.G. 4938)
The subsidiary penalty Is "the same deprivations as those of which
the principal penalty consists."

If the penalty imposed is imprisonment, the subsidiary penalty
must be imprisonment also. If the penalty imposed is destierro, the
subsidiary penalty must be destierro also. If the penalty imposed is
suspension, the subsidiary penalty must be suspension also. This
is so, because paragraph No. 4 of Article 39 states that the convict
"shall continue to suffer the same deprivations as those of which the
principal penalty consists."
The convict who served subsidiary penalty may still be required
to pay the fine.
It will be noted from paragraph No. 5 of Article 39, as amended,
that the convict who suffered subsidiary penalty for nonpayment
of the fine is not relieved from paying the fine should his financial
circumstances improve.
Before Article 39 was amended, once a convict suffered
subsidiary penalty for nonpayment of the fine, he was forever relieved
from paying the fine.
Subsidiary imprisonment is not Imprisonment for debt.
The laws which prohibit imprisonment for debt relate to the
imprisonment of debtors for liability incurred in the fulfillment of
contracts, but not to the cases seeking the enforcement of penal
statutes that provide for the payment of money as a penalty for the
commission of crime. (U.S. v. Cara, 41 Phil. 828, 834-837)
Thus, the civil liability arising from libel is not a "debt" within
the purview of the constitutional provision against imprisonment for
nonpayment of "debt." Insofar as said injunction is concerned, "debt"
means an obligation to pay a sum of money "arising from contract,"
653

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

express or implied. In addition to being part of the penalty, the civil
liability in libel arises from a tort or crime; hence, from law. As a
consequence, the subsidiary imprisonment for nonpayment of said
liability does not violate the constitutional injunction. (Quemuel v.
Court ofAppeals, No. L-22794, January 16, 1968, 22 SCRA 44, 47)

fishing with the use of explosive, fails to provide for such subsidiary
imprisonment, and that being a special law, it is not subject to the
provisions of the R.P.C., is untenable. The second paragraph of Article
10 of the said Code provides that this Code shall be supplementary
to such laws, unless the latter should specially provide the contrary.
Articles 100 (civil liability) and 39 (subsidiary penalty) are applicable
to offenses under special laws. (People v. Moreno, 60 Phil. 178; Copiaco
v. Luzon Brokerage, 66 Phil. 184)

Art. 39

No subsidiary penalty in the following cases:
1.

When the penalty imposed is higher than prision
correccional. (Art. 39, par. 3; People v. Bati, G.R. No. 87429,
August 27, 1990, 189 SCRA 97, 106; People v. Domingo,
G.R. No. 82375, April 18, 1990, 184 SCRA 409, 415;
Humilde • Pablo, Adm. Matter No. 604-CFI, February 20,
1981, 102 SCRA 731, 732)

2.

For failure to pay the reparation of the damage caused,
indemnification of the consequential damages, and the
costs of the proceedings.

3.

When the penalty imposed is fine and a penalty not to be
executed by confinement in a penal institution and which
has no fixed duration.

Subsidiary Imprisonment under special laws.
The provisions on subsidiary imprisonment can be applied
suppletorily to special laws pursuant to Article 10 which provides:
ART. 10. Offenses not subject to the provisions of this Code.
Offenses which are or in the future may be punishable under special
laws are not subject to the provisions of this Code. This Code shall be
supplementary to such laws, unless the lattershould specially

provide the contrary.
Thus, unless the special law provides that subsidiary
imprisonment shall not be imposed, subsidiary imprisonment can be
imposed for violation of special laws.
As early as 1959, the Supreme Court has held in People v. Cubelo,
G.R. No. L-13678, November 20, 1959, 106 Phil. 496 that:
Appellants contention that the trial court committed error in
ordering him to serve subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency in
the payment offine with the reason that Act No. 4003, which prohibits
654

Art. 39

No subsidiary imprisonment for nonpayment of income tax.
As the Internal Revenue Code fails to provide for the collection of
the income tax in criminal proceedings, conviction for failure or neglect
to pay such tax does not include payment of indemnity to the State in
the amount of the tax not paid, nor can subsidiary imprisonment be
imposed in case of insolvency. (People w. Arnault, 92 Phil. 252, 262)
Subsidiary Imprisonment, like accessory penalties, not essential
In detennlning jurisdiction.
The accused was prosecuted for violation of the Usury Law. The
penalty for such violation is a fine of not less than P50.00 nor more
than P200.00, or imprisonment for not less than 10 days nor more than
six months, or both, and also the return of the entire sum received
as interest from the party aggrieved, and in case of non-payment to
suffer subsidiary imprisonment. It was argued by the Solicitor General
that in view of the possible subsidiary imprisonment which must be
added to the principal penalty of six months, the justice of the peace
court has no jurisdiction in cases involving the Usury Laws.
Held: The return of the usurious interest is a civil liability and
is not a part of the penalty provided for the offense. (People v. Caldito,
72 Phil. 262, 264-265)
What determines thejurisdiction of the Court in criminal cases is
the extent of the penalty which the law imposes for the crime charged
in the information or complaint. (People v. Fajardo, 49 Phil. 206, 210)
It is settled rule that subsidiary imprisonment, like accessory
penalties, is not essential in the determination of the criminal
jurisdiction of a court. (People v. Caldito, supra, at 267)

655

THE REVJSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

The decision need not state that there should not be any subsidiary
Imprisonment when the law forbids it.

disqualification from the right of suffrage which the offender
shall suffer although pardoned as to the principal penalty,
unless the same shall have been expressly remitted in the
pardon.

Arts, 40-42

Counsel for appellee submits that, "In view of the principal
penalty imposed, the decision should state that there should not be any
subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency." The recommendation
is not well taken because Article 39, No. 3, R.P.C. provides that when
the principal penalty is higher than prision correccional, no subsidiary
imprisonment in case of insolvency shall be imposed. Hence, it is not
necessary for the decision to state what the law expressly forbids. We
are aware of the practice ofcourts in making such statement although
unnecessary and find nothing wrong in the superfluity. However, a
judgment which does not include said pronouncement is in accordance
with law. (People v. Rivera, 1 C.A. Rep. 38)

Section Three. - Penalties in which other accessory
penalties are inherent
Art. 40. Death - Its accessory penalties. -- The death
penalty, when it is not executed by reason of commutation
or pardon shall carry with it that of perpetual absolute
disqualification and that of civil interdiction during thirty
years following the date of sentence, unless such accessory
penalties have been expressly remitted in the pardon.

Art. 41. Reclusion perpetua and reclusion temporal
Their accessory penalties. -- The penalties of reclusion
perpetua and reclusion temporal shall carry with them
that of civil interdiction for life or during the period of the
sentence as the case may be, and that of perpetual absolute .
disqualification which the offender shall suffer even though
pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless the same shall
have been expressly remitted in the pardon.

Art. 42. Prision mayor - Its accessory penalties. -- The
penalty ofprision mayor shall carry with it that of temporary
absolute disqualification and that of perpetual special
656

Arts. 40-44

Art. 43. Prision correccional
Its accessory penalties.
The penalty of prision correccional shall carry with it
that of suspension from public office, from the right to
follow a profession or calling, and that of perpetual special
disqualification from the right of suffrage, if the duration
of said imprisonment shall exceed eighteen months. The
offender shall suffer the disqualification provided in this
article although pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless
the same shall have been expressly remitted in the pardon.

Art. 44. Arresto
Its accessory penalties. The penalty
of arresto shall carry with it that of suspension of the right
to hold office and the right of suffrage during the term of the
sentence.
Outline of accessory penalties inherent in principal penalties:
1.

Death, when not executed by reason of commutation or
pardon - (1) perpetual absolute disqualification; and
(2) civil interdiction for 30 years, if not expressly remitted
in the pardon.

2.

Reclusion perpetua and reclusion temporal- ( 1) civil
interdiction for life or during the sentence; and (2) perpetual
absolute disqualification, unless expressly remitted in the
pardon of the principal penalty.

3.

Prision mayor - (1) temporary absolute disqualification;
and (2) perpetual special disqualification from suffrage,
unless expressly remitted in the pardon of the principal
penalty.

4.

Prision correccional- (1) suspension from public
office, profession or calling, and (2) perpetual special
657

Arts. 40-44

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

disqualification from suffrage, if the duration of imprisonment exceeds 18 months, unless expressly remitted in the
pardon of the principal penalty.

Art. 45

civil interdiction during the period of the sentence and perpetual
absolute disqualification.
Accessory penalties do not determine jurisdiction.

Note:

5.

There is perpetual special disqualification from suffrage,
only when the duration of the imprisonment exceeds 18
months.
Arresto - suspension of the right to hold office and the
right of suffrage during the term of the sentence.

Destierro has no accessory penalty.
The Code does not provide for any accessory penalty for destierro.
Is there accessory penalty attached to death penalty?
None, for obvious reasons.
It is only when the death penalty is not executed by reason of
commutation or pardon that the accessory penalty provided for in
Article 40 shall be suffered by the convict.
"Unless expressly remitted in the pardon."
The accessory penalties mentioned in Articles 40 to 43 must
be suffered by the offender, although pardoned us to the principal
penalties. To be relieved of the accessory penalties, the same must
be expressly remitted in the pardon.
Accessory penalties need not be expressly imposed; they are
deemed imposed.
The accessory penalties are understood to be always imposed
upon the offender by the mere fact that the law fixes a certain penalty
for a given crime.
Article 73 provides that whenever the courts shall impose a
penalty which, by provision of law, carries with it other penalties,
according to the provisions of Articles 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, and 45 of
this Code, it must be understood that the accessory penalties are also
imposed upon the convict.

The accused was charged with estafa, and was sentenced to
arresto mayor with the accessory penalty of suspension from public
office and the right of suffrage during the term of his sentence by the
justice of the peace court.
The accused raised the question ofjurisdiction of the justice of
the peace court.
Held: The justice of the peace court has jurisdiction. The
accessory penalties do not affect the jurisdiction of the court in which
the information is filed, because they do not modify, or alter the nature
of the penalty provided by the law. What determines jurisdiction in
criminal cases is the extent of the principal penalty which the law
imposes for the crime charged in the information or complaint. (People
v. Fajardo, supra; People v. Caldito, supra)
Note:

Under Section 2ofR.A. No. 7691, the MTC has exclusive
original jurisdiction over offenses punishable with
imprisonment not exceeding six years irrespective of the
amount of the fine, and regardless of other imposable
accessory or other penalties, including the civil liability
arising from such offenses or predicated thereon,
irrespective of kind, nature, value or amount thereof.

Art. 45. Confiscation and forfeiture of the proceeds or
instruments of the crime.
Every penalty imposed for the
commission of a felony shall carry with it the forfeiture of
the proceeds of the crime and the instruments or tools with
which it was committed.
Such proceeds and instruments or tools shall be
confiscated and forfeited in favor of the Government, unless
they be the property of a third person not liable for the offense,
but those articles which are not subject of lawful commerce
shall be destroyed.

Thus, when the law provides that those guilty of homicide shall
be punished by reclusion temporal, it is understood that it includes
658

659

Art. 45

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Outline of the provision of this article.
l.

Every penalty imposed carries with it the forfeiture of the
proceeds of the crime and the instruments or tools used in
the commission of the crime.

2.

The proceeds and instruments or tools of the crime are
confiscated and forfeited in favor of the Government.

3.

Property of a third person not liable for the offense is not
subject to confiscation and forfeiture.

4.

Property not subject oflawful commerce (whether it belongs
to the accused or to third person) shall be destroyed.

No forfeiture where there is no criminal case.
Where the slot machines were seized under a search warrant
and there is no criminal case as yet against their operator for violation
of the gambling law, and there is only a civil case brought by the
operator to enjoin the municipal officials from banning the operation
of the slot machines, the court cannot order the destruction of the
machines as not subject of lawful commerce. (Philips v. Municipal
Mayor, 105 Phil. 1344 Unrep.], No. L-9183, May 30, 1959)
The ruling is based on the phrase "every penalty imposed." A
penalty cannot be imposed unless there is a criminal case filed, the
case is tried, and the accused is convicted.
The forfeiture of the proceeds or instruments of the crime cannot
be ordered if the accused is acquitted, because no penalty is imposed.
Courts cannot order the confiscation of property belonging to a
third person if the latter is not indicted.
Under Article 45 of the R.P.C., which authorizes the confiscation
and forfeiture of the proceeds of the crime and the instruments or
tools with which it was committed except when they are "the property
of a third person not liable for the offense," the court cannot order
the forfeiture of goods the owner of which is not indicted although
there is sufficient ground to hold him guilty of the acts for which the
accused has been convicted. (People v. Delgado, C.A., 64 O.G. 785)
Third party ownership was considered established under the
following set of facts: that the car in question was registered in the
660

TITLE THREE

Art. 45

Penalties

name of the third party, who, in the absence of strong evidence to
the contrary, must be considered as the lawful owner thereof; that
the only basis in concluding that the said car belongs to the accused
were the latter's statements during the trial of the criminal case to
that effect; that the said statements were not, however, intended to
be, nor could constitute, a claim of ownership over the car adverse to
his mother, who is the third party, but were made simply in answer
to questions propounded in court for the sole purpose of establishing
the identity of the defendant who furnished the car used by the
appellants in the commission of the crime; that the chattel mortgage
on the car and its assignment in favor of the intervenor, the assignee
of the chattel mortgage, were made several months before the date of
the commission of the crimes charged, which circumstance forecloses
the possibility of collusion to prevent the State from confiscating the
car. (People v. Jose, No. L-28232, February 6, 1971, 37 SCRA 450,
481)
Instruments of the crime belonging to innocent third person may
be recovered.
U.S. v. Bruhez
(28 Phil. 305)
Facts: Lorenzo Uy was an employee and during the absence of his
employer and without the latter's knowledge, Lorenzo Uy drew out a check
for P3,500.00 against the bank account of the employer and used the money
consisting of seven P500.00 bills to bribe Bruhez.
Held: Where the money used to bribe a customs official to permit the
illegal importation of opium belongs to an innocent third party, it should
not he confiscated. The person who owns the money used in the commission
of the crime has a right to intervene in the proceeding in the court having

jurisdiction of the offense for the purpose of determining his rights in the
premises.

Confiscation can be ordered only if the property is submitted in
evidence or placed at the disposal of the court.
U.S. v. Filart
(30 Phil. 80)
Facts: 'The accused planned to sell 450 tickets, each representing a
chance on an automobile to be given as a prize to the one who would draw

the lucky number. The trial court ordered the confiscation of the automobile
661

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

and the money obtained from the sale of the tickets which were not before
the court or in the possession of any of the parties to the action at the time
the order of confiscation was made.

additional penalty and would amount to an increase of the penalty
already imposed, thereby placing the accused in double jeopardy. And
under Rule 118 (now Rule 122), Section 2, of the Rules of Court, the
Government cannot appeal in a criminal case if the defendant would
be placed thereby in double jeopardy. (People v. Sanchez, 101 Phil.
745, 747-748)

Art. 45

Held: Where it appears that in a prosecution for violation of the
Gambling Law, the automobile as well as the money used in committing such
violation was not in the possession of the court, or of any ofthe parties to the
action, the court has no jurisdiction to order the confiscation of the property.
Articles which are forfeited, when the order of forfeiture is already
final, cannot be returned even in case of an acquittal.
Commissioner of Customs v. Encarnacion
(95 Phil. 439)

Facts: A crew member of the PAL, coming from Madrid, brought with
him certain dutiable articles. As they were not declared, the collector of
Customs decreed that said articles be forfeited to the Government. The order
of forfeiture became final. Said crew member was charged with violation of
the Revised Administrative Code for his failure to declare dutiable articles,
but after trial, he was acquitted on the ground of insufficiency of evidence,
the Court ordering at the same time the Bureau of Customs to return to him
said articles upon prior payment of the customs duties due thereon.
Held: The respondent judge erred in ordering the release of the dutiable
articles, because said articles already ceased to belong to the crew member,
as they had been forfeited to the Government.
Confiscation and forfeiture are additional penalties.
After several defendants had pleaded guilty to a charge of
gambling, the court sentenced each of them to pay a fine. Immediately
after the sentence was read to them, they paid the fine. Subsequently,
the fiscal discovered that a certain sum of money used by the
defendants in gambling had not been ordered confiscated. He moved
the court to modify the judgment by issuing an order confiscating the
money. Can the court properly issue such order? No. The confiscation
of the money is an additional penalty and as the sentence has become
final, the court cannot modify, alter or change that sentence. (U.S. v.
Hart, 24 Phil. 578, 581-582)

When the accused has appealed, confiscation and forfeiture not
ordered by the trial court may be imposed by the appellate court.
Article 45 of the R.P.C. (providing for the confiscation or
forfeiture of the instruments or tools employed in the commission of
a crime) has repeatedly been applied to crimes penalized by special
laws, in default of a contrary mandate therein. While th[e] Court in
the case of People v. Paet, 53 O.G. 668 and People v. Sanchez, supra,
refused to entertain the Government's appeal from the refusal of the
Court to decree such a forfeiture, it did so, not because Article 45 of
the Penal Code did not apply but exclusively on the ground that in a
criminal case wherein the accused had not appealed, no appeal can be
interposed by the Government with a view to increasing the penalty
imposed by the Court below; and confiscation being an additional
penalty, the accused would be placed twice in jeopardy of punishment
for the same offense, should the Government's appeal be entertained.
But in the present case, the accused's own appeal has removed all bars
to the review and correction of the penalty imposed by the court below,
even if an increase thereof should be the result. Judgment modified
by ordering that the unlicensed money found in the possession of the
appellant be declared forfeited to the Government. (People v. Exconde,
101 Phil. 1125, 1133-1134)
Forfeiture and confiscation of instruments and proceeds of the
offense are accessory penalties. Are they not deemed imposed?

Th[e) Court has held in People v. Alejandro Paet y Velasco,
100 Phil. 357, that where the penalty imposed did not include the
confiscation of the dollars involved, the confiscation or forfeiture of
the said dollars as is sought in the Government's appeal, would be an
662

Art. 45

663

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 47

to the wrong done, the law fixes a distinct penalty for the principal
in frustrated or attempted felony.

Chapter Four
APPLICATION OF PENALTIES
Section One. - Rules for the application of penalties to
the persons criminally liable and for the
graduation of the same.

Example: The penalty prescribed by the Code for robbery
with homicide is reclusion perpetua to death (Art. 294, No. 1); but
the penalty to be imposed upon the offender in case the homicide
was consummated but the robbery was attempted or frustrated
is not two degrees or one degree lower than said penalty, but
reclusion temporal in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua
as prescribed in Article 297.
Graduation of penalties by degrees or by periods.

Art. 46. Penalty to be imposed upon principals in general.
- The penalty prescribed by law for the commission of a felony
shall be imposed upon the principals in the commission of
such felony.

The graduation of penalties by degrees refers to stages of
execution (consummated, frustrated or attempted) and to the degree
of the criminal participation of the offender (whether as principal,
accomplice, or accessory).

Whenever the law prescribes a penalty for a felony in
general terms, it shall be understood as applicable to the
consumm ated felony.

The division of a divisible penalty into three periods, as
maximum, medium and minimum, refers to the proper period of the
penalty which should be imposed when aggravating or mitigating
circumstances attend the commission of the crime.

Penalty prescribed in general terms General rule.
The penalty prescribed by law in general terms shall be imposed:
1.

Upon the principals.

2.

For consummated felony.

In Article 249, for instance, the penalty of reclusion temporal is
provided for the crime of homicide. That penalty is intended for the
principal in a consummated homicide.
Exception - when the Jaw fixes a penalty for frustrated or attempted
felony.

Art., 47. In what cases the death penalty shall not be
imposed; Automatic review of death penalty cases. - The
death penalty shall be imposed in all cases in which it must be
imposed under existing laws, except when the guilty person
is below (18) years of age at the time of the commission of
the crime or is more than seventy years of age or when upon
appeal or automatic review of the case by the Supreme Court,
the required majority vote is not obtained for the imposition of
the death penalty, in which cases the penalty shall be reclusion
perpetua.

Whenever it is believed that the penalty lower by one or two
degrees corresponding to said acts of execution is not in proportion

In all cases where the death penalty is imposed by the
trial court, the records shall be forwarded to the Supreme
Court for automatic review and judgment by the court en bane,
within twenty (20) days but not earlier than fifteen (15) days
after promulgation of the judgment or notice of denial of any
motion for new trial or reconsideration. The transcript shall

664

665

The exception is when the penalty to be imposed upon the
principal in frustrated or attempted felony is fixed by law.

Art. 47

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Criminal Law

also be forwarded within ten (10) days after the filing thereof
by the stenographic reporter. (As amended by RA. No. 7659)

(2)

Art. 47

Where the Penalty Imposed Is Reclusion Perpetua or Life
Imprisonment: by Notice of Appeal (Rule 122, Sec. 3[c],
Rules of Court)

Court of Appeals to review death penalty cases.
Republic Act No. 9346 prohibited the imposition of the death penalty.
Republic Act No. 9346 which was enacted on June 24, 2006
prohibited the imposition of the death penalty, and provided for the
imposition of the penalty of reclusion perpetua in lieu of death. It
repealed R.A. No. 7659 which restored the death penalty for certain
heinous crimes.
The 1987 Constitution merely suspended the Imposition of the
death penalty.
Section 19(1), Article III of the 1987 Constitution provides that:
"Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel, degrading or inhuman
punishment inflicted. Neither shall the death penalty be imposed,
unless, for compelling reasons involving heinous crimes, the Congress
hereafter provides for it. Any death penalty already imposed shall be
reduced to reclusion perpetua." A reading of said Section will readily
show that there is really nothing therein which expressly declares
the abolition of the death penalty. The 1987 Constitution merely
suspended the imposition of the death penalty. (People v. Munoz,
G.R. Nos. 38969-70, February 9, 1989, 170 SCRA 107, 120, 121)

While the Fundamental Law requires a mandatory review
by the Supreme Court of cases where the penalty imposed is
reclusion perpetua, life imprisonment, or death, nowhere, however,
has it proscribed an intermediate review. If only to ensure utmost
circumspection before the penalty of death, reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment is imposed, the Court now deems it wise and compelling
to provide in these cases a review by the Court of Appeals before the
case is elevated to the Supreme Court. Where life and liberty are at
stake, all possible avenues to determine his guilt or innocence must
be accorded an accused, and no care in the evaluation of the facts can
ever be overdone. A prior determination by the Court of Appeals on,
particularly, the factual issues, would minimize the possibility of an
error of judgment. If the Court of Appeals should affirm the penalty
of death, reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, it could then render
judgment imposing the corresponding penalty as the circumstances
so warrant, refrain from entering judgment and elevate the entire
records of the case to the Supreme Court for its final disposition.
(People v. Mateo, G.R. Nos. 147678-87, July 7, 2004)
The Mateo Decision, clarified.

Majority vote of the Supreme Court Is required for the imposition
of the death penalty.
Since the Supreme Court is composed of 15 members (Art. VIII,
Sec. 4[1), 1987 Constitution), the vote of eight members is required
to impose the death penalty.
Republic Act No. 296 provides that eight justices must concur
in the imposition of the death penalty.
Appeals In cases where penalty imposed Is death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment.
(1)

Where the Penalty Imposed Is Death: No notice of appeal is
necessary. The Court of Appeals will automatically review
the Judgment. (Rule 122, Sec. 3[d), Rules of Court)
666

In People v. Rocha, G.R. No. 173797, August 31, 2007, the Court
clarified the Mateo ruling, holding that:
In Mateo, as quoted by plaintiff-appellee, it was stated that
"[wlhile the Fundamental Law requires a mandatory review by
the Supreme Court ofcases where the penalty imposed is reclusion
perpetua, life imprisonment, or death, nowhere, however, has
it proscribed an intermediate review." A closer study of Mateo,
however, reveals that the inclusion in the foregoing statement
of cases where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua and
life imprisonment was only for the purpose of including these
cases within the ambit of the intermediate review of the Court
of Appeals: "[this] Court now deems it wise and compelling
to provide in these cases [cases where the penalty imposed is
667

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 47

Criminal Law

reclusion perpetua, life imprisonment or death] review by the
Court of Appeals before the case is elevated to the Supreme
Court."
We had not intended to pronounce in Mateo that cases
where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment are subject to the mandatory review of this
Court. In Mateo, these cases were grouped together with
death penalty cases because, prior to Mateo, it was this Court
which had jurisdiction to directly review reclusion perpetua,
life imprisonment and death penalty cases alike. The mode
of review, however, was different. Reclusion perpetua and life
imprisonment cases were brought before this Court via a notice
of appeal, while death penalty cases were reviewed by this Court
on automatic review.
After the promulgation of Mateo on 7 June 2004, this
Court promptly caused the amendment of the foregoing
provisions, but retained the distinction of requiring a notice of
appeal for reclusion perpetua and life imprisonment cases and
automatically reviewing death penalty cases. Thus, Rule 122,
Sections 3 and 10, as amended by A.M. No. 00-5-03-SC (which
took effect on 15 October 2004), now provides:
SEC. 3. How appeal taken.XXX

(e) The appeal in cases where the penalty imposed
by the Regional Trial Court is reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment, or where a lesser penalty is imposed but
for offenses committed on the same occasion or which
arose out of the same occurrence that gave rise to the more
serious offense for which the penalty of death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment is imposed, shall be by notice
of appeal in accordance with paragraph (a) of this Rule.
(d) No notice of appeal is necessary in cases where
the Regional Trial Court imposed the death penalty. The
Court of Appeals automatically review the Judgment
provided in section 10 of this Rule.

668

Art. 47

Where the penalty of reclusion perpetua is imposed, in lieu of the
death penalty, there is a need to perfect an appeal.
Since the death penalty's imposition is now prohibited, there
is a need to perfect an appeal, if appeal is desired, from a judgment
of conviction for an offense where the penalty imposed is reclusion
perpetua in lieu of the death penalty. (People u. Salome, G.R. No.
169077, August 31, 2006)
Death penalty Is not Imposed in the following cases:
1.

When the guilty person is below 18 years of age at the time
of the commission of the crime.

2.

When the guilty person is more than 70 years of age.

3.

When upon appeal or automatic review of the case by the
Supreme Court, the vote of eight members is not obtained
for the imposition of the death penalty.

Death penalty shall not be Imposed when guilty person Is over 70
years.
At the time the trial court rendered its decision on March 11
1967, Manosca was 64 years old. He should now be 74. Article 47
the R.P.C. prohibits the imposition of the death penalty when the
guilty person is more than 70 years of age. (People u. Alcantara, No.
L-16832, November 18, 1967, 21 SCRA 906, 913-914)

af

Exceptional cases in which the death penalty was not imposed.
( 1)

Considering the circumstances under which the offense
in question was perpetrated in the light of the deplorable
conditions existing in the national penitentiary which
had been previously taken cognizance of by this Court,
imposition of the penalty of death is believed unwarranted.
(People u. Dela Cruz, No. L-46397, May 16, 1983, 122 SCRA
227,231, citing People u. Delos Santos, 14 SCRA 4702 and
People u. Garcia, 96 SCRA 497)

(2)

Appellant has already been detained for almost eight years
now and is presently confined at the National Penitentiary
awaiting the outcome of our review of the judgment
rendered by the trial court. The facts of the case tend to
669

Art. 47

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
show that the crime was not the result of any deliberate
and well-formed nefarious conspiracy of a criminal group.
It was rather a crime clumsily conceived on the spur of
the moment. Appellant obviously did not fully realize the
gravity of the crime he and his companions were embarking
upon. The extreme penalty of death imposed on appellant
is inappropriate. Under the given circumstances, the
penalty that should be imposed should be reduced to life
imprisonment. (People u. Marcos, No. L-65048, January 9,
1987, 147 SCRA 204,217)

What is the Justification for death penalty?

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 47

medicine for him and he should be put to death slowly but surely" and
imposed life imprisonment at hard labor, without hope whatsoever
of any pardon or reprieve.
Is the pronouncement of the court in accordance with law?
No. As long as the death penalty remains in the statute books,
it is the duty of the judicial officers to respect and apply the law
regardless of their private opinion. (People u. Limaco, 88 Phil. 35, 43)
The trial court must require the prosecution to present evidence,
despite plea of guilty when the crime charged is punished with
death.

The death penalty, as such, is not excessive, unjust or cruel,
within the meaning of that word in the Constitution. Punishments are
cruel when they involve torture or lingering death. Cruel punishment
implies something inhuman and barbarous, something more than the
mere extinguishment of life. (People u. Marcos, supra, at 216, citing
People v. Camano, 115 SCRA 688)

The fact that there were no stenographic notes taken of the
proceedings and that the lower court made only a brief reference to
the plea of guilty in the decision did not speak well of the trial court's
conduct in so serious a matter involving a human life. The essence of
judicial review in capital offenses is that while society allows violent
retribution for heinous crimes committed against it, it always must
make certain that the blood of the innocent is not spilled, or that the
guilty are not made to suffer more than their just measure of the
punishment and retribution. Thus, a sentence of death is valid only
ifit is susceptible ofa fair and reasonable examination by this court.
This, however, is impossible ifno evidence of guilt was taken after a
plea of guilty. (People u. Busa, No. L-32047, June 25, 1973, 51 SCRA
317, 321)

In what crimes is death penalty Imposed?

Death penalty is not imposed in view of certain circumstances.

In (1) treason, (2) piracy, (3) qualified piracy, (4) qualified bribery,
(5) parricide, (6) murder, (7) infanticide, (8) kidnapping and serious
illegal detention, (9) robbery with homicide, (10) destructive arson,
(11) rape with homicide, (12) plunder, (13) certain violations of the
Dangerous Drugs Act, and (14) carnapping.

Precisely because of the limited nature of his schooling and of
the effect upon his general outlook, of the unenlightened environment
prevailing in the community of Ilongots to which he belongs, as well
as of the circumstance that the deceased Flaviano Fontanilla had
been a former municipal mayor, whose act in clearing and working
on a land claimed by the Tiongots was seemingly regarded by these
non-Christians as one of oppression and abuse of authority, the
Court feels that Santos should not be dealt with the severity due to
persons otherwise circumstanced. (People u. Santos, Nos. L-17215-17,
February 28, 1967, 19 SCRA 445, 454)

Social defense and exemplarity justify the penalty of death.
Carillo has proved himself to be a dangerous enemy of society. The
death penalty imposed upon him is a warning to others. (People u.
Carillo, 85 Phil. 611, 635)
Death penalty not cruel and unusual.

"Death penalty shall be imposed in all cases in which It must be
Imposed under existing law."
The accused, without any provocation, hacked to death three
girls in their house. The court refused to impose the death penalty,
believing and stating that "a quick death would seem to be too sweet a
670

671

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 48

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Criminal Law

Art. 48. Penalty for complex crimes. - When a single act
constitutes two or more grave or less grave felonies, or when
an offense is a necessary means for committing the other, the
penalty for the most serious crime shall be imposed, the same
to be applied in its maximum period. (As amended by Act No.

2.

Art. 48

That the single act produces (1) two or more grave felonies,
or (2) one or more grave and one or more less grave felonies,
or (3) two or more less grave felonies.

4000)

The single act of throwing a hand grenade producing murder and
multiple attempted murders.

At least two crimes must be committed.

Guillen, by a single act of throwing a highly explosive hand
grenade at President Roxas resulting in the death of another person,
committed several grave felonies, namely:

Article 48 requires the commission of at least two crimes. But
the two or more grave or less grave felonies must be the result of a
single act, or an offense must be a necessary means for committing
the other.
A complex crime is only one crime.
In complex crime, although two or more crimes are actually
committed, they constitute only one crime in the eyes of the law as
well as in the conscience of the offender. The offender has only one
criminal intent. Even in the case where an offense is a necessary
means for committing the other, the evil intent of the offender is
only one. (People v. Hernandez, 99 Phil. 515) Hence, there is only one
penalty imposed for the commission of a complex crime.
Two kinds of complex crimes:

(1)

murder, of which Simeon Varela was the victim; and

(2)

multiple attempted murders, of which President Roxas and
four others were the injured parties. (People v. Guillen, 85
Phil. 307, 318)

Murder is committed when a person is killed by means of
explosion. (Art. 248) The penalty for the crime committed is death,
the maximum of the penalty for murder, which is the graver offense.
The penalty for each of the attempted murder is two degrees lower,
which is still an afflictive penalty. The attempted murders are grave
felonies.
Placing a time bomb in a plane, which caused it to explode in
mid-air, killing 13 persons therein, constitutes a complex crime of
multiple murder and destruction of property. (People v. Largo, 99
Phil. 1061-1062 [Unrep.J)

1.

When a single act constitutes two or more grave or less
grave felonies.

Several shots from submachine gun causing several deaths, caused
by a single act of pressing the trigger, considered a complex crime.

2.

When an offense is a necessary means for committing the
other.

Apolonio Ikoy and Irineo Gellangala died from bullets discharged
by the same shot which was aimed at the former. The shot was fired
from a submachine gun where a single pull at the trigger would fire
several bullets automatically in succession. The Supreme Court,
citing II Viada, 5th Ed., p. 629, categorized the facts as constituting
one single act - a complex crime of murder and homicide. (People v.
Buyco, 80 Phil. 58, 67-69)

The first is otherwise known as compound crime. The second is
the complex crime proper.
But ordinarily, both are referred to as complex crimes.
"When a single act constitutes two or more grave or less grave
felonies."
Requisites:
1.

That only a single act is performed by the offender.
672

Where it ls not possible to determine who killed the victim.
Although several independent acts were performed by the
accused in firing separate shots from their individual firearms,
it was not possible to determine who among them actually killed
673

Art. 48

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

victim Rolando Tugadi. Moreover, there is no evidence that accusedappellants intended to fire at each and every one of the victims
separately and distinctly from each other. On the contrary, the
evidence clearly shows a single criminal impulse to kill Marlon
Tugad's group as a whole. Thus, one of accused-appellants exclaimed
in frustration after the ambush: "My gosh, we were not able to kill all
of them." Where a conspiracy animates several persons with a single
purpose, their individual acts done in pursuance of that purpose are
looked upon as a single act, the act of execution, giving rise to a single
complex offense. (People v. Sanidad, G.R. No. 146099, April 30, 2003)

Light felonies produced by the same act should be treated and
punished as separate offenses or may be absorbed by the grave
felony.
l.

When the acts are wholly different, not only in themselves,
but also because they are directed against two different
persons, as when one fires his revolver twice in succession,
killing one person and wounding another (U.S. v. Ferrer,
1 Phil. 56), or when two persons are killed one after the
other, by different acts, although these two killings were
the result of a single criminal impulse (People v. Alfindo,
47 PhL. 1), the different acts must be considered as distinct
crimes.

(b)

The eight killings and the attempted murder were
perpetrated by means of different acts. Hence, they cannot
be regarded as constituting a complex crime under Article
48 of the R.P.C. which refers to cases where "a single act
constitutes two or more grave felonies, or when an offense
is a necessary means for committing the other." (People v.
Toling, No. L-27097, January 17, 1975, 62 SCRA 17, 34)

(c)

The infliction of the four fatal gunshot wounds on Siyang
and of the wound in the palm of the mayor's right hand
was not the result of a single act. The injuries were the
consequences of two volleys of gunshots. Hence, the
assaults on Siyang and the mayor cannot be categorized
as a complex crime. (People v. Tamani, Nos. L-22160-61,
January 21, 1974, 55 SCRA 153, 176)

"Two or more grave or less grave felonies."
In the case of a compound crime, the offenses involved should
be either both grave or both less grave, or one of them a grave felony
and the other less grave.
674

Several light felonies resulting from one single act - not
complex.
Thus, in a collision between two automobiles driven
in a careless and negligent manner, resulting in the slight
physical injuries of the passengers and light felony of
damage to property, there is no complex crime, because the
crime of slight physical injuries, as well as that of damage
to property, is alight felony. (People v. Turla, 50 PhiL. 1001,
1002)

No single act in the following cases.
(a)

Art. 48

In this case, there are as many crimes as there are
persons injured with light physical injuries and as many
penalties as there are light felonies committed, even if they
are produced by a single act of the offender.
2.

When the crime is committed by force or violence, slight
physical injuries are absorbed.
a.

Where the person in authority or his agent, who
was attacked while in the performance of his duty,
suffered slight physical injuries only, the crime of
slight physical injuries is absorbed in the crime of
direct assault. (Art. 148) This is the ruling in the
cases of People v. Benitez, 73 Phil. 671 and People v.
Acierto, 57 Phil. 614.

b.

When in the commission of rape, slight physical
injuries are inflicted on the girl's genital organ, the
crime of slight physical injuries is absorbed in the
crime of rape. (People v. Apiado, 53 Phil. 325, 327)
The reason for the rulings is that the slight
physical injuries are the necessary consequence of
the force or violence inherent in the crimes of direct
assault and rape.

Examples of compound crime:
(a)

The single act of Pama in firing a shot, the same bullet
causing the death of two persons who were standing on the
675

Art. 48

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

same line of the direction of the bullet. (People v. Pama,
CA., 44 O.G. 3339)
Homicide, which is the unlawful killing of a person,
is punishable by reclusion temporal, an afflictive penalty.
Hence, in killing two persons, Pama committed two
homicides, which are two grave felonies. (See Art. 9) Since
they were the result of one single act of firing a shot, a
complex crime was committed.
(b)

After a justice of the peace had read to the accused the
sentence of conviction, the latter took a dagger and
stabbed said justice of the peace in the back, the wound
incapacitating him for ordinary work for more than 30
days. This is a complex crime of direct assault with serious
physical injuries, the single act of stabbing the justice of
the peace constituting the two less grave felonies of direct
assault and serious physical injuries. (U.S. v. Montiel, 9
Phil. 162, 167-168)

(c)

Where the victim was killed while discharging his duty as
barangay captain to protect life and property and enforce
law and order in his barrio, the crime is a complex crime
of homicide with assault upon a person in authority. (G.R.
No. 57415, December 15, 1989, 180 SCRA 102, 107)

(d)

Where the stabbing and killing of the victim which caused
likewise the death of the fetus arose from the single
criminal intent of killing the victim, as shown by accused's
pursuit of the victim after she was able to escape, the crime
committed is the complex crime of murder with abortion.
(People v. Lopez, G.R. No. 136861, November 15, 2000)

When there is no conspiracy and it is impossible to ascertain the
number of persons killed by each accused, there is only one offense
of multiple homicide.

Art. 48

to that effect. There was no intent on the part of the appellants to fire
at each and everyone of the victims separately and distinctly from
each other.
Held: If the act or acts complained of resulted from a single
criminal impulse, it constitutes a single offense. It may also be added
that there is absolutely no evidence as to the number of persons killed
by each and every one of the appellants, so even ifwe were induced to
hold each appellant responsible for each and every death caused by
him, it is impossible to carry that desire into effect as it is impossible
to ascertain the individual deaths caused by each and everyone. [The
Court] [is], therefore, forced to find the appellants guilty of only one
offense of multiple homicide for which the penalty to be imposed
should be in the maximum period. (People v. Lawas, G.R. L-7618,
June 30, 1955, 97 PhL. 975 [Unrep.J)
InLawas, this Court was merely forced to apply Article 48 of the
Revised Penal Code because of the impossibility of ascertaining the
number of persons killed by each accused. Since conspiracy was not
proven therein, joint criminal responsibility could not be attributed
the accused. Each accused could not be held liable for separate
cnmes because oflack ofclear evidence showing the number of persons
actually killed by each of them. (People v. Nelmida, G.R. No. 184500,
September 11, 2012)

to

The ruling in the Lavas case applies only when there is no evidence at
all to show the number ofpersons killed by each ofseveral defendants.
. The ruling in the Lawas case that each of the appellants was
guilty only of the complex crime of homicide, notwithstanding the
fact that about 50 persons were killed by the appellants who fired at
them with their guns a number of shots, because the killings were
the result of a single impulse, does not apply when the appellant
alone killed all the six victims, one after another, with one shot each.
(People v. Remollino, 109 Phil. 607, 612)
In People v. Abella, No. L-32205, August 31, 1979, 93 SCRA
25, 76 O.G. 1091, 16 members of the OXO gang, who were prisoners
occupymg three small cells on one side of the jailhouse were able to
break into the big cell opposite theirs and, in that big cell, killed 14
mmates who were members of the Sigue-Sigue Gang.

Facts: Members of the Home Guard, upon order of their leader,
Lawas, simultaneously and successively fired at several victims. As
a result, 50 persons died. The evidence positively shows that the
killing was the result of a single impulse, which was induced by the
order of the leader to fire, and continued with the intention to comply
therewith, as the firing stopped as soon as the leader gave the order

The fiscal and the trial court treated the fourteen killings and
injuries inflicted on the three other victims as a complex crime of

676

677

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE

multiple murder and multiple frustrated murder, the court imposing
one penalty of death on all of the accused.

the defendants. Thus, it was impossible to ascertain the number of
persons killed by each of them.

Art. 48

In sustaining the trial court, the Supreme Court said:
"In the De Los Santos case (supra), which involved two riots
on two successive days in the national penitentiary wherein nine
prisoners were killed (five on the first day and four on the second
day), the fourteen members of the Sigue-Sigue gang who took part
in the killing were convicted of multiple murder (a complex crime)
and not of nine separate murders. x xx."
"The ruling in the De Los Santos case is predicated on the theory
that 'when, for the attainment of a single purpose which constitutes
an offense, various acts are executed, such acts must be considered
only as one offense,' a complex crime (People v. Penas, 66 Phil. 682,
687; See also: People v. Cu Unjieng, 61 Phil. 236, 302 and 906) where
the falsification of 128 warehouse receipts during the period from
November 30 to July 6, 1931, which enabled the accused to swindle
the bank in the sum ofP1,400,000.00 was treated as only one complex
crime of estafa through multiple falsification of mercantile documents
and only one penalty was imposed." (See also: People u. Garcia, No.
L-4O16, March 13, 1980, 96 SCRA 497, 504, which applied the same
same motive" rule.)
Note:

The "single-criminal-impulse," "same motive" or the
"single-purpose" theory has no legal basis, for Article
48 speaks of "a single act." However, the theory is
acceptable when it is not certain who among the accused
killed or injured each of the several victims.

The ruling in the Lawas case is not applicable where there was
conspiracy to perpetuate the killings.
It is clear from the evidence on record that the three crimes of
murder did not result from a single act but from several individual
and distinct acts. Deeply rooted is the doctrine that when various
victims expire from separate shots, such acts constitute separate and
distinct crimes. (People v. Gaffud, Jr., G.R. No. 168050, September 19,
2008, 566 SCRA 76, 88, citing People u. Hon. Pineda, No. L-26222,
July 21, 1967, 20 SCRA 748)

Art. 48

Penalties

In the instant case, however, the acts of accused-appellants
demonstrate the existence of conspiracy, thereby imputing collective
criminal responsibility upon them, as the act of one is the act of all.
Verily, the ruling in Lawas that "it is impossible to ascertain the
individual deaths caused by each and everyone" of the defendants
does not apply here.
Considering our holding above, [the Court] rule[s] that accusedappellant Orias is guilty, not of a complex crime of multiple murder,
but of three counts of murder for the death of the three victims. (People
v. Elarcosa, et al., G.R. No. 186539, June 29, 2010)
When it Is within the scope of possibility that the two victims were
killed by one and the same missile.
When there is no evidence as to how many wounds the victims
received and it is within the scope of possibility that they were killed
by one and the same missile as they were riding astride the same
carabao, and they were shot by the accused in that position, in the
absence of a showing that the victims died from more than one bullet
the crime should be classified as a complex crime of double murder.
(People v. Bersamin, G.R. No. L-3098, March 5, 1951)
Ruling in the Bersamin case is applicable only when there is no
evidence as to how many wounds the victims received and there is a
possibility that they were killed by one and the same missile.
Thus, when the two victims each received more than one bullet
wound, they were not close to each other when fired at, and their
bodies were found in different places, the ruling is not applicable. In
such case, the presumption is that the victims were killed by different
shots, and, therefore, the accused are liable for two separate murders.
(People v. Basarain, G.R. No. L-6690, May 24, 1955)
There Is no complex crime of arson with homicide under Article 48.

In Lawas, since there was no conspiracy to perpetuate the
killing, collective criminal responsibility could not be imputed upon

The ruling in the case of U.S. u. Burns, 41 Phil. 418, that under
an information charging the accused with setting fire to an automobile
in the basement of an inhabited house, whereby said house was
destroyed and one of its inmates burned to death, the accused is guilty

678

679

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

of a complex crime of arson with homicide, is no longer applicable to
such case, Article 320 of the R.P.C., as amended by R.A. No. 7659,
having provided one penalty therefor.

something more: there must be not only intention to own but also
intent to use (People v. Estoista, 93 Phil. 647), which is not necessarily
the case in every theft of firearm. Thus, stealing a firearm with intent
not to use but to render the owner defenseless, would not justify a
charge of illegal possession of the firearm. (People v. Remerata, 98
Phil. 413, 414)

Art. 48

Applicable to crimes through negligence.
Thus, a municipal mayor who accidentally discharged his
revolver during a school program, killing a girl and injuring a boy
requiring medical attendance for more than 30 days, was found guilty
of a complex crime of homicide with less serious physical injuries
through reckless imprudence. (People v. Castro, 40 O.G., Supp. 12,
83)
The reason for this ruling is that in view of the definition
of felonies in Article 3 of the Code, that is, "Acts and omissions
punishable by law," committed either "by means of deceit (dolo)" or
"by means of fault (culpa)," it is clear that Article 48 which speaks of
"felonies" is applicable to violations under Article 365 which defines
and penalizes criminal negligence, a felony by means offault(culpa).
A man while pouring gasoline in the tank of his passenger bus
in a garage used a candle to light the place. The gasoline caught fire
and the house was burned. His mother-in-law, who jumped from a
window during the fire, died due to burns and injuries and another
person suffered serious physical injuries.
Held: The crimes of arson, homicide, serious physical injuries,
and damage to property constitute a complex crime within the
meaning of Article 48. (People v. Pacson, C.A., 46 0.G. 2165)
The accused, who drove a cargo truck at a fast rate without
sounding its horn and without lights in the evening, caused his truck
to collide with a bicycle which was thrown to a group of pedestrians.
Two of them died and several other persons were seriously injured.

Art. 48

The other reason is that Article 48 speaks of two or more grave or
less grave felonies resulting from a single act, which excludes crimes
punishable by special laws, like the law punishing illegal possession
of firearms.
"When an offense is a necessary means for committing the other."
Although the law uses the term "offenses," the Supreme Court,
in the case of People v. Araneta, 48 Phil. 650, held that this kind of
complex crime does not exist when the two crimes are punished under
different statutes.
Requisites:
1.

That at least two offenses are committed.

2.

That one or some of the offenses must be necessary to
commit the other.

3.

That both or all the offenses must be punished under the
same statute.

At least two offenses must be committed.
Examples:

Theft of firearm and illegal possession of same firearm do not form
a complex crime they are two distinct crimes.

Falsification of a public document by an accountable officer
(altering the duplicate of the cedulas already issued to other
persons by erasing the names originally written thereon
and writing in their places new names) is an offense which
is necessary to commit malversation (collecting P2.00 from
each of them and misappropriating the amount), which is
another offense. (People v. Barbas, 60 Ph±L. 241, 243)

While in stealing a firearm, the accused must necessarily come
into possession thereof, the crime of illegal possession of firearm is
not committed by mere transient possession of the weapon. It requires

The falsification of the cedula certificate, which is a
crime under Article 171, was necessary to commit the crime
of malversation under Article 217, because the accused had

Held: The two deaths and several serious physical injuries
resulted from his single act ofreckless driving. Hence, only one penalty
should be imposed upon him. (People v. Villamora, C.A., 40 0.G. 768)

680

(a)

681

Art. 48

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

to falsify the duplicate of the cedulas to obtain from the
taxpayers the money which he later misappropriated.
(b)

Simple seduction by means of usurpation of official
functions. (U.S. v. Hernandez, 29 Phil. 109)
U.S. v. Hernandez
(29 Phil. 109)

Fact: Accused Hernandez, in order to seduce a girl, 15 years old, had
a talk with accused Bautista. Between them they concocted a plan and then
accused Hernandez proposed marriage to the girl. She agreed. In a house
in Ermita, accused Bautista, under the name of Aniceto de Castro and
pretending to be a Protestant minister, solemnized a fictitious marriage
between the girl and accused Hernandez. Thereafter, they lived as a married
couple. Later, accused Hernandez and Bautista were prosecuted for seduction
through usurpation of public functions.
Held: Without legal authority, accused Bautista performed an act
properly pertaining to a person in authority by assuming the official character
of a minister of a religious sect in order to make the girl believe that she
was legally married to accused Hernandez who had the intention to seduce
her. The girl would not have been seduced were it not for the act of accused

Bautista.
Note: The crime of usurpation of official function (Art. 177) was a
necessary means for committing the crime of simple seduction. (Art. 338)
Abduction as a necessary means for committing rape.
A girl, 19 years of age, who had worked in the rice fields in
Calamba, Laguna, was on her way home in the afternoon. When in
an uninhabited place, the two accused forcibly abducted her against
her strong protest and resistance, took her to the woods in Silang,
Cavite, and other places where she was raped by one of the accused
while her hands were being held by the other. The crime of forcible
abduction (taking a woman against her will with lewd designs - Art.
342) was a necessary means for committing the crime ofrape (having
sexual intercourse with a woman by using force, etc. - Art. 266-A).
(See People v. Manguiat, 51 Phil. 406)
The phrase "necessary means" does not mean "Indispensable
means."

Art. 48

then the offense as a "necessary means" to commit another would be
an indispensable element of the latter and would be an ingredient
thereof. The phrase merely signified that, for instance, a crime such
as simple estafa can be and ordinarily is committed in the manner
defined in the Penal Code; but if the "estafador" resorts to or employs
falsification, merely to facilitate and insure his committing estafa,
then he is guilty of the complex crime of estafa through falsification.
(Dissenting Opinion, People v. Hernandez, 99 Phil. 515, 557)
In complex crime, when the offender executes various acts, he must
have a single purpose.
The accused received 17 money orders with a letter, all in one
envelope, addressed to the offended party. The accused presented
them to the post office for cashing on one occasion, after having
falsified the signature of the remitter on each and every one of the
17 money orders.
Held: In all the acts performed by the accused, there was only
one criminal intent. To commit estafa, the accused had to commit 17
falsifications. These falsifications were necessary means to commit
estafa. (People v. Gallardo, C.A., 52 0.G. 3103)
The crime committed is only one complex crime of estafa
through multiple falsifications, and not seventeen separate estafas
and seventeen separate falsifications.
But if a person falsified 27 vouchers, not to commit estafa or
malversation, he is liable for 27 falsifications, because the various
acts of falsification were not executed for the attainment of a single
purpose. (See Gonzales v. City Fiscal, CA-G.R. No. 19075-R, March
20, 1957)
In this case, one or more offenses are not necessary means for
committing the others.
When in the definition ofa felony one offense is a means to commit the
other, there is no complex crime.

The phrase "necessary means" used in Article 48 has been
interpreted not to mean indispensable means, because if it did,

In murder where the killing of a person is qualified by the
circumstance that it was committed by means of fire or by means of
explosion (Art. 248, par. 3) which in themselves arc felonies defined
and penalized under Article 321 and Article 324, as arson and crimes

682

683

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE

involving destruction, respectively, there is no complex crime. The
crime is murder, plain and simple.

No complex crime, when one offense is committed to conceal the
other.

Art. 48

Subsequent acts of Intercourse, after forcible abduction with rape,
are separate acts of rape.
Where the complaining witness was forcibly abducted by the
four accused and violated on board a truck by one of them with the
assistance of the three others, and after reaching a house in the
evening, the four of them alternately ravished her inside the house
three times each and one each the following morning, there was only
one forcible abduction with rape which was the one committed in the
truck, and the subsequent acts of intercourse in the house against her
will are separate acts of rape. The reason for the ruling is that when
the first act of rape was committed in the truck, the crime of forcible
abduction was already consummated so that each of the succeeding
rapes committed in the house cannot legally be considered as still
connected with the abduction. The crimes committed are one forcible
abduction with rape and 16 separate rapes. (People v. Bohos, No.
L-40995, June 25, 1980, 98 SCRA 353, 364)
Even while the first act ofrape was being performed, the crime
of forcible abduction was already consummated, so that each of the
three succeeding rapes cannot be complexed with forcible abduction.
(People v. Jose, No. L-28232, February 6, 1971, 37 SCRA 450, 475)
No complex crime when trespass to dwelling Is a direct means to
commit a grave offense.
When trespass to dwelling (Art. 280) is a direct means to
commit a graver offense, like rape, homicide or murder, there is no
complex crime of trespass to dwelling with rape, homicide or murder.
The trespass to dwelling will be considered as the aggravating
circumstance of unlawful entry under paragraph 18, or of breaking
a part of the dwelling under paragraph 19, of Article 14. (People v.
Abedosa, 53 Phil. 788, 79 I)
Note: Trespass to dwelling is committed when a private person
shall enter the dwelling of another against the latter's will.

684

Art. 48

Penalties

But when one of the offenses was committed for the purpose of
concealing the commission of the other, there is no complex crime.
Examples:
(a)

After committing homicide, the accused, in order to
conceal the crime, set fire to the house where it had been
perpetrated. (People v. Bersabal, 48 Phil. 439, 442)
Note:

(b)

Setting fire to the house is arson. (Art. 321) But in
this case, neither homicide nor arson was necessary
to commit the other.

A postmaster received from the offended party P1,250.00
to be transmitted as a telegraph money order to a third
person. He failed to send the money and when the
complainant demanded its return, he returned only
P417.00, having already misappropriated the difference of
P833.00. He then forged the signature of the complainant
to a receipt made by him (the accused), reciting therein
that said complainant had already received from him the
entire amount.
Held: The amount appropriated to himself was in the
possession and at the disposal of the accused and he could
have appropriated it to himself without the necessity of
the falsified document. Two crimes were committed. The
falsification was a means to conceal, not to commit, the
malversation. (U.S. u. Geta, 43 Phil. 1009, 1013)

When the offender had in his possession the funds which he
misappropriated, the falsification of a public or official document
Involving said funds is a separate offense.
The accused, a municipal treasurer of Batac, Ilocos Norte,
misappropriated P741.24 belonging to the public funds. He made it
appear in the payroll that several municipal teachers ofBatac received
their salaries when in fact they did not receive the sums indicated
in the payroll as received by them. It was held that the accused was
guilty ofmalversation and falsification, two separate crimes, because
the falsification was not a necessary means for the commission of the
685

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

malversation, but was committed only to conceal the malversation.
(People v. Cid, 66 Phil. 354, 363)

Note: Before the R.P.C. took effect, the crime of malversation
was punished under the Administrative Code.

Art. 48

The municipal president, municipal treasurer, and a private
individual signed two official payrolls on April 30 for P473.70 and on
May 2 for P271.60, where it was made to appear that certain persons
worked as laborers in street projects, when in fact no work was done
and those persons were not entitled to pay. The three spent the
money for their own personal benefit. It was held that the falsification
of the payrolls were not necessary means for the commission of
malversation. (Regis u. People, 67 Phil. 43, 47)
The municipal treasurer having in his possession the funds, the
same could be misappropriated by him and his co-accused without the
necessity of falsifying any document. Hence, the falsification was not
a necessary means for committing the malversation. The falsification
of the payrolls was committed to conceal the malversation, in the
sense that it was made to appear that the amounts were lawfully
disbursed.
But when the offender had to falsify a public or official document
to obtain possession of the funds which he misappropriated, the
falsification is a necessary means to commit the malversation.
Thus, when the special deputy of the provincial treasurer
collected from two individuals the amount of P2.00 each in payment of
their cedula tax, which he was able to do by altering the duplicates of
the ceduJas, which he had already issued to other persons, and issuing
the altered duplicates to the two individuals, the falsification of the
duplicates was necessary to obtain the P4.00 from the two individuals
and was the means to commit the malversation by misappropriating
the amount. (People v. Barbas, 60 Phil. 241, 244)
No complex crime where one of the offense is penalized by a special
law.

Art. 48

Illegal possession of firearm is not a necessary means to commit
homicide.

The accused was previously convicted of homicide for the
perpetration of which he used a .30 caliber rifle. Later, he was
prosecuted for illegal possession of said firearm.
Held: The accused committed two different acts with two
separate criminal intents, to wit, the desire to take unlawfully the
life of a person, and the willful violation of the law which prohibits
the possession of a firearm without the required permit. (People u.
Alger, 92 Phil. 227, 229-230)
Note: The other reason is that homicide and illegal possession
of firearm are punished under different statutes.
Illegal possession of flreann, when considered a special aggravating
circumstance.

With the passage of R.A. No. 8294 on June 6, 1997, the use of
an unlicensed firearm in murder or homicide is now considered, not

as a separate crime, but merely a special aggravating circumstance.
(People u. Castillo, G.R. Nos. 131592-93, February 15, 2000)
Illegal possession of flreann absorbed in rebellion.

People v. Rodriguez
(G.R. L-13981, April 25, 1960)
Facts: The accused was charged with illegal possession of firearm and
ammunition. The accused filed a motion to quash on the ground that the crime
with which he was charged was already alleged as a component ingredient
of the cnme of rebellion with which he was already charged in the Court of
First Instance of Manila.

Although the evidence shows that a crime has been committed
for the express purpose of committing another, as when a public officer
misappropriates public funds for which he is accountable through
falsification of public document, yet both crimes should be punished
separately where it appears that they are punished under different
statutes, i.e., the Administrative Code and the Penal Code. (People v.
Araneta, 48 Phil. 650, 654)

Held: This gun was introduced by the prosecution as evidence in the
case of rebellion. On October 24, 1951, the case for rebellion was filed in the
Court of First Instance. On the other hand, the information in the present
case was filed on October 30, 1956, which involves the charge of illegal
possession of the same firearm and same ammunition. Considering that
any or all of the acts described in Article 135, when committed as a means
to or in furtherance of the subversive ends described in Article 134, become

686

687

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

absorbed in the crime of rebellion, and cannot be regarded or penalized as
distinct crimes in themselves x x x and cannot be considered as giving rise
to a separate crime that, under Article 48 of the Code, would constitute a
complex one with that of rebellion (People v. Geronimo, L-8936, October 23,
1956), the conclusion is inescapable that the crime with which the accused
is charged in the present case is already absorbed in the rebellion case and
so to press it further now would place him in double jeopardy. While it is
true that in the crime of rebellion, there is no allegation that the firearm in
question is one of those used in carrying on the rebellion and that the same
was borne by the accused without a license. the same would not make the
present charge different from the one included in the crime ofrebellion, for it
appears from the record that one of the firearms used in furtherance thereof
is the same pistol with which the accused is now charged. In fact, that pistol
was presented in the rebellion case as evidence. Nor is the fact that there
is no allegation in the rebellion case that the carrying of the firearm by the
accused was without license ofany consequence, for it can be safely assumed
that it was so, not only because the accused was a dissident but because the
firearm was confiscated from his possession."

229) Such common offenses are absorbed or inherent in the crime of
rebellion. (People u. Hernandez, 99 Phil. 515) But a rebel who, for some
independent or personal motives, commits murder or other common
offenses in addition to rebellion, may be prosecuted for and convicted
of such common offenses. (People u. Geronimo, 100 Phil. 90, 99)

Art. 48

When two or more crimes are committed, but (1) not by a single
act, or (2) one Is not a necessary means for committing the other,
there is no complex crime.
The accused compelled the pilot to direct the airplane from Laoag
to Amoy instead of Aparri, and for not complying with such illegal
demand, the accused shot him to death.
Held: The accused committed two separate crimes of frustrated
coercion (Arts. 6 and 286) and murder (Art. 248). They do not constitute
a complex crime of grave coercion with murder, because the accused
could have killed the pilot, without necessity of compelling him to
change the route of the airplane; the coercion was not necessary for
the commission of murder. Neither was murder necessary to commit
coercion. The accused executed two distinct acts, and not only one.
Compelling the pilot to change the route of the airplane is one act.
Shooting him when he did not comply with that order is another act.
(People u. Ang Cho Kio, 95 Phil. 475, 478)

Art. 48

When two crimes produced by a single act are respectively within
the exclusive jurisdiction of two courts of different jurisdiction, the
court of higher jurisdiction shall try the complex crime.
Through reckless imprudence committed in one single act, the
accused caused damage to property, punishable by a fine which only
the Court of First Instance can impose and less serious physical
injuries which ordinarily is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
municipal court.
Held: The Court of First Instance should try the case charging a
complex crime. Since both crimes were the result of a single act, the
information cannot be split into two; one for physical injuries, and
another for damage to property. (Angeles u. Jose, 96 Phil. 151)
An accused should not be harassed with various prosecutions
based on the same act by splitting the same into various charges.
(People v. Lizardo, No. L-22471, December 11, 1967, 21 SCRA 1225,
1227, reiterating People v. Silva, No. L-15974, January 30, 1962, 4
SCRA95J
People v. Cano
(G.R. No. L-19660, May 24, 1966)
Facts: Defendant was accused of the crime of damage to property with
multiple physical injuries, through reckless imprudence. The information
alleges that, through reckless negligence ofthe defendant, the bus driven by
him hit another bus causing upon some of its passengers, serious physical
injuries and upon still others slight physical injuries, in addition to damage
to property.

Murder, arson, and robbery are mere ingredients of the crime
of rebellion, as means "necessary" for the perpetration of the offense.
(Enrile v. Salazar, G.R. No. 92163, June 5, 1990, 186 SCRA 217,

Held: The information does not purport to complex the offense ofslight
physical injuries through reckless negligence with that ofdamage to property
and serious and less serious physical injuries thru reckless imprudence. It
is merely alleged that, through reckless negligence of the defendant, the bus
driven by him hit another bus causing upon some of its passengers, serious
physical injuries, upon others less serious physical injuries and upon still
others slight physical injuries, in addition to damage to property.

688

689

There is no complex crime of rebellion with murder, arson, robbery,
or other common crimes.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

From the viewpoint both of trial practice and justice, it is doubtful
whether the prosecution should split the action against the defendant, by
fling against him several information, one for damage to property and serious
and less serious physical injuries, through reckless imprudence, before the
court of first instance, and another for slight physical injuries through reckless
negligence, before the justice of the peace or municipal court. Such splitting
of the action would work unnecessary inconvenience to the administration
ofjustice in general and to the accused in particular, for it would require the
presentation of substantially the same evidence before two different courts.
In the event of conviction in the municipal court and appeal to the court of
first instance, said evidence would still have to be introduced once more in

The penalty for complex crime Is the penalty for the most serious
crime, the same to be applied in its maximum period.

Art. 48

the latter court.
The RTC of Manila retained jurisdiction in a charge of abduction
with rape, although abduction, which was commenced in Manila,
was not proven, and the rape, which was committed in Cavite, was
the only matter proved.
Although the forcible abduction, which was supposedly
commenced in Manila, was not proven, and although the rape, which
was proven, was actually committed in Cavite, still the CFI of Manila
had jurisdiction to convict the accused of rape. The complex crime of
forcible abduction with rape was charged in the complaint on the basis
of which the case was tried. (People v. Pera, No. L-36435, December
20, 1977, 80 SCRA 589,598)
Article 48 Is intended to favor the culprit.
In directing that the penalty for the graver offense shall be
imposed in its maximum period, Article 48 could have had no other
purpose than to prescribe a penalty lower than the aggregate of the
penalties for each offense, if imposed separately. The reason for this
benevolent spirit of Article 48 is readily discernible. When two or
more crimes are the result of a single act, the offender is deemed less
perverse than when he commits said crimes through separate and
distinct acts. (People v. Hernandez, 99 Phil. 515, 542-543)

Art. 48

Thus, in the complex crime of direct assault with homicide, the
penalty for homicide, being the more serious crime, shall be imposed
and the penalty is to be applied in its maximum period. The penalty
for direct assault is at most prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods; whereas, the penalty for homicide is reclusion
temporal.
The penalty for the complex crime of homicide with assault upon
a person in authority is the maximum period of the penalty for the
more serious crime - homicide. That penalty is the maximum period
of reclusion temporal. (People v. Rillorta, G.R. No. 57415, December
15, 1989, 180 SCRA 102, 109-110)
If the different crimes resulting from one single act are punished
with the same penalty, the penalty for any one of them shall be
imposed, the same to be applied in the maximum period.
The same rule shall be observed when an offense is a necessary
means for committing the other.
A complex crime of the second form may be committed by two
persons, as in seduction through usurpation of official functions
where one of the accused committed usurpation of official functions
by simulating the performance of a marriage ceremony without legal
right between the victim and his co-accused who thereafter seduced
the victim. Both accused, being in conspiracy, were sentenced to the
maximum period of the penalty for usurpation of official functions, an
offense more serious than the crime of seduction. (U.S. u. Hernandez,
29 Phil. 109, 113-114)
But when one of the offenses, as a means to commit the other was
committed by one of the accused by reckless imprudence, that accused
who committed the offense by reckless imprudence is liable for his act
only.

Note: If a person fired a shot and killed two persons with the
same shot, were it not for Article 48, he would be sentenced to
reclusion temporal for each homicide. But under Article 48, he shall
be sentenced to the maximum period of one reclusion temporal only.
Reclusion temporal has a duration of 12 years and one day to 20 years.

There is no question that appellant cooperated in the commission
of the complex offense of estafa through falsification by reckless
imprudence by acts without which it could not have been accomplished,
and this being a fact, there would be no reason to exculpate him
from liability. Even assuming that he had no intention to defraud
the offended party if his co-defendants succeeded in attaining the

690

691

Art. 48

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

purpose sought by the culprits, appellant's participation together
with the participation of his co-defendants in the commission of the
offense completed all the clements necessary for the perpetration
of the complex crime of estafa through falsification of commercial
document. (Art. 172, R.P.C.) Anyway and for the purpose of the
penalty that was actually imposed upon appellant, it is immaterial
that he be considered only guilty of falsification of a commercial
document through reckless negligence, because the penalty for
the crime of falsification of a commercial document under Article
172, No. 1, of the R.P.C., is prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods and a fine of not more than P5,000.00 which under
the provisions of Articles 25 and 26 of the same Code is a correctional
penalty. Consequently, ifin the cases at bar the crimes of falsification
were due to reckless imprudence, the corresponding penalty would
be arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods (Article 365,
opening paragraph, of the R.P.C.), which comprehends the penalty
imposed by the Court of Appeals upon appellant. (Samson v. Court
ofAppeals, 103 Phil. 277, 282-283)
When the homicide, physical injuries, and the burning ofa house are
the result ofone single act of negligence, there is only one penalty, but
there are three civil liabilities.
In the case ofPeople • Pacson, C.A. 46 0.G. 2165, Roque Pacson
and Ambrosio Francisco, who poured gasoline from one container to
another near a lighted candle, causing the burning of the house of
Aurelio de Leon, valued at P18,320.00, the injury of Romualdo de Leon,
who was confined in the hospital at the cost of P600.00, and the death
of Paula Elhino, were sentenced each to suffer from four months of
arresto mayor to two years and four months ofprision correccional, to
indemnify jointly and severally the heirs of Paula Elhino in the sum
of P2,000.00, Romualdo de Leon in the sum of P600.00, and Aurelio
de Leon in the sum of P18,320.00.
When the penalty for one of the crimes resulting from a single act
is beyond the jurisdiction of the municipal court, there should be
additional penalty for the other.
The third paragraph of Article 365 reads as follows:
"When the execution of the act covered by this article shall
have only resulted in damage to the property of another, the
offender shall be punished by a fine ranging from an amount
692

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 48

equal to the value of said damage to three times such value, but
which shall in no case be less than 25 pesos."
The above-quoted provision simply means that if there is only
damage to property, the amount fixed therein shall be imposed, but if
there are also physical injuries, there should be an additional penalty
for the latter. (Angeles v. Jose, 96 PHiL. 151, 152)
When two felonies constituting a complex crime are punishable
by imprisonment and fine, respectively, only the penalty of
imprisonment should be Imposed.
When a single act constitutes two grave or less grave felonies,
or one grave and another less grave, and the penalty for one is
imprisonment while that for the other is fine, the severity of the
penalty for the more serious crime should not be judged by the
classification of each of the penalties involved, but by the nature of
the penalties. (People v. Yongco, CA-G.R. No. 18252-CR, January 26,
1977)
Even if the fine for damage to property through reckless
imprudence is P40,000.00, an afllictive penalty, and the penalty for
physical injuries resulting from the same act is only four months of
arresto mayor, a correctional penalty, the latter penalty should be
imposed.
This opinion is based on the following observation:
In the order of severity of the penalties, arresto mayor and
arresto menor are considered more severe than destierro (Art.
70, R.P.C.) and arresto menor is higher in degree than destierro
(Art. 71, R.P.C.), even if both arresto mayor and destierro are
classified as correctional penalties, and arresto menor is only a
light penalty.
On the other hand, fine is not included in the list of penalties
in the order of severity, and it is the last in the graduated scales in
Article 71 of the R.P.C.
The ruling in Angeles v. Jose, 96 Phil. 151, that if damage
to property and physical injuries resulted from a single act of the
defendant there should be an additional penalty for the latter, is in
disregard of Article 48 of the R.P.C. which provides that only one
penalty should be imposed for a complex crime.
693

Art. 48

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Generally, the penalty for complex crime is intended to favor
the offender. (People v. Hernandez, 99 Phil. 515)

One lnfonnation should be filed when a complex crime is committed.

In People v. Pacson, 46 0.G. 2165, the Court of Appeals held
that the penalty for a complex crime, causing the burning of a house
valued at P18,320.00 and the death of one of the inmates of the house
through reckless imprudence, is from four months of arresto mayor
to two years and four months of prision correccional, to indemnify
the owner of the house and the heirs of the deceased in the amounts
stated, without fine.
Article 48 applies only to cases where the Code does not provide
a definite specific penalty for a complex crime.

The accused inflicted less serious physical injuries on the
municipal mayor in the cockpit where at the time there were many
people present. There was a manifest intent to insult the mayor and
of adding ignominy to the offense.

Art. 48

Thus, even if several persons were killed, only one information
should be filed if the victims were killed by a single act.
But if four crimes of murder and a frustrated murder resulted
from the firing of several shots at five victims, the crimes are not
complex. Five informations should be filed. (People v. Pineda, G.R. No.
L-26222, July 21, 1967, 20 SCRA 748, 750, 754) In case of conviction,
five penalties shall be imposed.
The same ruling applies when one of the offenses committed is
not a necessary means for committing the other, as when one offense
is committed to conceal the other. In that case, two informations
will have to be filed and in case of conviction, two penalties shall be
imposed.
When a complex crime is charged and one offense Is not proven,
the accused can be convicted of the other.

The prosecution charged the accused with a complex crime of
serious slander by deed with less serious physical injuries, because
Article 359 considers as slander by deed any act "which shall cast
dishonor, discredit, or contempt upon another person," and since said
act resulted in the infliction ofless serious physical injuries, it is also
covered by Article 265.

When a complex crime is charged and the evidence fails to
support the charge as to one of the component offenses, the defendant
can be convicted of the other. (People v. Maribung, No. L-47500, April
29, 1987, 149 SCRA 292, 300-301, 304)

Held: The act cannot come under Article 48 for the simple
reason that in this particular case, that act is specifically covered by
paragraph 2 of Article 265.

.
A composite crime, also known as a special complex crime,
is composed of two or more crimes that the law treats as a single
indivisible and unique offense for being the product of a single criminal
impulse. It is a specifc crime with a specific penalty provided by law,
and differs from a compound or complex crime under Article 48 of the
Revised Penal Code. (People v. Villaflores, G.R. No. 184926, April 11,
2012, 669 SCRA 365,280)

Under Article 265, paragraph 2 of the R.P.C., whenever an act
has been committed which inflicts upon a person less serious physical
injuries with the manifest intent to insult or offend him or under
circumstances adding ignominy to the offense, the offender should be
prosecuted under that article and, if convicted, should be sentenced
to the penalty therein prescribed.
The acts complained of cannot constitute a complex crime of
slander by deed with less serious physical injuries, because complex
crime exists only in cases where the Code has no specific provision
penalizing the same with defined specific penalty. (People v. Lasala,
G.R. No. L-12141, January 30, 1962, 4 SCRA 61, 62, 64-65)
694

Special Complex Crime or Composite Crime.

Composite crime, distinguished from complex or compound crime.
(1)

In a composite crime, the composition of the offenses is fixed
by law. In a complex or compound crime, the combination of
the offenses is not specified but generalized, that is, grave
and/or less grave, or one offense being the necessary means
to commit the other.

(2)

For a composite crime, the penalty for the specified
combination of crimes is specific. For a complex or
695

Art. 48

THE REVlSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
compound crime, the penalty is that corresponding to the
most serious offense, to be imposed in the maximum period.

(3)

A light felony that accompanies a composite crime is
absorbed. A light felony that accompanies the commission
of a complex or compound crime may be the subject of a
separate information. (People v. Villaflores, supra)

Article 48 does not apply when the law provides one single penalty
for special complex crimes.

Thus, in robbery with homicide (Art. 294, par. 1), robbery with
rape (Art. 294, par. 2), or kidnapping with serious physical injuries
(Art. 267, par. 3), or kidnapping with murder or homicide (Art. 267,
last par.), or rape with homicide (Art. 335), Article 48 does not apply
because the R.P.C. provides for one single penalty for each of those
special complex crimes.
Special Complex Crime of Kidnapping with Murder or Homicide.

Prior to December 31, 1993, the date of effectivity of R.A. No.
7659, the rule was that where the kidnapped victim was subsequently
killed by his abductor, the crime committed would either be a complex
crime of kidnapping with murder under Article 48 of the R.P.C., or two
separate crimes of kidnapping, and murder. Thus, where the accused
kidnapped the victim for the purpose of killing him, and he was in
fact killed by his abductor, the crime committed was the complex
crime of kidnapping and murder under Article 48 of the R.P.C., as
the kidnapping of the victim was a necessary means of committing
the murder. On the other hand, where the victim was kidnapped
not for the purpose of killing him but was subsequently slain as an
afterthought, two separate crimes of kidnapping and murder were
committed.
However, R.A. No. 7659 amended Article 267 of the R.P.C. by
adding thereto a last paragraph which provides
When the victim
is killed or dies as a consequence of the detention, or is raped, or is
subjected to torture or dehumanizing acts, the maximum penalty
shall be imposed.
This amendment introduced in our criminal statutes the concept
of "special complex crime" of kidnapping with murder or homicide.
It effectively eliminated the distinction drawn by the courts between
696

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 48

those cases where the killing of the kidnapped victim was purposely
sought by the accused, and those where the killing of the victim was
not deliberately resorted to but was merely an afterthought.
Consequently, the rule now is: Where the person kidnapped is
killed in the course of the detention, regardless of whether the killing
was purposely sought or was merely an afterthought, the kidnapping
and murder or homicide can no longer be complexed under Article 48,
nor be treated as separate crimes, but shall be punished as a special
complex crime under the last paragraph of Article 267, as amended
by R.A. No. 7659. (People v. Ramos, 297 SCRA 618, citing Parulan •
Rodas)
Plurality of crimes.

Plurality of crimes defined.
Plurality of crimes consists in the successive execution by the
same individual of difTerent criminal acts upon any of which no
conviction has yet been declared. (Guevara)
Kinds of plurality of crimes.

There are two kinds of plurality of crimes: (1) formal or ideal
plurality; and (2) real or material plurality.
Article 48 provides for two cases of formal or ideal plurality of
crimes. There is but one criminal liability in this kind of plurality.
In real or material plurality, there are different crimes in law
as well as in the conscience of the offender. In such cases, the offender
shall be punished for each and every offense that he committed.
Example of real or material plurality.

A stabbed B with a knife. Then, A also stabbed C. There are two
crimes committed. Note that there are two acts performed.
Plurality of crimes distinguished from recidivism.

In recidivism, there must be conviction by final judgment of the
first or prior offense; in plurality of crimes, there is no conviction of
any of the crimes committed.

697

TITLE THREE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 48

same being necessary to justify the finding that, although
they were committed on different dates, a single intention
determined the commission of both, the appellant is liable
for each and every one of those offenses. (Regis v. People,
67 Phil. 43, 47)

Plural crimes of the formal or ideal type are divided into three
groups.
A person committing multiple crimes is punished with ONE
penalty in the following cases:
1.

When the offender commits any of the complex crimes
defined in Article 48 of the Code.

2.

When the law specifically fixes a single penalty for two or
more offenses committed.

2.

Examples:

3.

( 1)

Robbery with homicide (Art. 294 );

(2)

Kidnapping with serious physical injuries. (Art. 267,
par. 3)

Continued crime.

The taking of six roosters from coop is a single
offense of theft. The assumption is that the accused were
animated by single criminal impulse. (People v. Jaranilla,
No. L-28547, February 22, 1974, 55 SCRA 563, 575)

A continued (continuous or continuing) crime is a single crime,
consisting of a series of acts but all arising from one criminal
resolution.
3.

Although there is a series of acts, there is only one crime
committed. Hence, only one penalty shall be imposed.
Examples of continued crimes:
1.

698

Eight robberies as component parts ofa general plan. While
the inhabitants of a barrio were working in a sugar mill,
seven armed persons, who had a general plan to commit
robbery against all those in the place, entered the mill and
while two of the bandits guarded the people with guns
levelled at them, five of them ransacked the houses for
their personal properties.
Held: The several acts of ransacking the different
houses were not unconnected and entirely distinct from
one another. They formed component parts of the general
plan to despoil all those within the vicinity. There is only
one crime of robbery in this case. (People v. De la Cruz, G.R.
L-1745, May 23, 1950)

Thus, a collector of a commercial firm misappropriates for
his personal use several amounts collected by him from
different persons. There is here one crime only, because
the different and successive appropriations are but the
different moments during which one criminal resolution
arises and a single defraudation develops.
But if it does not appear that when the malversation
and the falsification were committed on April 30, it was
already the intention of the appellant to commit also the
falsification and the malversation of May 2, 1931, the

Likewise, a thief who takes from the yard of a house two
game roosters belonging to two different persons commits
only one crime, for the reason that there is a unity of
thought in the criminal purpose of the offender. There is
no series of acts here for the accomplishment of different
purposes, but only ofone (purpose) which is consummated,
and which determines the existence of only one crime.
(People v. De Leon, 49 Phil. 437, 439-441)
In getting hold of the two roosters, it is not done by
a single act of taking, but by two separate acts. There is,
however, a unity of thought and action in taking the two
roosters.

When the offender commits continued crimes.

A continuing offense is a continuous, unlawful act or series of
acts set on foot by a single impulse and operated by an unintermittent
force, however long a time it may occupy. (22 C.J.S., 52)

Art. 48

Penalties

Criminal Law

4.

The accused and his companion ran amok in the passengers'
section of the upper deck of a motorboat. Eleven persons
were killed and 20 other persons were seriously wounded by
him and his companion who was later killed by a patrolman.
699

Art. 48

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The accused confessed that he and his companion had a
common motive to run amok. It was held that since the
killings were the result of a single impulse and that neither
the accused nor his companion had in mind killing any
particular individual, the acts complained of should be
considered as resulting from a single criminal impulse and
constituting a single offense. (People v. Emit, CA-G.R. No.
13477-R, January 31, 1956)
Not one continuing crime, but three separate crimes.
People v. Enguero
(100 Phil. 1001)
Facts: Appellants were charged with the crime of robbery in band in
three separate Informations, committed by robbing one house, then procee ded
to another house where the second robbery was commi tted and then to another
house where the third robbery was committed.

Held: Appellants argue that they are guilty of one crime only, citing in
support of their contention the case of People v. De Leon, 49 Phil. 437. The
contention is without merit. In the case cited, defendant entered the yard of
a house where he found two fighting cocks belonging to different persons and
took them. In the present case, appellants, after committing the first crime,
went to another house where they committed the second and then proceeded

to another house where they committed the third. Obviously, the rule in the
case cited cannot be invoked and applied to the present.
The series of acts born of a single criminal Impulse may be
perpetrated during a long period of time.
A sent an anonymous letter to B, demanding P5,000.00 under
threats of death and burning the latter's house. B sent P1,000.00 to
A. Two months later, A sent again another letter to B, demanding the
balance of P4,000.00 and making the same threats. B sent P2,000.00 to
A. Four months later,A sent again another letter toB, demanding the
amount of P2,000.00 and making the same threats. B sent Pl ,000.00.
Six months thereafter, A sent another letter to B, demanding the
remaining P1,000.00 and making the same threats. This time, A was
arrested for grave threats.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 48

of a single criminal impulse to attain a definite objective. (See People
v. Moreno, CA., 34 0.G. 1767)
When two acts are deemed distinct from one another although
proceeding from the same criminal impulse.
Where the accused, after uttering defamatory words against
the offended party, attacked and assaulted the latter, resulting in
slight physical injuries, two offenses were committed, for while the
insults as well as the assault were the product of the same criminal
impulse, the act of insulting is entirely different and distinct from
that of inflicting physical injuries, although the two offenses may have
taken place on the same occasion, or that one preceded the other.
The act of insulting cannot be deemed included in that of inflicting
physical injuries, because the offense of insult is an offense against
honor, whereas slight physical injuries is an offense against persons.
Hence, prosecution of the accused for the two offenses cannot place
him in danger of double jeopardy. (People v. Ramos, 59 0.G. 4052)
Slander (uttering defamatory words) is defined and penalized
in Article 358. Slight physical injuries is defined and penalized in
Article 266.
A continued crime is not a complex crime.
A continued crime is not a complex crime, because the offender
in continued or continuous crime does not perform a single act, but a
series of acts, and one offense is not a necessary means for committing
the other.
Not being a complex crime, the penalty for continued crime is
not to be imposed in the maximum period.
There is no provision in the R.P.C. or any other penal Jaw
defining and specifically penalizing a continuing crime. The principle
is applied in connection with two or more crimes committed with a
single intention.

It was held that the different acts of sending letters of demand
for money with threats to kill and burn the house of the offended
party constitute only one and the same crime of grave threats born

Thus, in the case of People v. De Leon, supra, the theft of the
two game roosters belonging to two different persons was punished
with one penalty only, the Supreme Court holding that there being
only one criminal purpose in the taking of the two roosters, only one
crime was committed.

700

701

Art. 49

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

A continued crime is different from a transitory crime.
A continued, continuous or continuing crime is different
from a transitory crime in criminal procedure to determine venue.
An example of transitory crime, also called a moving crime," is
kidnapping a person for the purpose of ransom, by forcibly taking
the victim from Manila to Bulacan where ransom was demanded.
The offenders could be prosecuted and tried either in Manila or in
Bulacan.
When a transitory crime is committed, the criminal action
may be instituted and tried in the court of the municipality, city or
province wherein any of the essential ingredients thereof took place.
The singleness of the crime, committed by executing two or more acts,
is not considered.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

3.
The rule established by the next preceding
paragraph shall not be applicable if the acts committed by the
guilty person shall also constitute an attempt or frustration of
another crime, if the law prescribes a higher penalty for either
of the latter offenses, in which ease the penalty provided for
the attempt or the frustrated crime shall be imposed in the
maximum period.

Rules as to the penalty to be imposed when the crime committed
Is different from that intended.
1.

If the penalty for the felony committed be higher than
the penalty for the offense wh.ich the accused intended to
commit, the lower penalty shall be imposed in its maximum
period.

2.

If the penalty for the felony committed be lower than the
penalty for the offense which the accused intended to
commit, the lower penalty shall be imposed in its maximum
period.

3.

If the act committed also constitutes an attempt or
frustration of another crime, and the law prescribes a
higher penalty for either of the latter, the penalty for
the attempted or frustrated crime shall be imposed in its
maximum period.

Distinguish real or material plurality from continued crime.
In real or material plurality as well as in continued crime, there
is a series of acts performed by the offender.
In real or material plurality, each act performed by the offender
constitutes a separate crime, because each act is generated by a
criminal impulse; in continued crime, the different acts constitute only
one crime because all of the acts performed arise from one criminal
resolution.

Art. 49. Penalty to be imposed upon the principals when
the crime committed is different from that intended. In cases
in which the felony committed is different from that which
the offender intended to commit, the following rules shall he
observed.

Art. 49

Article 49 has reference to the provision of the 1st paragraph of
Article 4.

2.
If the penalty prescribed for the felony committed be
lower than that corresponding to the one which the accused
intended to commit, the penalty for the former shall be
imposed in its maximum period.

When the crime actually committed is different from that
intended, as contemplated in the first paragraph of Article 4, the
penalty to be imposed must be governed by the rules provided in
Article 49, because the opening sentence of Article 49 specifically
mentions "cases in which the felony committed is different from that
which the offender intended to commit." On the other hand Article 4
in its paragraph l provides that criminal liability shall be incurred
"by any person committing a felony (delito) although the wrongful
act done be different from that which he intended."

702

703

1.
I the penalty prescribed for the felony committed
be higher than that corresponding to the offense which the
accused intended to commit, the penalty corresponding to
the latter shall be imposed in its maximum period.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 49

Article 49 applies only when there is a mistake in the identity of
the victim of the crime, and the penalty for the crime committed is
different from that for the crime intended to be committed.

A intended to commit is homicide, punishable by reclusion
temporal. In view of rule No. 1 provided for in Article 49,
the penalty for homicide shall be imposed in its maximum
period.

Paragraph 1 of Article 4 covers (1) aberratio ictus (mistake in
the blow), (2)error in personae (mistake in the identity of the victim),
and (8) praeter intentionem (where a more serious consequence not
intended by the offender befalls the same person).
(1)

But suppose that A wanted to kill his father and
waited for the latter in a dark alley where he used to pass
in going home; when A saw a person coming and thinking
that he was his father, A shot him; and it turned out that
that person was a stranger. In this case, A should be
punished with the penalty for homicide to be applied in
its maximum period.

Aberratio ictus Example: A fired his gun at his father, with intent to
kill him, but he missed and hit C, killing the latter.
In this case, two crimes were actually committed: (1)
homicide, of which C was the victim; and (2) attempted
parricide, of which A's father was the offended party. One
who fires a gun at his father with intent to kill is guilty of
attempted parricide, even if the latter is not injured at all.

(2)

Art. 49

Note that in either case, the lesser penalty is always to
be imposed, only that it shall be imposed in the maximum
period.
(3)

Praeter intentionem-

The two crimes actually committed were the result
of a single act; hence, A committed a complex crime of
consummated homicide with attempted parricide. There
being a complex crime, Article 48, not Article 49, is
applicable.

Example: A, without intent to kill, boxed B from
behind on the back part of the latter's head. B fell to the
cement pavement with his head striking it. B died due to
the fracture of the skull. In this case, the death of B was
not intended by A.

Thus, the Supreme Court in the case of Guillen, 85
Phil. 307, said: "We think it is (Art. 48) and not paragraph 1
of Article 49 that is applicable. The case before us is clearly
governed by the first clause ofArticle 48 because by a single
act, that of throwing a highly explosive hand grenade at
President Roxas, the accused committed several grave
felonies, namely: (1) murder, of which Simeon Valera was
the victim· and (2) multiple attempted murder, of which
President Roxas, Alfredo Eva, Jose Fabio, Pedro Carillo
and Emilio Maglalang were the injured parties."

Article 49 has no application to cases where a more serious consequence
not intended by the offender befalls the same person.

Error in personae
Examples: A, thinking that the person walking in
a dark alley was B, a stranger, fired at that person, who
was killed as a result. It turned out that person was C, the
father of A.
In this case, the crime actually committed is parricide,
punishable by reclusion perpetua to death. The crime which
704

A wanted only to inflict a wound on the face of B that would
leave a permanent scar on his face or one that would compel the latter
to remain in the hospital for a week or two, but never intended to
kill him. But as A did not have control of his right arm on account of
paralysis, the blow, although intended for the face, landed at the base
of the neck, resulting in the fatal wound in that part of the body of
B, who died as a consequence. (People v. Albuquerque, 59 Phil. 150,
152)
In this case, there is praeter intentionem and the crime not
intended by the offender befell the same person. Note that in the
examples under error in personae, the crime not intended by the
offender befell a different person.
From the foregoing examples and discussions, it will be noted
that the rules stated in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 49 cannot apply
to cases involving aberratio ictus or praeter intentionem.
705

Art. 49

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

On the other hand, in error in personae, since only one crime is
produced by the act of the offender, there could be no complex crime,
which presupposes the commission of at least two crimes. In the two
examples of error in personae, it will be noted that only one person
was affected by the single act of the offender; hence, only one crime
was produced. For this reason, it is Article 49, and not Article 48,
that is applicable.
Article 49 is applicable only when the intended crime and the crime
actually committed are punished with different penalties.

The rules prescribed in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 49
contemplate of cases where the intended crime and the crime
actually committed are punished with different penalties by reason
of relationship between the offender and the offended party, which
qualifies one of the crimes.
If the intended crime and the crime actually committed are
punished with the same or equal penalties, Article 49 is not applicable.
Thus, if A, intending to kill B, a stranger, actually killed C,
another stranger, Article 49 is not applicable, because whether it
was B or it was C who was killed, the crime committed was homicide.
There is no difference in the penalty.
Article 49 distinguished from Article 48.

In Article 49, the lesser penalty is to be imposed, to be applied
in the maximum period (Pars. 1 and 2); in Article 48, the penalty
for the more or most serious crime shall be imposed, the same to be
applied in its maximum period.
Rule No. 3 in Article 49 is not necessary.

The rule in paragraph 3 of Article 49 is not necessary because
the cases contemplated in that paragraph may well be covered by
Article 48 in view of the fact that the same act committed by the guilty
person, which gives rise to one crime, also constitute(s) an attempt or
a frustration of another crime.

706

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Arts. 50-55

Art. 50. Penalty to be imposed upon principals of a
frustrated crime. - The penalty next lower in degree than
that prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be
imposed upon the principals in a frustrated felony.

Art. 51. Penalty to be imposed upon principals of
attempted crime. - The penalty lower by two degrees than
that prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be
imposed upon the principals in an attempt to commit a felony.

Art. 52. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in a
consummated crime. - The penalty next lower in degree
than that prescribed by law for the consummated felony
shall be imposed upon the accomplices in the commission of
a consummated felony.

Art. 53. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories to the
commission ofa consummated felony. - The penalty lower by
two degrees than that prescribed by law for the consummated
felony shall be imposed upon the accessories to the commission
of a consummated felony.

Art. 54. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in a
frustrated crime. - The penalty next lower in degree than that
prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall be imposed
upon the accomplices in the commission of a frustrated felony.

Art. 55. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories of a
frustrated crime. - The penalty lower by two degrees than that
prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall be imposed
upon the accessories to the commission of a frustrated felony.

707

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 56. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in an
attempted crime. - The penalty next lower in degree than that
prescribed by law for an attempt to commit a felony shall be
imposed upon the accomplices in an attempt to commit the
felony.

Examples: A is convicted of attempted homicide for having shot
B with intent to kill the latter, but without inflicting a mortal wound.

Arts. 50-57

Art. 57. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories of an
attempted crime. - The penalty lower by two degrees than
that prescribed by law for the attempt shall be imposed upon
the accessories to the attempt to commit a felony.

Diagram of the application of Articles 50 to 57.

Principals

Consummated

Frustrated

Attempted

0

1

2

Accomplices

1

2

3

Accessories

2

3

4

" represents the penalty prescribed by law in defining a crime,
which is to be imposed on the principal in a consummated offense,
in accordance with the provisions of Article 46. The other figures
represent the degrees to which the penalty must be lowered, to meet
the different situations anticipated by law.

Arts. 50-57

The penalty for consummated homicide is reclusion temporal.
(Art. 249, Book II, R.P.C.) The penalty lower by one or more degrees is
indicated in Scale No. 1 ofArticle 71. The crime committed by A being
attempted homicide, the penalty to be imposed on him is that penalty
lower by two degrees than reclusion temporal (No. 3 in Scale No. 1,
Art. 71), and the penalty two degrees lower is prision correccional
(No. 5 in the same Scale No. 1).
To find the penalty for frustrated homicide, which is one degree
lower than reclusion temporal, use also Scale No. l of Article 71, and
that penalty one degree lower is prision mayor (No. 4 in the Scale).
A, as principal, B, as accomplice, and C, as accessory, are
convicted of consummated homicide. The penalty for A is reclusion
temporal, he being the principal. (Art. 46) The penalty for B is prision
mayor, the penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed for
the consummated homicide. (Art. 52) The penalty for C is prision
correccional, it being two degrees lower than that prescribed for
consummated homicide. (Art. 53)
In the examples, the penalty for the principal in the attempted
homicide, and the penalties for the principal, accomplice and accessory
in the commission of consummated homicide shall be imposed
in the proper period and shall be subject to the provisions of the
Indeterminate Sentence Law.
Exceptions to the rules established In Articles 50 to 57.

In Articles 50, 51, 52, and 53 of the R.P.C., the basis for reduction
of the penalty by one or two degrees, is invariably the penalty
prescribed by law for the consummated crime, while under Articles
54 and 55, the basis for the reduction is the penalty prescnbed by
law for the frustrated felony; and under Articles 56 and 57, the basic
penalty to be used for reduction by one or two degrees is that for the
attempted felony. From all of these, it will also be observed that in
making any reduction by one or two degrees, the basis used is that
already prescribed, not as already reduced. It will also be noticed that
under Article 51, the penalty for an attempted crime is that for the
consummated felony, reduced by two degrees, not the penalty for the
frustrated felony, reduced by one degree. (De los Angeles v. People,
103 Phil. 295, 298-299)

The courts, in view of the facts of the case, may impose upon
the person guilty of the frustrated crime of parricide, murder, or
homicide, a penalty lower by one degree than that which should be
imposed under the provisions of Article 50; and may reduce by one
degree, the penalty which under Article 51 should be imposed for an
attempt to commit any of such crimes. (Art. 250)

708

709

Articles 50 to 57 shall not apply to cases where the law expressly
prescribes the penalty for a frustrated or attempted felony, or to be
imposed upon accomplices or accessories. (Art. 60)
The penalty for frustrated parricide, murder, or homicide may be two
degrees lower; and the penalty for attempted parricide, murder, or
homicide may be three degrees lower.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

What are the bases for the determination of the extent of penalty
to be imposed under the Revised Penal Code?

Art. 58. Additional penalty to be imposed upon certain
accessories.
Those accessories falling within the terms of
paragraph 3 of Article 19 of this Code who should act with
abuse of their public functions, shall suffer the additional
penalty of absolute perpetual disqualification if the principal
offender shall be guilty of a grave felony, and that of absolute
temporary disqualification if he shall be guilty of a less grave
felony.

Arts. 50-57

1.

The stage reached by the crime in its development (either
attempted, frustrated or consummated).

2.

The participations therein of the persons liable.

3.

The aggravating or mitigating circumstances which
attended the commission of the crime.

In the different stages of execution in the commission of the crime
and in the participation therein of the persons liable, the penalty is
graduated by degree.
What Is a degree In relation to penalty?

A degree is one entire penalty, one whole penalty or one unit
of the penalties enumerated in the graduated scales provided for
in Article 71. Each of the penalties of reclusion perpetua, reclusion
temporal, prision mayor, etc., enumerated in the graduated scales of
Article 71, is a degree.
When there is mitigating or aggravating circumstance, the
penalty is lowered or increased by period only, except when the
penalty is divisible and there are two or more mitigating and without
aggravating circumstances, in which case the penalty is lowered by
degree.

Arts. 58-59

Additional penalties for public officers who are guilty as accessories
under paragraph 3 of Article 19.

Public officers who help the author of a crime by misusing their
office and duties shall suffer the additional penalties of:
1.

Absolute perpetual disqualification, ifthe principal offender
is guilty of a grave felony.

2.

Absolute temporary disqualification if the principal offender
is guilty of less grave felony.

Why does this article limit its provisions to grave or Jess grave
felonies? Because it is not possible to have accessories liable for light
felonies. (Art. 16)
This article applies only to public officers who abused their public
functions.

What Is a period of penalty?

A period is one of the three equal portions, called minimum,
medium, and maximum, of a divisible penalty. (See Art. 65)
A period of a divisible penalty, when prescribed by the Code as a
penalty for a felony, is in itself a degree.

In Article 140, the penalty for the leader of a sedition is prision
mayor in its minimum period and fine.
It being a degree, the penalty next lower than that penalty is
prision correccional in its maximum period. (People v. Gayrama, 60
Phil. 796, and People v. Haloot, 64 Phil. 739)

710

. . The accessories referred to in Article 58 are only those falling
within the term ofparagraph 3 of Article 19.
The additional penalty prescribed in this article will be
imposed only on those accessories whose participation in the crime
is characterized by the misuse of public office or authority. This is so,
because Article 58 says "who should act with abuse of their public
functions."

Art. 59. Penalty to be imposed in case offailure to commit
the crime because the means employed or the aims sought
are impossible. - When the person intending to commit an
offense has already performed the acts for the execution of
711

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

the same but nevertheless the crime was not produced by
reason of the fact that the act intended was by its nature one
of impossible accomplishment or because the means employed
by such person are essentially inadequate to produce the
result desired by him, the court, having in mind the social
danger and the degree of criminality shown by the offender,
shall impose upon him the penalty of arresto mayor or a fine
ranging from 200 to 500 pesos.

by a penalty of arresto mayor which is higher than that prescribed
for the consummated fight felony, which is arresto menor. (Albert)

Art. 59

Penalty for impossible crime.
The penalty for impossible crime is arresto mayor or a fine
ranging from 200 to 500 pesos.
Basis for imposition of proper penalty: (1) social danger; and (2)
degree of criminality shown by the offender.
The court must take into consideration the social danger and
the degree of criminality shown by the offender. (Art. 59)
Thus, a person who fired a revolver upon his enemy from a
distance of one kilometer, shows stupidity rather than dangerousness.
According to the Positivist theory, such person should not be punished,
because there is neither "social danger" nor any "degree ofcriminality"
shown by such person. His said act is absolutely harmless. Even
subjectively, a man with a little common sense will know that he
cannot hit a person by firing a revolver one kilometer away. (Guevara)
But one who discharged a shotgun at another from a distance of
200 yards, is guilty of discharge of firearm under Article 254, not of
impossible crime, there being no proof of intent to kill on the part of
the offender and it being possible of accomplishing the evil intent of
the offender (to frighten the offended party). (See People v. Agbuya,
57 Phil. 238, 243)
Is the penalty for impossible crime proper?
The fixing of the penalty of arresto mayor or a fine of P200.00
to P500.00 is subject to criticism, because this article uses the words
"offense" and "crime" which include light felony. So, he who attempts
to commit a light felony of impossible materialization may be punished
712

Art. 60

But the provision of Article 59 is limited to those cases where the
act performed would be grave felonies or less grave felonies. (Guevara)

Art. 60. Exceptions to the rules established in Arti cles 50 to
57. -- The provisions contained in Articles 50 to 57, inclusive,
of this Code shall not be applicable to cases in which the law
expressly prescribes the penalty provided for a frustrated
or attempted felony, or to be imposed upon accomplices or
accessories.

Articles 50 to 57 do not apply when the law expressly prescribes
the penalty for a frustrated or attempted felony or to be imposed
upon accomplices or accessories.
Thus, when on the occasion or in consequence of an attempted
or frustrated robbery, the offender commits a homicide, the law
provides in Article 297 that the special penalty ofreclusion temporal
in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua shall be imposed upon
the offender.
.
Were it not for this provision in Article 60, the penalty to be
imposed would be reclusion temporal which is the penalty next
lower in degree than reclusion perpetua to death, the penalty for
consummated offense of robbery with homicide.
Because of the gravity of the offense of attempted or frustrated
robbery with homicide, the law provides a special penalty therefor.
Accomplice, punished as principal.
Again, under the general rule, an accomplice is punished by a
penalty one degree lower than the penalty imposed upon the principal.
But in two cases, the Code punishes an accomplice with the same
penalty imposed upon the principal. They are:

1.

The ascendants, guardians, curators, teachers and
any person who by abuse of authority or confidential
relationship, shall cooperate as accomplices in the crimes
713

Art. 61

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

of rape, acts of lasciviousness, seduction, corruption of
minors, white slave trade or abduction. (Art. 346)
2.

One who furnished the place for the perpetration of the
crime of slight illegal detention. (Art. 268)

Furnishing the place for the perpetration of the crime is
ordinarily the act of an accomplice.
Certain accessories are punished with a penalty one degree lower,
instead of two degrees.
In certain crimes, the participation of the offender is that ofan
accessory because he perpetrates the act after someone has committed
counterfeiting or falsification. But the penalty for the act perpetrated
is one degree lower instead of two degrees lower in the following
crimes:
1.

Knowingly using counterfeited seal or forged signature or
stamp of the President. (Art. 162)

2.

Illegal possession and use of a false treasury or bank note.
(Art. 168)

3.

Using a falsified document. (Art. 173, par. 3)

4.

Using a falsified dispatch. (Art. 173, par. 2)

Art. 61. Rules for graduating penalties. - For the purpose
of graduating the penalties which, according to the provisions
of Articles fifty to fifty-seven, inclusive, of this Code, are to be
imposed upon persons guilty as principals of any frustrated
or attempted felony, or as accomplices or accessories, the
following rules shall be observed:
1.
When the penalty prescribed for the felony is single
and indivisible, the penalty next lower in degree shall be
that immediately following that indivisible penalty in the
respective graduated scale prescribed in Article 71 of this
Code.
2.
When the penalty prescribed for the crime is
composed of two indivisible penalties, or of one or more
divisible penalties to be imposed to their full extent, the penalty

Art. 61

next lower in degree shall be that immediately following the
lesser of the penalties prescribed in the respective graduated
scale.
3.
When the penalty prescribed for the crime is
composed of one or two indivisible penalties and the maximum
period of another divisible penalty, the penalty next lower in
degree shall be composed of the medium and minimum periods
of the proper divisible penalty and the maximum period of
that immediately following in said respective graduated scale.
4.
When the penalty prescribed for the crime is
composed of several periods, corresponding to different
divisible penalties, the penalty next lower in degree shall be
composed of the period immediately following the minimum
prescribed and of the two next following, which shall be
taken from the penalty prescribed if possible; otherwise from
the penalty immediately following in the above mentioned
respective graduated scale.
5.
When the law prescribes a penalty for a crime in
some manner not specially provided for in the four preceding
rules, the courts, proceeding by analogy, shall impose the
corresponding penalties upon those guilty as principals of
the frustrated felony, or of attempt to commit the same, and
upon accomplices and accessories. (As amended by Com. Act
No.217)
.

Article 61 provides for the rules to be observed in lowering the
penalty by one or two degrees.
According to Article 46, the penalty prescribed by law in general
terms shall be imposed upon the principal in a consummated felony.
According to Articles 50 to 57, the penalty prescribed by law for the
felony shall be lowered by one or two degrees, as follows:
(1)

For the principal in frustrated felony

(2)

For the principal in attempted felony - two degrees lower;

(3)

For the accomplice in consummated felony - one degree
lower; and

(4)

For the accessory in consummated felony - two degrees
lower.

714
715

one degree lower;

The rules provided for in Article 61 should also apply in
determining the minimum of the indeterminate penalty under the
Indeterminate Sentence Law. The minimum of the indeterminate
penalty is within the range of the penalty next lower than that
prescribed by the R.P.C. for the offense.
Those rules also apply in lowering the penalty by one or
two degrees by reason of the presence of privileged mitigating
circumstance (Arts. 68 and 69), or when the penalty is divisible and
there are two or more mitigating circumstances (generic) and no
aggravating circumstance. (Art. 64)
The lower penalty shall be taken from the graduated scale in
Article 71.
Scale No. I in Article 71 enumerates the penalties in the
following order:
1.

TITLE 'THREE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 61

2.

Reclusion perpetua,
Reclusion temporal,

4.

Prision mayor,

5.

Prision correccional,

6.

Arresto mayor,

7.

Destierro,

8.

Arresto menor,

9.

Public censure,

10.

Fine.

Illustrations of the rules:
First rule:
When the penalty is single and indivisible.
A single and indivisible penalty is reclusion perpetua. Th.is is the
penalty for k.idnapping and failure to return a minor. (Art. 270) In
Scale No. 1 in Article 71, the penalty immediately following reclusion
perpetua is reclusion temporal. The penalty next lower in degree,
therefore, is reclusion temporal.
Second rule:
When the penalty is composed of two indivisible penalties.
As R.A. No 9346 prohibited the imposition of the death penalty,
there is now only one indivisible penalty - reclusion perpetua. Thus,
the first part of rule 2 has no application.
Two indivisible penalties are reclusion perpetua to death. Th.is is
the penalty for parricide. (Art. 246)The penalty immediately following
the lesser of the penalties, which is reclusion perpetua, is reclusion
temporal. (See Scale No. 1 in Art. 71)

Death,

3.

Art. 61

Penalties

When the penalty is composed of one or more divisible penalties
to be imposed to their full extent.
One divisible penalty to be imposed to its full extent is reclusion
temporal; and two divisible penalties to be imposed to their full extent
are prision correccional to prision mayor. The penalty immediately
following the divisible penalty of reclusion temporal in Scale No. 1 of
Article 71 is prision mayor; and the penalty immediately following
the lesser of the penalties of prision correccional to prision mayor is
arresto mayor. (See Scale No. 1 in Art. 71)

The indivisible penalties are: (1) death, (2) reclusion perpetua,
and (3) public censure.
The divisible penalties are reclusion temporal down to arresto
menor.

The divisible penalties are divided into three periods, namely:
(1) the minimum, (2) the medium, (3) the maximum.

716

Third rule:
When the penalty is composed of one or two indivisible penalties
and the maximum period of a divisible penalty.
The penalty for murder (Art. 248) is reclusion temporal in its
maximum period to reclusion perpetua.
Thus, the penalty for murder consists of one indivisible penalty
of reclusion perpetua and one divisible penalty of reclusion temporal
in its maximum period.
717

Art. 61

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The proper divisible penalty is reclusion temporal. The penalty
immediately following reclusion temporal is prision mayor.

Illustration:

Under the third rule, the penalty next lower is composed of
the medium and minimum periods of reclusion temporal and the
maximum ofprision mayor.

Reclusion temporal-

Illustration:

1. Maximum
2. Medium
{
3. Minimum} (1)
1. Maximum
Prision mayor

Reclusion perpetua

Reclusion
temporal -

1.

Maximum

2.

Medium

\ 3.

Minimum

Prision mayor
\

1.

Maximum

2.

Medium

3.

Minimum

}

(1)

2. Medium
{

Penalty for the principal in consummated felony.

:: ::::} (2)
Prision correccional

}

{
Penalty for accomplice; or penalty for
the principal in frustrated felony.

Art. 61

3.

Penalty for the
principal in
consummated
felony.
Penalty for
accomplice; or
penalty for the
principal in
frustrated felony.

Fifth rule: (by analogy, because "not specially provided for in the
four preceding rules.")
When the penalty has two periods.
Certain offenses defined in the Code are punished with a penalty
composed of two periods, either of the same penalty

Fourth rule:
When the penalty is composed of several periods.
The word "several" in relation to the number of periods,
means consisting in more than two periods. Hence, the fourth rule
contemplates a penalty composed of at least three periods.
The several periods must correspond to different divisible
penalties.
The penalty which is composed ofseveral periods corresponding
to different divisible penalties is prision mayor in its medium period
to reclusion temporal in its minimum period. The period immediately
following the minimum, which is prision mayor in its medium period,
is prision mayor in its minimum period. The two periods next following
are the maximum and medium periods of prision correccional, the
penalty next following in the scale prescribed in Article 71 since it
cannot be taken from the penalty prescribed.

718

(1)

For abduction (Art. 343) -- prision correccional in its
minimum and medium periods;

or of different penalties (2)

For physical injuries (Art. 263, subsection 4) - arresto
mayor in its maximum period to prision correccional in its
minimum period.

In these cases, the penalty lower by one degree is formed by two
periods to be taken from the same penalty prescribed, if possible, or
from the periods of the penalty numerically following the lesser of
the penalties prescribed.
These cases are not covered by the fourth rule, because the
penalty contemplated in the fourth rule must contain at least three
periods. The penalty under the fifth rule (by analogy) contains one
or two periods only.

719

(3)

Example:
The penalty next lower than prision correccional in its minimum
and medium periods is arresto mayor in its medium and maximum
periods.
Maximum
Medium
Prision correcional
Minimum
Maximum
{ Medium
Arresto mayor
Minimum

The penalty prescribed
for the felony.
The penalty next lower.

When the penalty has one period.
If the penalty is any one of the three periods of a divisible penalty,
the penalty next lower in degree shall be that period next following
the given penalty. Thus, the penalty immediately inferior to prision
mayor in its maximum period is prision mayor in its medium period.
(People v. Co Pao, 58 Phil. 545, 551)
If the penalty is reclusion temporal in its medium period, the
penalty next lower in degree is reclusion temporal in its minimum
period. (People v. Gayrama, 60 Phil. 796, 810)
The penalty prescribed by the Code for a felony is a degree. If the
penalty prescribed for a felony is one of the three periods of a divisible
penalty, that period becomes a degree, and the period immediately
below is the penalty next lower in degree.
Simplified rules:
The rules prescribed in paragraphs 4 and 5 of Article 61 may be
simplified, as follows:
(1)

(2)

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 61

If the penalty prescribed by the Code consists in three
periods, corresponding to different divisible penalties, the
penalty next lower in degree is the penalty consisting in
the three periods down in the scale.
If the penalty prescribed by the Code consists in two
periods, the penalty next lower in degree is the penalty
consisting in two periods down in the scale.

720

Art. 62

If the penalty prescribed by the Code consists in only one
period, the penalty next lower in degree is the next period
down in the scale.

If the given penalty is composed of one, two or three periods, the
penalty next lower in degree should begin where the given penalty
ends, because, otherwise, if it were to skip over intermediate ones,
it would be lower but not next lower in degree. (People v. Haloot, 64
Phil. 739, 744)
Mitigating and aggravating circumstances are disregarded in the
application of the rules for graduating penalties.
It will be noted that each paragraph ofArticle 61 begins with the
phrase, "When the penalty prescribed for the felony" or "crime." Hence,
in lowering the penalty, the penalty prescribed by the R.P.C. for the
crime is the basis, without regard to the mitigating or aggravating
circumstances which attended the commission of the crime.
It is only after the penalty next lower in degree is already
determined that the mitigating and/or aggravating circumstances
should be considered.

Section Two.

Rules for the application of penalties
with regard to the mitigating and
aggravating circums tances, and habitual
delinquency

Art. 62. Effects of the attendance of mitigating or
aggravating circumstances and of habitual delinquency.
- Mitigating or aggravating circumstances and habitual
delinquency shall be taken into account for the purp ose of
diminishing or increasing the penalty in conformi ty with the
followin g rules:
l.
Aggravating circumstances which in themselves
constitute a crime specially punishable by law or which
are included by the law in defining a crime and prescribing
the penalty therefor shall not be taken into account for the
purpose of increasing the penalty.
l(a). When in the commi ssion of the crime, advantage
was taken by the offender of his public position, the
721

Art. 62

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

penalty to be imposed shall be in its maximum regardless
of mitigating circumstances.
The maximum penalty shall be imposed if the
offense was committed by any person who belongs to an
organized/syndicated crime group.

An organized/syndicated crime group means a group
of two or more persons collaborating, confederating or
mutually helping one another for purposes of gain in the
commission of any crime.
2.
The same rule shall apply with respect to any
aggravating circumstances inherent in the crime to such a
degree that it must of necessity accompany the commission
thereof.
3.
Aggravating or mitigating circumstances which
arise from the moral attributes of the offender, or from bis
private relations with the offended party, or from any other
personal cause, shall only serve to aggravate or mitigate the
liability of the principals, accomplices, and accessories as to
whom such circumstances are attendant.
4.
The circumstances which consist in the material
execution of the act, or in the means employed to accomplish
it, shall serve to aggravate or mitigate the liability of those
persons only who had knowledge of them at the time of the
execution of the act or their cooperation therein.
5.
effects:

crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional
penalty of prision mayor in its maximum period to
reclusion temporal in its minimum period.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the total
of the two penalties to be imposed upon the offender, in
conformity herewith, shall in no case exceed 30 years.
For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed
to be habitual delinquent, if within a period of ten years
from the date of his release or last conviction of the crimes of
serious or less serious physical injuries, robo, hurto, estafa, or
falsificacion, he is found guilty of any of said crimes a third
time or oftener. (As amended by RA. No. 7659)

Effect of the attendance of aggravating or mitigating circumstances
or of habitual delinquency.
1.

Aggravating circumstances (generic and specific) have the
effect of increasing the penalty, without, however, exceeding
the maximum provided by law.

2.

Mitigating circumstances have the effect of diminishing

the penalty.
3.

Habitual delinquency shall have the following

(a) Upon a third conviction, the culprit shall be
sentenced to the penalty provided by law for the last
crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional
penalty of prision correccional in its medium and
maximum periods;
(b) Upon a fourth conviction, the culprit shall be
sentenced to the penalty provided for the last crime of
which be be found guilty and to the additional penalty of
prision mayor in its minimum and medium periods; and
(c) Upon a fifth or additional conviction, the culprit
shall be sentenced to the penalty provided for the last
722

Art. 62

Habitual delinquency has the effect, not only of increasing
the penalty because of recidivism which is generally
implied in habitual delinquency, but also of imposing an
additional penalty.

Rules regarding aggravating and mitigating circumstances:
Paragraph 1 Aggravating circumstances which (1) in themselves constitute
a crime especially punished by law or which (2) are included by the
law in defining a crime and prescribing the penalty therefor are not
to be taken into account to increase the penalty.

Examples:
(1)

Which in themselves constitute a crime.
That the crime be committed "by means of fire" (Art.
14, par. 12), is not considered as aggravating in arson;
723

Art. 62

and that the crime be committed by means of"derailment
of a locomotive" (Art. 14, par. 12), is not considered as
aggravating in the crime described in Article 330 known
as "Damages and obstruction to means of communication."
Article 330 punishes the act of damaging any railway
resulting in derailment of cars.
(2)

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
Paragraph 3-

Aggravating or mitigating circumstances which arise from
(1)the moral attributes of the offender, or (2) from his private relations
with the offended party, or (3) from any other personal cause, serve to
aggravate or mitigate the liability of the principals, accomplices and
accessories as to whom such circumstances are attendant.

Which are included by law in defining a crime.

Examples:

That the crime was committed in the dwelling of
the offended party is not aggravating in robbery with
force upon things (Art. 299); abuse of confidence is not
aggravating in qualified theft committed with grave abuse
of confidence. (Art. 310)

(1)

When maximum of the penalty shall be imposed.

1.

When in the commission of the crime, advantage was taken
by the offender of his public position;

2.

If the offense was committed by any person who belongs
to an organized/syndicated crime group.

What is an organized/syndicated crime group?
An organized/syndicated crime group means a group of two or
more persons collaborating confederating or mutually helping one
another for purposes of gain in the commission of any crime.
Paragraph 2 The same rule applies with respect to aggravating circumstances
which are inherent in the crime.
Example: Evident premeditation is inherent in robbery and
theft. (U.S. v. Castroverde, 4 Phil. 246, 248)
724

From the moral attributes of the offender:
A and B killed C. A acted with evident premeditation,
and B with passion and obfuscation.
The circumstances of evident premeditation and
passion and obfuscation arise from the moral attributes
of the offenders. Evident premeditation should affect
and aggravate only the penalty for A, while passion and
obfuscation will benefit B only and mitigate his liability.

Neither can the aggravating circumstance that the
crime was committed by means ofpoison (Art. 14, par. 12)
be considered in the crime of murder committed by means
of poison, since using poison to kill the victim is included
by law in defining the crime of murder. (Art. 248, par. 3)

The maximum of the penalty shall be imposed in the following
cases:

Art. 62

Note: The states of their minds are different.
(2)

From his private relations with the offended party:
A and C inflicted slight physical injuries on B. A is the
son of B. C is the father of B. In this case, the alternative
circumstance of relationship, as aggravating, shall be
taken into account against A only, because he is a relative
of a lower degree than the offended party, B. Relationship
is mitigating as regards C, he being a relative of a higher
degree than the offended party, B.
Also, if A assisted the wife of B in killing the latter,
only the wife is guilty of parricide and A for homicide or
murder, as the case may be. (People v. Bucsit, 43 Phil. 184,
185; People v. Patricio, 46 Phil. 875, 879)
V, a confidential clerk in the American Express Co.,
learned of the description of the turns of the combination
of his employer's safe. B cooperated as accomplice in the
commission of the crime of qualified theft by V. It was held
that the qualifying circumstance of breach of confidence
which in the case of Valdellon justifies the imposition of
a penalty one degree (now two degrees) higher than that
725

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 62

Criminal Law

prescribed for simple theft does not apply to B who was
not in confidential relations with the offended party and
who therefore should be punished as an accomplice in the
crime of simple theft. (People v. Valdellon, 46 Phil. 245,
252)
Note:

(3)

This ruling holds true even if there was conspiracy
between V and B. The rule that in conspiracy the
act of one is the act of all, does not mean that the
crime of one is the crime of all.

From any other personal cause:
A and B committed a crime. A was under 16 years of
age and B was a recidivist.

Paragraph 4The circumstances which consist ( 1) in the material execution
of the act, or (2) in the means employed to accomplish it, shall serve
to aggravate or mitigate the liability of those persons only who had
knowledge of them at the time of the execution of the act or their
cooperation therein.
Examples:
( 1)

Material execution of the act:
A, as principal by induction, B, and C agreed to kill D.
Band C killed D with treachery, which mode of committing
the offense had not been previously agreed upon by them
with A. A was not present when B and C killed D with
treachery.
The aggravating circumstance of treachery should
not be taken into account against A, but against B and C
only. (People v. De Otero, 51 Phil. 201) But ifA was present
and had knowledge of the treachery with which the crime
was committed by B and C, he is also liable for murder,
qualified by treachery.
The qualifying circumstance of treachery should not
be considered against the principal by induction when
he left to the principal by direct participation the means,
726

Art. 62

modes or methods of the commission of the felony. (U.S. v.
Gamao, 23 Phil. 81, 96)
(2)

Means to accomplish the crime:
A ordered B to kill C. B invited C to eat with him.
B mixed poison with the food of C, who died after he had
eaten the food.A did not know thatB used poison to kill C.
In this case, the aggravating circumstance that the crime
be committed by means of poison is not applicable to A.

There Is no mitigating circumstance relating to the means employed
In the execution of the crime.
Insofar as relates to the means employed in the execution of the
crime and other acts incident to the actual perpetration thereof, it
is impossible to conceive of any mitigating circumstance which can
properly be considered as to one of the defendants, but is not equally
applicable to the others, even to those who had no knowledge of the
same at the time of the commission of the crime, or their cooperation
therein. (U.S. v. Ancheta, 15 Phil. 470, 482, citing Groizard)
Difference between (1) circumstances relating to the persons
participating in the crime and (2) circumstances consisting in the
material execution or means employed.
S induced four Igorots to kill B. S instructed them to hide in
the bushes until night when they should go to the house of B and
kill him. The crime was committed by the four lgorots as they were
instructed. The trial court considered the aggravating circumstance
of nocturnity against the four lgorots but not against S.
Is the ruling of the trial court correct?
No. Nocturnity being a circumstance in the material execution of
the deed and one of the means employed to accomplish its commission,
and S having knowledge of its use, should be considered against S.
The circumstances attending the commission of a crime relate
either (1) to the persons participating in the same, or (2) to its material
execution, or to the means employed.
The former (1), do not affect all the participants in the crime,
but only those to whom they particularly apply.
727

Art. 62

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The latter (2), have a direct bearing upon the criminal liability
of all the defendants who had knowledge thereof at the time of the
commission of the crime, or of their cooperation therein. (U.S. v.
Ancheta, supra)
Defendants-appellants, though forming part of the conspiracy of
kidnapping, were not the ones who actually kidnapped the victim at
nighttime; and, under Article 62, paragraph 4, of the R.P.C., they are
not bound or affected by the aggravating circumstance of nighttime
unless they knew that it would be availed of in accomplishing the
offense, and there is no proof of said knowledge. (People v. Villanueva,
98 Phil. 327, 339)
Is it necessary that there be proof ofcooperation or participation with
regard to the act of cruelty?
The aggravating circumstance of cruelty, while it may be
considered as against one accused, may not be appreciated as against
another accused, where there is no sufficient proof of conspiracy in
the commission of the main act, nor is there proof of cooperation or
participation on the part of the latter with regard to the act of cruelty.
(People v. Vocalos, 59 O.G. 693)
If cruelty is a means employed to accomplish the act, cooperation
or participation with regard to the act of cruelty is not necessary, as
only knowledge of it is required by Article 62, paragraph 4, of the
Code.
Note, however, that as cruelty is defined in Article 14, paragraph
21, the act of cruelty (the other wrong) is "not necessary for" the
"commission" of the crime. It would seem that cruelty consists neither
"in the material execution of the act" nor "in the means employed to
accomplish it." If this is the case, the ruling in People v. Vocales is
correct, because Article 62, paragraph 4, would not be applicable.
Paragraph 5 -

Art. 62

The crimes are specified in habitual delinquency.
The crimes mentioned in the definition of habitual delinquency
are: serious or less serious physical injuries (Arts. 263 and 265),
robbery (Arts. 293-303), theft (Arts. 308-311), estafa (Arts. 315-318),
and falsification (Arts. 170-174).
Thus, ifA was convicted ofand served sentence for theft in 1935;
after his release he committed homicide (Art. 249), was convicted in
1937, and was released in 1951; and in 1957 was convicted of rape
(Art. 335); he is not a habitual delinquent even if he was convicted
the third time. Homicide and rape are not mentioned in the definition
of habitual delinquency. (See Molesa v. Director of Prisons, 59 Phil.
406, 408)
If the accused is convicted of a violation of Article 155 (Llobrera
v. Director ofPrisons, 87 Phil. 179), or ofArticle 190(People v. Go Ug,
67 Phil. 202), he is not a habitual delinquent, even ifhe has previous
convictions of theft, estafa, robbery, falsification, or serious or less
serious physical injuries.
Requisites of habitual delinquency.
1.

That the offender had been convicted of any of the crimes
of serious or less serious physical injuries, robbery, theft,
estafa, or falsification;

2.

That after that conviction or after serving his sentence, he
again committed, and, within 10 years from his release or
first conviction, he was again convicted of any of the said
crimes for the second time; and

3.

That after his conviction of, or after serving sentence for,
the second offense, he again committed, and, within IO
years from his last release or last conviction, he was again
convicted of any of said offenses, the third time or oftener.

Who is a habitual delinquent?
A person is a habitual delinquent if within a period often years
from the date of his (last) release or last conviction of the crimes of
(1) serious or less serious physical injuries, (2) robo, (3) hurto,
(4) estafa, or () falsificacion, he is found guilty of any of said crimes
a third time or oftener.
728

Computation of ten-year period.
With respect to the period of ten years, the law expressly
mentions the defendant's last conviction or (last) release as the
starting point from which the ten-year period should be counted.

729

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 62

Criminal Law

For instance, a person has the following criminal records:
Crimes Committed

Date of Conviction

Date of Release

Thef

June 1915

July 1916

Estafa

May 1920

October 1922

Attempted Robbery

July 1928

August 1930

Theft

August 1937

September 1940

Crime charged

October 1946

With respect to the conviction for estafa in May 1920, the starting
point would be the date of his conviction for theft, which is June
1915, or the date of his release, which is July 1916; and the date of
his conviction for estafa, which is May 1920, or the date of release,
which is October 1922, should be the starting point with reference to
the conviction for attempted robbery in July 1928, etc.
The ten-year period should not be counted from the date of
conviction for theft, which is June 1915, or the date of release, which
is July 1916, in relation to the last crime of which the offender was
found guilty in October 1946, because June 1915, or July 1916, is
not the date of defendant's last conviction or last release. The date of
last conviction with respect to the crime charged is August 1937, for
theft. The date of last release is September 1940.
But if A was convicted of theft in 1920, of robbery in 1922,
of swindling in 1935, and of theft again in 1936, only the crime of
swindling, of which he was convicted in 1935 can be taken into account
in the imposition of the penalty for theft in 1936 and, therefore, A is
not a habitual delinquent but only a recidivist.
Why the starting point is date of release or date of last conviction.
Suppose, a convict has the following criminal records:

Note that as regards the crime ofestafa committed in November,
1920, the starting point may be the date of conviction for theft. (April
1915)or the date of release (September 1916), because between April
1923 and April 1915 there is only a difference of eight years or between
April 1923 and September 1916, there is only a difference of seven
years. But as regards robbery committed in July 1932, if we have to
make the date of last conviction (April 1923) as the starting point
to determine the ten-year period to April 1934, the date when the
offender was found guilty of robbery, there is already a difference of
11 years. In this case, it seems that he is not a habitual delinquent.
But the law says "from the date of his release or last conviction." So,
we can count the ten-year period from April 1925. The difference will
be only nine years. He is then a habitual delinquent.
If the starting point is only the date of last conviction, there
will be a case where the offender cannot be considered a habitual
delinquent. Suppose that in connection with the three crimes hereinbefore mentioned, the offender was sentenced one after another to
12 years for each, even if he should commit the subsequent offense
immediately after release, he cannot be a habitual delinquent.
"The culprit shall be sentenced to the penalty provided by law for
the last crime of which he be found guilty."
Thus, if the accused is tried for robbery and previously he was
convicted of theft and estafa, robbery is the last crime, and if found
guilty, the penalty for robbery shall be imposed upon him. In view of
his two previous convictions of theft. and estafa, he will be declared
a habitual delinquent upon his conviction of robbery and he will be
sentenced also to the additional penalty ofprision correccional in its
medium and maximum periods.
Additional penalty for habitual delinquency:
1.

Offenses

Date of
Commission

Date of
Conviction

Date of Release

Theft

August 1914

April 1915

September 1916

Estafa

November 1920

April 1923

April 1925

Robbery

July 1932

April 1934
730

Art. 62

2.

Upon a third conviction, the culprit shall be sentenced to
the penalty provided by law for the last crime of which
he is found guilty and to the additional penalty of prision
correccional in its medium and maximum periods.
Upon a fourth conviction, the culprit shall also be sentenced

to the additional penalty ofprision mayor in its minimum
and medium periods.
731

Art. 62

3.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
Upon a fifth or additional conviction, the culprit shall also
be sentenced to the additional penalty ofprision mayor in
its minimum period to reclusion temporal in its minimum
period.

Total penalties not to exceed 30 years.
The total of the two penalties shall not exceed 30 years. The
two penalties refer to: (1) the penalty for the last crime of which he
is found guilty, and (2) the additional penalty for being a habitual
delinquent.
Reason for imposing additional penalty in habitual delinquency.
If, after undergoing punishment for the first time for any of
those crimes, instead of abandoning his ways he goes on to commit
again any of them, this second offense is punished with the maximum
period of the penalty provided by law. He may be a recidivist.
If such graver punishment for committing the second offense
has proved insufficient to restrain his proclivities and to amend his
life, he is deemed to have shown a dangerous propensity to crimes.
Hence, he is punished with a severer penalty for committing any
of those crimes the third time or oftener. An additional penalty is
imposed on him.
Purpose of the law In Imposing additional penalty.
The purpose of the law in imposing additional penalty on
habitual delinquents is to render more effective social defense and
the reformation of multirecidivists. (People v. Abuyen, 52 Phil. 722,
725)
Subsequent crime must be committed AFTER CONVICTION of
former crime.
Thus, although the accused was six times previously convicted
of estafa, yet if (1) the second crime was committed before his first
conviction, and (2) the fourth before his third conviction, and (3) the
fifth and sixth were committed on the same day, the six convictions
are equivalent to three only. (People v. Ventura, 56 Phil. 1, 5-6)

732

Art. 62

Illustration:
Offenses

Date of
Commission

Date of
Conviction

(1) Theft

January 1920

(2) Estafa

September 1921

December 1921

(3) Robbery

January 1930

March 1931

October 1921

(4) Falsification

February 1931

December 1931

(5) Serious physical

November 1, 1932

December 4, 1932

November 1, 1932

December 7, 1932

injuries
(6) Less serious physical

injuries
Note that when the crime of estafa was committed in September
1921, the offender was not yet convicted of theft because the date
of conviction is October 1921. When the crime of falsification was
committed in February 1931, the offender was not yet convicted of
robbery, because the date of conviction in the crime of robbery is
March 1931.
In order that an accused may be legally deemed a habitual
criminal, it is necessary that he committed the second crime after his
conviction of, or after service of sentence for, the first crime; that he
committed the third crime after his conviction of, or after service of
sentence for, the second crime; the fourth crime, after his conviction
of, or after service of sentence for, the third crime, etc. (People v.
Santiago, 55 Phil. 266, 272)
In the Information must be alleged:
1.

The dates of the commission of the previous crimes.

2.

The date of the last conviction or release.

3.

The dates of the other previous convictions or releases.
(People v. Venus, 63 Phil. 435, 440)

The allegation of habitual delinquency in the information should
be, as follows:
733

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 62

Criminal Law

and the last conviction is fixed by law; in habitual
delinquency, the offender is found guilty of any of the
crimes specified within 10 years from his last release or
last conviction.

That the accused is a habitual delinquent, under the provisions
of paragraph 5 of Article 62 of the R.P.C., having been previously
convicted of theft and estafa, to wit:
Previous
Offenses

Date of
Commission

Theft

June 7, 1930

July 5, 1931

Estafa

April 9, 1935

September 14, 1936 December 14, 1937

Date of
Conviction

Date of Release

(3)

As to the number of crimes committed. In recidivism, the
second conviction for an offense embraced in the same
title of the Code is sufficient; in habitual delinquency, the
accused must be found guilty the third time or oftener of
any of the crimes specified. (People v. Bernal, 63 Phil. 750,
755)

(4)

As to their effects. Recidivism, if not offset by a mitigating
circumstance, serves to increase the penalty only to the
maximum; whereas, if there is habitual delinquency, an
additional penalty is also imposed.

October 3, 1931

Effect ofplea ofguilty when allegations are insufficient.

A plea of guilty to an information which fails to allege the dates
of commission of previous offenses, of convictions and of releases is
not an admission that the offender is a habitual delinquent, but only
a recidivist. (People v. Masonson, 63 Phil. 92, 93-94; People v. Flores,
63 Phil. 443, 444-445)
Effect of failure to object to admission of decision showing dates of
previous convictions.

Rulings on habitual delinquency:
1.

Ten-year period computed either from last conviction
or last release. The law on habitual delinquency does
not contemplate the exclusion from the computation of
prior convictions those falling outside the ten-year period
immediately preceding the crime for which the defendant
is being tried, provided each conviction is followed by
another transgression within ten years from one conviction
to another. (People v. Lacsamana, 70 Phil. 517,520; People
v. Rama, 55 Phil. 981, 982-983)

2.

Ten-year period is counted not to the date of commission
of subsequent offense, but to the date ofconviction thereof
in relation to the date of his last release or last conviction.
(People v. Morales, 61 Phil. 222, 224)

However, failure to allege said dates in the information is deemed
cured where the accused did not object to the admission of decisions
for previous offenses which show the dates of his convictions. (People
v. Nava, CA., 58 O.G. 4750)
Date of release ls not absolutely necessary.
If the preceding conviction is less than ten years from the date
of the conviction in the offense complained of, the date oflast release
is not important, because the release comes after conviction. (People
v. Tolentino, 73 Phil. 643, 644)

Art. 62

Habitual delinquency distinguished from recidivism.
(1)

As to the crimes committed. In recidivism, it is sufficient
that the accused on the date of his trial, shall have been
previously convicted by final judgment of another crime
embraced in the same title of the Code; in habitual
delinquency, the crimes are specified.

(2)

As to the period of time the crimes are committed. In
recidivism, no period oftime between the former conviction
734

The definition of a habitual delinquent in the last
paragraph ofArticle 62 says, "if within a period often years
x xx, he is found guilty of any of said crimes a third time
or oftener."
Thus, if A was convicted of theft in 1920; after his
release he committed and was convicted of estafa in 1922:
was released on December 5, 1923; and on December 4,
1933, he committed robbery, and was convicted thereof in
735

Art. 62

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 62

January, 1934; he is not a habitual delinquent. The reason
for this is that when he was convicted ofrobbery in January,
1934, more than ten years had elapsed. The period of ten
years from December 5, 1923, should not be counted up to
the commission ofrobbery on December 4, 1933, but to the
date of A's conviction thereof, which is January, 1934.

additional penalty. In April 1935, defendant was also
found guilty of estafa committed on October 18, 1934, and
his two previous convictions were also considered for the
imposition of the additional penalty. Defendant contended
that he could be sentenced only to one additional penalty
which was already imposed in the first case.

3.

When an offender has committed several crimes mentioned
in the definition of habitual delinquent, without being first
convicted of any of them before committing the others, he
is not a habitual delinquent. (People v. Santiago, 55 Phil.
266, 269-270)

Held: The contention of defendant is untenable.
Ruling in People v. Santiago, 55 Phil. 266, reversed. (People
v. De la Rama, G.R. No. 43744, January 31, 1936, 62 Phil.
972 [Unrep.J)

4.

Convictions on the same day or about the same time are
considered as one only. (People v. Kaw Liong, 57 Phil. 839,
841-842) Convictions on March 3 and 5, 1934 are considered
one only. (People v. Lopido, C.A., 38 O.G. 1907)
The reason for this ruling lies in the fact that the
additional penalties fixed by law for habitual delinquency
are reformatory in character and that their application
should be gradual, and this can be carried out only when
the second conviction takes place after the first or after
service of sentence for the first crime, etc. (People v.
Santiago, supra, at 270-271)

5.

Crimes committed on the same date, although convictions
on different dates (July 29 and September 2, 1937) are
considered only one. (People v. Albuquerque, 69 Phil. 608609)
The reason for this ruling lies in the fact that until
the offender has served the additional penalty provided in
his case, and has committed or abstained from committing
another crime, it cannot be known if said additional penalty
has or has not reformed him. (People v. Santiago, supra,
at 271)

6.

Previous convictions are considered every time a new
offense is committed.
On February 12, 1935, defendant was convicted of
estafa. In said case, defendant's two previous convictions
were taken into consideration for the imposition of the
736

7.

The commission of any of those crimes need not be
consummated. He who commits a crime, whether it be
attempted or frustrated, subjectively reveals the same
degree of depravity and perversity as one who commits a
consummated crime. (People v. Abuyen, 52 Phil. 722, 725726)

8.

Habitual delinquency applies to accomplices and accessories. Their participation in committing those crimes
(serious or less serious physical injuries, robbery, theft,
estafa or falsification) repeatedly, whether as principals,
accomplices or accessories, reveals the persistence in them
of the inclination to wrongdoing, and of the perversity of
character that had led them to commit the previous crimes.
(People v. San Juan, 69 Phil. 347, 349)

9.

If one crime was committed during the minority of the
offender, such crime should not be considered for the
purpose of treating him as a habitual offender because
the proceedings as regards that crime were suspended.

10.

The imposition of the additional penalty prescribed by law
for habitual delinquents is mandatory. (People v. Ortezuela,
51 Phil. 857, 860-861)
The imposition of additional penalty is not
discretionary. (People v. Navales, 59 Phil. 496, 497)

11.

Modifying circumstances applicable to additional penalty.
In the case of People v. De Jesus, 63 Phil. 760, 764765, it was held that the additional penalty is subject to
the general rules prescribed by Article 64, that is, that
737

Art. 62

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

contrary to the purpose of the law. (People v. Tolentino,
supra)

such additional penalty is to be imposed in its minimum,
medium or maximum period according to the number and
nature of the modifying circumstances present. When the
law prescribed the additional punishment for habitual
delinquency in such form as to make it susceptible of
division into periods, it must have been for no other reason
than to take into account all the circumstances which
may exist in a given case with the end in view of avoiding
arbitrariness in the selection of the period in which the
punishment is to be imposed.

Illustration:
A was previously twice convicted of theft within ten
years. Within ten years after service of his last sentence,
he was convicted ofrobbcry under Article 294, subsection 2,
of the Code, punished by reclusion temporal in its medium
period to reclusion perpetua.
Being a habitual delinquent, A should suffer two
years, four months, and one day ofprision correccional, as
an additional penalty.

This case being the latest is controlling. The ruling
in this case upholds the dissenting opinion of Chief Justice
Avancena and Justice Villamor in the Tanyaquin and
Sanchez cases.
12.

Habitual delinquency is not a crime. It is simply a fact or
circumstance which, if present in a given case with the
other circumstances enumerated in Rule 5 of Article 62,
gives rise to the imposition of the additional penalties
therein prescribed. (People v. De Jesus, supra, at 767;
People v. Blanco, 85 Phil. 296, 297)

13.

Penalty for habitual delinquency is a real penalty that
determines jurisdiction. (People • Costosa, 70 Phil. 10,
11-12)

14.

A habitual delinquent is necessarily a recidivist. (People
v. Tolentino, 73 Phil. 643, 644)
Recidivism is inherent in habitual delinquency
and shall be considered as aggravating circumstance in
imposing the principal penalty. (People v. Espina, 62 Phil.
607, 608; People o. De Jesus, 63 Phil. 760, 764)
Reason for the rule:
The purpose of the law in imposing additional penalty
on a habitual delinquent is to punish him more severely.
Ifin imposing the additional penalty, recidivism could not
be considered as aggravating circumstance in fixing the
principal penalty, the imposition of the additional penalty
would make the penalty lighter, instead of more severe,
738

Art. 62

Without taking into consideration the aggravating
circumstance of recidivism, the principal penalty to be
imposed would be 17 years, four months and one day of
reclusion temporal, the medium of the penalty prescribed
for the crime. If we add two years, four months and one
day (additional penalty) to the principal penalty, the total
would be 19 years, eight months and two days.
But if the additional penalty is not imposed and
recidivism is taken into consideration in fixing the principal
penalty, it would be reclusion perpetua, which is the
maximum of the penalty prescribed by law.
15.

But in imposing the additional penalty, recidivism is not
aggravating because inasmuch as recidivism is a qualifying
or inherent circumstance in habitual delinquency, it
cannot be considered an aggravating circumstance at the
same time. Consequently, the additional penalty to be
imposed upon the accused must be the minimum of that
prescribed by law as, with the exception of recidivism, no
other circumstance or fact justifying the imposition of said
penalty in a higher period has been present. (People v. De
Jesus, 63 Phil. 760, 766-767; People v. Tolentino, 73 Phil.
643, 644)

Can a convict be a habitual delinquent without being a recidivist?
Yes. When no two of the crimes committed are embraced in the
same title of the Code.
739

Art. 63

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 63

penalty in accordance with the preceding rules, according to
the result of such compensation.

Illustration:
A was convicted of falsification in 1920 and served sentence
in the same year. Then, he committed estafa, convicted, and served
sentence in 1925. His last crime was physical injuries committed in
1930. Falsification is a crime against public interests; estafa, against
properly; physical injuries, against person.
The Imposition of additional penalty for habitual delinquency is
constitutional.
It is neither an ex post facto law nor an additional punishment
for former crimes. It is simply a punishment on future crimes, the
penalty being enhanced on account of the criminal propensities of the
accused. (People v. Montera, 55 Phil. 933-934)

Art. 63. Rules for the application of indivisible penalties.
-- In all cases in which the Jaw prescribes a single indivisible
penalty, it shall be applied by the courts regardless of any
mitigating or aggravating circumstances that may have
attended the commission of the deed.
In all cases in which the law prescribes a penalty
composed of two indivisible penalties the following rules shall
be observed in the application thereof:

Outline of the rules.
1.

When the penalty is single indivisible, it shall be applied
regardless of any mitigating or aggravating circumstances.

2.

When the penalty is composed of two indivisible penalties, the
following rules shall be observed:
(a)

When there is only one aggravating circumstance, the
greater penalty shall be imposed.

(b)

When there is neither mitigating nor aggravating
circumstances, the lesser penalty shall be imposed.

(c)

When there is a mitigating circumstance and no aggravating
circumstance, the lesser penalty shall be imposed.

(d)

When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances are
present, the court shall allow them to offset one another.

Article 63 applies only when the penalty prescribed by the Code Is
either one indivisible penalty or two indivisible penalties.

1.
When in the commission of the deed there is present
only one aggravating circumstance, the greater penalty shall
be applied.

Article 63 does not apply when the penalty prescribed by the
Code is reclusion temporal in its maximum period to death, because
although this penalty includes the two indivisible penalties of death
and reclusion perpetua, it has three periods; namely, the minimum
(reclusion temporal maximum); the medium (reclusion perpetua); and
the maximum (death).

2.
When there are neither mitigating nor aggravating
circumstances in the commission of the deed, the lesser
penalty shall be applied.

Single and indivisible penalty.

3.
When the commission of the act is attended by
some mitigating circumstance and there is no aggravating
circumstance, the lesser penalty shall be applied.

In kidnapping and failure to return a minor (Art. 270) and in
rape (Art. 266-B), the penalty is reclusion perpetua, a penalty which
is single and indivisible.

In this case, Article 64 shall apply.

4.
When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances
attended the commission of the act, the courts shall reasonably
allow them to offset one another in consideration of their
number and importance, for the purpose of applying the

Reclusion perpetua to death. This penalty is imposed for parricide
(Art. 246), robbery with homicide (Art. 294, par. 1), kidnapping and

740

741

Example of two indivisible penalties.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

serious illegal detention without intention to extort ransom (Art.
267), and rape committed with the use of a deadly weapon or by two
or more persons. (Art. 266-B)

period, absent any other mitigating or aggravating circumstance.
(People v. Galang, G.R. No. 70713, June 29, 1989, 174 SCRA 454,
460-462)

When the penalty Is composed of two indivisible penalties, the
penalty cannot be lowered by one degree, no matter how many
mitigating circumstances are present.

Moral value, not numerical weight, of circumstances should prevail.

Art. 63

When there are two or more mitigating circumstances and no
aggravating circumstance, the court cannot proceed by analogy to the
provisions of subsection 5 of Article 64 and impose the penalty lower
by one degree. (U.S. v. Guevara, 10 Phil. 37, 38; U.S. w. Relador, 60
Phil. 593, 603-604; People v. Formigones, 87 Phil. 658, 663-664)
In a case, the commission of the crime of parricide punishable
with reclusion perpetua to death was attended by the two mitigating
circumstances of illiteracy and lack of intention to commit so grave
a wrong as that committed, without any aggravating circumstance.
The lower court imposed the penalty next lower, which is reclusion
temporal, applying Article 64, paragraph 5.
Held: The penalty imposed is not correct. The rule applicable in
this case is found in Article 63 and not in Article 64. (U.S. v. Reladcr,
supra)
Exception When a privileged mitigating circumstance under Article 68 or Article
69 is present.
But if the circumstance present is a privileged mitigating
circumstance under Article 68 or Article 69, since a penalty lower by
one or two degrees shall be imposed upon the offender, he may yet
get a penalty one or two degrees lower.

Art. 64

As regards paragraph 4 of Article 63, the moral value rather
than the numerical weight should prevail. (U.S. vu. Bulfa, 25 Phil. 97,
101; U.S. • Antonio, 31 Phil. 205, 212; U.S. vu. Reguera, 41 Phil. 506,
521-522)
Mitigating circumstance Is not necessary to impose reclusion
perpetua when the crime is punishable with two Indivisible penalties
of reclusion perpetua to death.
The reason is that under Article 63, when the crime is penalized
with two indivisible penalties, reclusion perpetua to death, the
lesser penalty should be imposed even when there is no mitigating
circumstance present. (People v. Belarmino, 91 Phil. 118, 122; People
v. Laureano, 71 Phil. 530,537)

Art. 64. Rules for the application ofpenalties which contain
three periods. - In cases in which the penalties prescribed
by law contain three periods, whether it be a single divisible
penalty or composed of three different penalties, each one of
which forms a period in accordance with the provisions of
Articles 76 and77, the courts shall observe for the application
of the penalty the following rules, according to whether there
are or are no mitigating or aggravating circumstances:
1.
When there are neither aggravating nor mitigating
circumstances, they shall impose the penalty prescribed by
law in its medium period.

Thus, if a woman who was being boxed by her husband stabbed
him with a knife in the chest, causing his death, she is entitled to
a penalty one degree lower from reclusion perpetua to death. The
penalty one degree lower is reclusion temporal.

2.
When only a mitigating circumstance is present in
the commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty in
its minimum period.

The imposable penalty for the crime of rape is reclusion perpetua.
The accused being entitled to the privileged mitigating circumstance
of minority, the imposable penalty is reclusion temporal in its medium

3.
When only an aggravating circumstance is present
in the commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty in
its maximum period.

742

743

Art. 64

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

4.
When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances
are present, the court shall reasonably offset those of one class
against the other according to their relative weight.
6. When there are two or more mitigating cireumstanees
and no aggravating eireumstances are present, the court shall
impose the penalty next lower to that prescribed by law, in the
period that it may deem applicable, according to the number
and nature of such circumstances.
6.
Whatever may be the number and nature of the
aggravating circumstances, the courts shall not impose a
greater penalty than that prescribed by law, in its maximum
period.
7.
Within the limits of each period, the courts shall
determine the extent of the penalty according to the number
and nature of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
and the greater or lesser extent of the evil produced by the
crime.

Article 64 applies only when the penalty has three periods.
Thus, Article 64 applies when the penalty prescribed by law for
the offense is reclusion temporal, prision mayor, prision correccional,
arresto mayor, arresto menor, or prision correccional to reclusion
temporal, etc., because they are divisible into three periods (minimum,
medium and maximum).
When the law prescribes a single divisible penalty, as reclusion
temporal for homicide, which according to Article 76, is understood
as distributed in three equal parts, each part forms a period called
minimum, medium, and maximum.
If the penalty is made up of three different penalties, as prision
correccional to reclusion temporal, each forms a period according to
Article 77. Thus, prision correccional will be the minimum; prision
mayor, the medium; and reclusion temporal, the maximum. Prision
mayor is included because it is between prision correccional and
reclusion temporal in Scale No. 1 of Article 71.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 64

Outline of the rules:
1.

No aggravating and no mitigating - medium period.

2.

Only a mitigating

3.

Only an aggravating - maximum period.

minimum period.

Illustration of Rules 1, 2, and 3:
A is convicted of homicide punishable by reclusion temporal,
which has three periods (minimum, medium, and maximum).
a.

If there is no mitigating or aggravating circumstance
- the penalty is reclusion temporal medium (14 years,
8 months and 1 day).

b.

If A pleaded guilty and there is no aggravating
circumstance to offset the mitigating circumstance
of plea of guilty, the penalty is reclusion temporal
minimum (12 years and 1 day).

c.

IfA committed the crime ofhomicide in the dwelling of
the deceased, and there is no mitigating circumstance
to offset the aggravating circumstance of dwelling, the
penalty to be imposed on him is reclusion temporal
maximum (17 years, 4 months, and 1 day).

The R.P.C. provides that when the penalties prescribed
by law contain three periods, whether it be a single divisible
penalty or composed of three different penalties, when neither
aggravating nor mitigating circumstances attend, the penalty
prescribed by law shall be imposed in its medium period. (Taer
v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No. 85204, June 18, 1990, 186 SCRA
598, 606-607; People v. Centeno, G.R. No. 33284, April 20, 1989,
172 SCRA 607, 612)
.
Under Article 248 of the R.PC., the penalty for murder
is reclusion temporal in its maximum period to death. There
being only one mitigating circumstance and no aggravating
circumstance to offset the same, the imposable penalty is the
mmmum pursuant to Article 64, paragraph 2, of the same
Code, which is the maximum period of reclusion temporal.
The Indeterminate Sentence Law applies which provides for a

744
745

Art. 64

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

minimum term within the range of the penalty next lower in
degree to be fixed in any of its periods in the discretion of the
court. Under Article 61, paragraph 3, of the same Code, when
the penally prescribed for the crime is composed of one or two
indivisible penalties, as in this case, the penalty next lower
in degree shall be composed of the medium and minimum
periods of the proper divisible penalty and the maximum of that
immediately following in the scale. The penalty next lower in
degree in the instant case ranges from the maximum ofprision
mayor to the medium degree of reclusion temporal. (People v.
Ordiales, No. L-30956, November 23, 1971, 42 SCRA 238, 248249)

The remaining mitigating circumstance will result
in the imposition of the minimum period of the penalty of
reclusion temporal, the penalty for homicide.
5.

Any or both of the two mitigating circumstances
should not be considered for the purpose of fixing the proper
penalty to be imposed, since they were already taken into
account in reducing the penalty by one degree lower. (Basan
v. People, No. L-39483, November 29, 1974, 61 SCRA 275
277)
'

When there are aggravating and mitigating - the court
shall offset those of one class against the other according
to their relative weight.
The mitigating circumstance must be ordinary, not
privileged; the aggravating circumstance must be generic
or specific, not qualifying or inherent.

Question:

A qualifying circumstance (treachery) cannot be
offset by a generic mitigating circumstance (voluntary
surrender). (People v. Abletes, No. L-33304, July 31, 1974,
58 SCRA 241, 247-248)

A was once convicted by final judgment of the crime of
serious physical injuries. A now committed homicide with
three mitigating circumstances. Is A entitled to a penalty
one degree lower?

Illustration:
A committed homicide in the nighttime, purposely
sought for by him and which facilitated the commission of
the crime. He surrendered to the mayor of the town and
when tried pleaded guilty to the charge.
One mitigating circumstance (either voluntary
surrender or pica of guilty) will offset the aggravating
circumstance of nighttime.

746

Two or more mitigating and no aggravating penalty next
lower, in the period applicable, according to the number
and nature of such circumstances.
The penalty for the offense is reclusion temporal
maximum to reclusion perpetua. (Art. 217, par. 4, R.P.C., as
amended by R.A. No. 1060) That penalty should be lowered
by one degree because of the presence of two mitigating
circumstances. So, the maximum of the indeterminate
penalty should be taken from prision mayor maximum
to reclusion temporal medium. (Art. 64, par. 5, R.P.C.)
And the minimum penalty should be taken from prision
correccional maximum to prision mayor medium. (Ramirez
v. Sandiganbayan, No. 56441, July 25, 1983, 123 SCRA
709, 710-711)

When there are two aggravating circumstances and there
is no mitigating circumstance, the penalty prescribed by law for
the crime should be imposed in its maximum period. (People v.
Mateo, Jr., G.R. Nos. 53926-29, November 13, 1989, 179 SCRA
303,324)
4.

Art. 64

No, because there is an aggravating circumstance of
recidivism. Physical injuries and homicide are embraced
in the same title of the R.P.C. In this case, paragraph 4
applies.
6.

No penalty greater than the maximum period of the penalty
prescribed by law shall be imposed, no matter how many
aggravating circumstances are present.
Thus, even if four generic aggravating circumstances
attended the commission of homicide without any
747

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 64

mitigating circumstance, the court cannot impose the
penalty of reclusion perpetua, which is higher than
reclusion temporal, the penalty for homicide.
Whatever may be the number and nature of the
aggravating circumstances, the courts may not impose a
greater penalty than that prescribed by law in its maximum
period. (Art. 64, par. 6, R.P.C.; People v. Manlolo, G.R. No.
40778, January 26, 1989, 169 SCRA 394, 400-401)
7.

The court can determine the extent of the penalty "within
the limits of each period, according to the number" and
"nature" of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
and the greater or lesser "extent ofthe evil" produced by the
crime.
Example: A crime punished with arresto mayor was
committed with the concurrence of three circumstances,
two aggravating and one mitigating. Under Rule 4, the
penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period (4 mos.
and l day to 6 mos.) shall be imposed.
Under Rule 7, the court can impose an intermediate
penalty between four months and one day to six months.
It may impose four months and one day, five months, or
six months.

The court has discretion to impose the penalty within the limits
fixed by law.
The penalty prescribed by the Code for the offense is prision
mayor or six years and one day to 12years. The court imposed eight
years and one day as the maximum of the indeterminate penalty. The
defense contended that the court should have imposed a maximum
lower than eight years. Is this contention correct?
The contention of the defense is not correct. Where a penalty
imposed is within the limits fixed by law, the charge that it was
excessive is without foundation, as the court imposing the penalty
may exercise discretion in its imposition. (People v. Recto, et al., CAG.R. No. 11341-R, December 13, 1954)
The court imposed the medium period of prision mayor. The
medium period of that penalty is from eight years and one day to 10
years.
748

Art. 64

"Extent of the evil produced."
V deposited in a bank certain checks of no value and later
knowing that he had no money in said bank, issued checks against
it. V was convicted of estafa.
How would you apply paragraph 7 of this Article?
Taking into account the extent of the injury produced by the
offense which, in a certain degree, disturbed the economic life of
a banking institution, it is proper, in accordance with Article 64,
paragraph 7, to impose upon the accused, the maximum of the medium
degree of the penalty. (People v. Velazco, 42 Phil. 75, 81)
Article 64 Is not applicable when the penalty Is indivisible or
prescribed by special law or fine.
Article 64 does not apply to (1) indivisible penalties, (2) penalties
prescribed by special laws, and (3) fines.
Offenses which are punishable under the special laws are not
subject to the provisions of Article 64 of the Revised Penal Code.
(People v. Respecia, L-13569, April 29, 1960)
The penalty imposed being only a fine, the rules established in
Articles 63 and 64 of the Revised Penal Code concerning the presence
of aggravating and mitigating circumstances could not he applied.
(People v. Ching Kuan, 74 Phil. 23)
In what cases are mitigating and aggravating circumstances not
considered in the imposition of penalty?
In the following cases:
1.

When the penalty is single and indivisible. (Art. 63)

2.

In felonies through negligence. The rules for the application
of penalties prescribed hy Article 64 are not applicable to
a case of reckless imprudence under Article 365. (People
v. Quijano, C.A., 43 0.G. 2214; Art. 365)

3.

The penalty to he imposed upon a Moro or other nonChristian inhabitants. It lies in the discretion of the trial
court, irrespective of the attending circumstances. (Sec.
106, Adm. Code of Mindanao and Sulu; People v. Moro
Disimban, 88 Phil. 120, 124)
749

Art. 64

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

4.

SEC. 106 of the Administrative Code of Mindanao
and Sulu provides:
Sentences upon Moros and non-Christians.
In pronouncing sentence upon a Moro or other nonChristian inhabitants of the Department convicted
of crime or misdemeanor, the judge or justice may
ignore any minimum penalty provided by law for
the offense, and may impose such penalty not in
excess of the highest penalty provided by law, as,
in his opinion, after taking into consideration all
the circumstances of the case, including the state of
enlightenment of the accused and the degree of moral
turpitude which attaches to the offense among his
own people, wilt best subserve the interest ofjustice.
The judge or justice may also, in his discretion at any
time before the expiration of the period allowed for
appeal, suspend the execution of any penalty or part
thereof so imposed, subject to such conditions as he
may prescribe.
Appellant being a member of the cultural minority
may be considered in his favor, pursuant to Section 106 of
the Administrative Code of Mindanao and Sulu and entitle
him, regardless of the attending circumstances, to life
imprisonment instead of death. (People v. Antonio Agbot,
L-37641, July 31, 1981)
The term "non-Christian" refers not only to religious
belief but in a way to geographical area and, more
particularly, directly to Philippine natives of a low grade
of civilization. (De Palad v. Saito, 55 Phil. 831, 838)
Section 106 does not apply to a Moro who has lived
in a Christian province for many years. (People v. Salazar
alias Darquez, 105 Phil. 1058)
Acts Nos. 2798 and 2913 extended Section 106 to the
Mountain Province. (People v. Tumbali, C.A., 39 O.G.214;
People v. Cawol, G.R. No. L-7250, March 31, 1955, 96Phil.
972 [Unrep.])

750

Art. 65

When the penalty is only a fine imposed by an ordinance.
For violation of an ordinance, the accused was sentenced to pay a fine of Pl 75.00, after a plea of guilty. Is
he entitled to a mitigating circumstance? No. The penalty
imposed being only a fine, the rules established in Articles
63 and 64 cannot be applied. (People v. Ching Kuan, 74
Phil. 23, 24)

5.

When the penalties are prescribed by special laws. (People
v. Respecia, 58 O.G. 458)

Art. 66. Rules in cases in which thepenalty is not composed
of threeperiods. - In cases in which the penalty prescribed by
law is not composed of three periods, the courts shall apply the
rules contained in the foregoing articles, dividing into three
equal portions the time included in the penalty prescribed,
and forming one period of each of the three portions.
Meaning of the rule.

I.

Compute and determine first the three periods of the entire
penalty.

2.

The time included in the penalty prescribed should be divided
into three equal portions, after subtracting the minimum
(eliminate the one day) from the maximum of the penalty.

3.

The minimum of the minimum period should be the minimum
of the given penalty (including the one day).

4.

The quotient should be added to the minimum prescribed
(eliminate the one day) and the total will represent the maximum
of the minimum period. Take the maximum of the minimum
period, add one day and make it the minimum of the medium
period; then add the quotient to the minimum (eliminate the
one day) of the medium period and the total will represent
the maximum of the medium period. Take the maximum of
the medium period, add one day and make it the minimum of
the maximum period; then add the quotient to the minimum
(eliminate the one day) of the maximum period and the total
will represent the maximum of the maximum period.
761

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Illustration of the computation when the penalty has three periods.

Prision correccional in its medium and maximum periods is
the penalty prescribed by the Code for infanticide committed by the
mother to conceal her dishonor. (Art. 255, par. 2)

Art. 65

1.

Let us take as an example prision mayor which has a duration
of six years and one day to 12 years.

2.

Subtract the minimum (disregarding the one day) from the
maximum, thus12 years - 6 years = 6 years.

3.

Divide the difference by three, thus
6years + 3 = 2years.

4.

Use the minimum of six years and one day ofprision mayor as
the minimum of the minimum period. Then add two years to the
minimum (disregarding the one day) to get the maximum of the
minimum period. Thus - we have eight years as the maximum
of the minimum period. The range of the minimum period is,
therefore, six years and one day to eight years.

5.

Use the maximum of the minimum period as the minimum of
the medium period, and add one day to distinguish it from the
maximum of the minimum period; we have - eight years and
one day. Then add two years to the minimum of the medium
period (disregarding the one day) to get the maximum of the
medium period. The range of the medium period is, therefore,
eight years and one day to 10 years.

6.

Use the maximum of the medium period as the minimum of the
maximum period, and add one day to distinguish it from the
maximum of the medium period; we have
10 years and one
day. Then add two years to the minimum of the maximum period
(disregarding the one day) to get the maximum of the maximum
period. Hence, the range of the maximum period is - 10 years
and one day to 12years.

The computation is not followed in the division ofarresto mayor.
(See Art. 76)
Illustration of the computation when the penalty is not composed
of three periods.

Art. 65

Computation:

The duration ofprision correccional is six months and one day
to six years. 6 years- 6 months = 5 years and 6 months :3 = 1 year
and 10 months.
Minimum

5 months and 1 day to 2years and 4 months.

Medium

2 years, 4 months and 1 day to 4years and 2 months.

Maximum- 4 years, 2 months and 1 day to 6 years.
Since the duration of the penalty of prision correccional in its
medium and maximum periods is two years, four months and one
day to six years, the time included in that penalty should be divided
into three equal portions. Thus
5 years and 12 mos. (or 6 yrs.)
2 years and 14 mos.
3 years and 8 mos. (1 yr.,2 mos. and 20 days)
3 years
6 mos.
2 mos. or 60 days
The duration of each portion after dividing the duration of the
penalty into three equal portions is one year, two months and 20 days.
Since the minimum prescribed by law is two years and four
months, and the duration of each portion is one year, two months
and 20 days, the time comprised in the minimum is from two years,
four months and one day to three years, six months and 20 days.
Computation: The minimum of the minimum is two years, four
months and one day. To obtain the maximum of the minimum we
have to add one year, two months and 20 days to two years and four
months. Therefore, the maximum of the minimum is three years, six
months and 20 days, computed as follows:

Note that Article 65 provides for the rule to be applied when the
penalty prescribed by the Code is not composed of three periods.

2 years, 4 months (and 1 day) - The minimum of the minimum.
+
1 year, 2 months and 20 days - The duration of each portion.
3 years, 6 months and 20 days - The maximum of the minimum.

762

763

Art. 66

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

To obtain the minimum of the medium, add one day to the
maximum of the minimum and make it the minimum of the medium.
Then, to obtain the maximum of the medium, we compute as
follows:
3y.,6 m. and 21 d. -- The minimum of the medium.
1y.,2 m. and 20 d. - The duration of each portion.
4y.,9 m. and 10 d. -- The maximum of the medium.
To obtain the minimum of the maximum, we have to add one
day to the maximum of the medium and make it the minimum of the
maximum.
To obtain the maximum of the maximum, we have to add one
year, two months and 20 days to four years, nine months and 11 days,
as follows:
4y.,9m. and 11 d.+
1y.,2 m. and 20 d.
6 years

The minimum of the maximum.
The duration of each portion.
The maximum of the maximum.

Hence, the maximum is from four years, nine months, and 11
days to six years.
Art. 66. Imposition offines. In imposing fines the courts
may fix any amount within the limits established by law; in
fixing the amount in each case attention shall be given, not
only to the mitigating and aggravating circumstances, but
more particularly to the wealth or means of the culprit.

Outline of this provision:
1.
2.

The court can fix any amount of the fine within the limits
established by law.
The court must consider a.

The mitigating and aggravating circumstances; and

b.

More particularly, the wealth or means of the culprit.
754

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 66

When the minimum of the fine is not fixed.
When the law does not fix the minimum of the fine, the
determination of the amount of the fine to be imposed upon the culprit
is left to the sound discretion of the court, provided it shall not exceed
the maximum authorized by law. (People u. Quinto, 60 Phil. 351, 357358)
Fines are not divided into three equal portions.
The courts are not bound to divide the amount of fine prescribed
by law into three equal portions as in the case of imprisonment
imposed in relation to a divisible penalty.
Wealth or means of culprit is main consideration in fine.
The wealth or means of the culprit is emphasized, because a fixed
amount of fine for all offenders of a particular crime, will result in an
inequality. P10,000.00 to a rich man is chicken-feed; but certainly,
that amount is something to a poor man.
Since a fine is imposed as penalty and not as payment for a
specific loss or injury, and since its lightness or severity depends
upon the culprit's wealth or means, it is only just and proper that
the latter be taken into account in fixing the amount. To an indigent
laborer, for instance, earning Pl.50 a day or about P36.00 a month,
a fine of P10.00 would undoubtedly be more severe than a fine of
Pl00.00 to an officeholder or property owner with a monthly income of
P600.00. Obviously, to impose the same amount of a fine for the same
offense upon two persons thus differently circumstanced would be to
mete out to them a penalty of unequal severity and, hence, unjustly
discriminatory. (People u. Ching Kuan, 74 Phil. 23, 24)
But mitigating and aggravating circumstances are not entirely
disregarded. Factors other than financial condition of accused may
be considered by the court.
Article 66 says that the court may also consider mitigating and
aggravating circumstances.
The court may also consider, in the imposition of the proper
amount of the fine, other factors, such as the gravity or seriousness
of the crime committed, the heinousness of its perpetration, and the
755

Art. 67

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

magnitude of its effects on the offender's victims. (People v. Manuel,
CA-G.R. Nos. 14648-61-R, July 6, 1957)
In view of the mitigating circumstances of voluntary surrender
and restitution, the fine of P10,000.00 may be reduced to P2,000.00.
(Nizurtado v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 107383, December 7, 1994)
Position and standing of accused considered aggravating in
gambling.
a.

Where a person found guilty of violation of the Gambling Law
is a man of station or standing in the community, the maximum
penalty should be imposed. (U.S. v. Salaveria, 39 Phil. 102, 113)

b.

Because the accused in a gambling case was a municipal
treasurer, the Court imposed a fine of P500.00 and one year
imprisonment, the maximum penalty provided by law.(U.S. •
Mercader, 41 Phil. 930, 932)

Art. 67.Penalty to be imposed when not all the requisites of
exemption ofthe fourth circumstance ofArticle 12 are present.
- When all the conditions required in circumstance number
4 of Article 12 of this Code to exempt from criminal liability
are not present, the penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum
period to prision correccional in its minimum period shall
be imposed upon the culprit, if he shall have been guilty of a
grave felony, and arresto mayor in its minimum and medium
periods, if of a less grave felony.

Article 67 applies only when all the requisites of the exempting
circumstance of accident are not present.

Art. 68

2.

That it be performed with due care.

3.

That the injury be caused by mere accident, i.e., by an
unforeseen event.

4.

That there be no fault or intention to cause the injury.

If all these conditions are not present, the act should be
considered as reckless imprudence if the act is executed without
taking those precautions or measures which the most common
prudence would require; and simple imprudence, ifit is a mere lack
of precaution in those cases where either the threatened harm is not
imminent or the danger is not openly visible. The case will fall under
Article 365, paragraph 1.
The penalty provided in Article 67 is the same as that in Article
365.

Art. 68. Penalty to be imposed upon a person under
eighteen years of age. - When the offender is a minor under
eighteen years and his case is one coming under the provisions
of the paragraph next to the last of Article 80 of this Code the
following rules shall be observed:
'
1.
Upon a person under fifteen but over nine years
of age, who is not exempted from liability by reason of the
court having declared that he acted with discernment a
discretionary penalty shall be imposed, but always lower by
two degrees at least than that prescribed by law for the crime
which he committed.
2.
Upon a person over fifteen and under eighteen years
of age the penalty next lower than that prescribed by law shall
be imposed, but always in the proper period.

Circumstance No. 4 of Article 12 refers to the exempting
circumstance of accident.
The conditions necessary to exempt from liability under
Subsection 4 of Article 12 are four:
1.

That the act causing the injury be lawful; that is, permitted
not only by law but also by regulations.
756

Article 68 has been repealed by Republic Act No. 9344, as amended
by Republic Act No. 10630.
Article 68 of the R.P.C. which prescribes the penalty to be
imposed upon a person under 18 years of age has been repealed by
R.A. No. 9344, as amended by R.A. No. 10630, which provides that:
767

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

(1)a child 15 years and under is exempt from criminal responsibility,
and (2) a child above 15 years but below 18 years of age is exempt
from criminal liability unless he/she has acted with discernment.
(Sec. 6, R.A. No. 9344)

He shall undergo an intensive intervention program supervised
by the LSWDO. If the best interest of the child requires that he/she be
placed in a youth care facility or "Bahay Pag-asa," the child's parents
or guardians shall execute a written authorization for the voluntary
commitment of the child.

Art. 68

Republic Act No. 9344, as amended by R.A. No. 10630 (An
Act Strengthening the Juvenile Justice System in the Philippines)
provides the following, among others:
Child under 15 years of age.
A child 15 years and under at the time of the commission of
the offense is exempt from criminal liability. The child shall be
immediately released to the custody of his/her parents or guardian,
or the child's nearest relative, and be subjected to a community-based
intervention program supervised by the local social welfare and
development officer (LSWDO), unless the best interest of the child
requires the referral of the child to a youth care facility or "Bahay
Pag-asa." (Sec. 6, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)

Art. 68

If the child has no parents or guardians or if they refuse or fail
to execute the written authorization for voluntary commitment, the
proper petition for involuntary commitment shall be immediately filed
by the DSWD or the LSWDO. (Sec. 20-B, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)
Child above 15 years of age but under 18 years of age.
An offender over 15 years but under 18 years of age shall be
exempt from criminal liability and be subject to an intervention
program.
If the offender over 15 but under 18 years of age acted with
discernment, he/she shall be subjected to diversion proceedings. (Sec.
6, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)

Child above 12 but under 15 years of age who commits serious
crimes.

Penalty to be imposed.

A child who is above 12 years of age up to 15 years of age and
who commits parricide, murder, infanticide, kidnapping and serious
illegal detention where the victim is killed or raped, robbery, with
homicide or rape, destructive arson, rape, or carnapping where the
driver or occupant is killed or raped or offenses under R.A. No. 9165
(Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002) punishable by more
than 12 years of imprisonment, shall be deemed a neglected child.

If the court finds that the objective of the disposition measures
imposed upon the child in conflict with the law has not been fulfilled,
or if the child in conflict with the law has willfully failed to comply
with the conditions of his/her disposition or rehabilitation program,
the child in conflict with the law shall be brought before the court for
execution of judgment.

He shall be mandatorily placed in a special facility within the
youth care faculty or "Bahay Pag-asa" called the Intensive Juvenile
Intervention and Support Center (IJISC). (Sec. 20-A, R.A. No. 9344,
as amended)
Child above 12 but under 15 years of age who commits another
offense.
A child who is above 12 years of age up to 15 years of age and
who commits an offense for the second time or oftener who was
previously subjected to a community-based intervention program,
shall be deemed a neglected child.
768

If said child in conflict with the law has reached 18 years of age
while under suspended sentence, the court shall determine whether to
discharge the child in accordance with this Act, to order execution of
sentence, or to extend the suspended sentence for a certain specified
period or until the child reaches the maximum age of 21 years. (Sec.
40, RA. No. 9344)
The penalty to be imposed on the child in conflict with the law
shall be the penalty next lower than that prescribed by law, minority
being a privileged mitigating circumstance. (Hubilla v. People, G.R.
No. 176102, November 26, 2014)

759

Art. 69

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Exemption from criminal liability does not include exemption from
civil liability.
The exemption from criminal liability herein established does
not include exemption from civil liability which shall be enforced in
accordance with ex.isting laws. (Sec. 6, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)
Liability for Damages.
The parents shall be liable for damages unless they prove, to
the satisfaction of the court, that they were exercising reasonable
supervision over the child at the time the child committed the offense
and exerted reasonable effort and utmost diligence to prevent or
discourage the child from committing another offense. (Sec. 20-D,
R.A. No. 9344, as amended)
Probation as an alternative to imprisonment
The court may, after it shall have convicted and sentenced a
child in conflict with the law, and upon application at any time, place
the child on probation in lieu of service of his/her sentence taking
into account the best interest of the child. For this purpose, Section
4 of P.D. No. 968, otherwise known as the "Probation Law of 1976,"
is hereby amended accordingly.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 69

"Provided the majority of such conditions be present."
In the case of People v. Alvarez, 44 0.G. 946, the Court of
Appeals refused to apply this article because there was only unlawful
aggression on the part of the victim, but the means employed by the
accused was not reasonable and he (accused) provoked the aggression.
Unlawful aggression is Indispensable in self-defense, defense of
relatives and defense of stranger.
The first circumstance in self-defense, etc. (Subsections 1, 2,
and 3 of Art. 11), which is unlawful aggression must be present. It is
the condition sine qua non for upholding self-defense as a justifying
circumstance. Unless the victim committed unlawful aggression
against the accused, self-defense, whether complete or incomplete,
should not be appreciated, for the two other essential elements of selfdefense would have no factual and legal bases without any unlawful
aggression to prevent or repel. (People v. Dulin, G.R. No. 171284,
June 29, 2015)
Forinstance,B, who was challenged by A to a fight, was the first
to attack A with a knife, whereupon A with similar weapon retaliated
by stabbing B, but in the struggle, B killed A.
Can B be given a reduction of one or two degrees lower than the
penalty prescribed for homicide?

Art. 69. Penalty to be imposed when the crime committed
is not wholly excusable.
A penalty lower by one or two
degrees than that prescribed by law shall be imposed if the
deed is not wholly excusable by reason of the lack of some of
the conditions required to justify the same or to exempt from
criminal liability in the several cases mentioned in Articles
11 and 12, provided that the majority of such conditions be
present. The courts shall impose the penalty in the period
which may be deemed proper, in view of the number and
nature of the conditions of exemption present or lacking.

Penalty for Incomplete Justifying and exempting circumstances.

Although the greater number of the conditions required to
justify the deed, that is, (1) reasonableness of the means employed,
and (2) lack of sufficient provocation, is present, since the essential
or primordial element of unlawful aggression is lacking, be is not
entitled to a reduction. (See U.S. v. Navarro, 7 Phil. 713)
There was no unlawful aggression, because there was an
agreement to fight between A and B. The latter accepted the challenge
by attacking the challenger A.
Let us take a case of homicide in which the provocation and
unlawful aggression came from the deceased, but the means employed
by the offender was not reasonable.

The privileged mitigating circumstances contemplated in Article
69 include the incomplete justifying and incomplete exempting
circumstances, provided the majority of their conditions are present.

In this case, there are present more than one of the requisites
of self-defense. (Guevara)

760

761

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

When two of the essential requisites for justification are present,
the penalty lower by two degrees may be imposed. (People v. Dorado,
43 Phil. 240, 244-245; People v. Lucero, 49 Phil. 160, 162; People v.
Almendrelejo, 48 Phil. 268, 276)

For the purpose of applying the provisions of the next
preceding paragraph the respective severity of the penalties
shall be determined in accordance with the following scale:

Art. 70

I.

Death,

2.

Reclusion perpetua,

"A penalty lower by one or two degrees than that prescribed by
law shall be imposed xxxin the period which may be deemed
proper, in view of the number and nature of the conditions of
exemption present or lacking."

3.

Reclusion temporal,

4.

Prision mayor,

In view of this clause in Article 69, the court has the discretion
to impose one or two degrees lower than that prescribed by law for
the offense.

5.

Prigion correccional,

6.

Arresto mayor,

But in determining the proper period of the penalty one or two
degrees lower, the court must consider the number and nature of the
conditions of exemption or justification present or lacking.
When the majority of the requisites of self-defense and two
mitigating without aggravating circumstances are present, the
penalty is three degrees lower.
Thus, if the accused charged with homicide punishable by
reclusion temporal proved unlawful aggression on the part of the
deceased and another requisite of self-defense; plus two mitigating
circumstances of surrender and obfuscation, without any aggravating
circumstance, the proper penalty for him is arresto mayor medium
or from two months and one day to four months.

7,

Arresto menor,

8.

Destierro,

9.

Perpetual absolute disqualification,

Art. 70

10. Temporary absolute disqualification,
11. Suspension from public office, the right to vote and
be voted for, the right to follow profession or calling, and
12.

Public censure.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the rule next preceding,
the maximum duration of the convict's sentence shall not be
more than three-fold the length of time corresponding to the
most severe of the penalties imposed upon him. No other
penalty to which he may be liable shall be inflicted after the
sum of those imposed equals the said maximum period.
Such maximum period shall in no case exceed forty years.

Art. 70. Successive service of sentences.
When the
culprit has to serve two or more penalties, he shall serve them
simultaneously if the nature of the penalties will so permit;
otherwise, the following rules shall be observed:

In applying the provisions of this rule the duration of
perpetual penalties (pena perpetua) shall be computed at
thirty years. (As amended by Com. Act No. 217)

In the imposition of the penalties, the order of their
respective severity shall be followed so that they may be
executed successively or as nearly as may be possible, should
a pardon have been granted as to the penalty or penalties first
imposed, or should they have been served out.

Outline of the provisions of this Article:

762

1.

When the culprit has to serve two or more penalties, he shall
serve them simultaneously if the nature of the penalties will so
permit.
763

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 70

2.

Otherwise, the order oftheir respective severity shall be followed.

3.

The respective severity of the penalties is as follows:
a.

Death,

b.

Reclusion perpetua,

c.

Reclusion temporal,

d.

Prision mayor,

e.

Prision correccional,

f.

Arresto mayor,

g.

Arresto menor,

h.

Destierro,

Art. 70

Penalties

Penalties consisting in deprivation of liberty cannot be served
simultaneously by reason of the nature of such penalties.
Penalties shall be served simultaneously if the nature of the
penalties will so permit.

i.

Perpetual absolute disqualification,

j.

Temporary absolute disqualification,

k.

Suspension from public office, the right to vote and be voted
for, the right to follow profession or calling, and

I.

Public censure.

Article 70 of the Revised Penal Code allows simultaneous service
of two or more penalties only if the nature of the penalties so permit.
The penalties that can be simultaneously served are: (1) perpetual
absolute disqualification, (2) perpetual special disqualification,
(3) temporary absolute disqualification, (4) temporary special disqualification, (5) suspension, (6) destierro, (7) public censure, (8) fine
and bond to keep the peace, (9) civil interdiction, and (10) confiscation and payment of costs. These penalties, except destierro, can be
served simultaneously with imprisonment. The penalties consisting
in deprivation of liberty cannot be served simultaneously by reason
of the nature of such penalties. Where the accused is sentenced to
two or more terms of imprisonment, the terms should be served
successively. (In the Matter of the Petition for Habeas Corpus of
Pete C. Lagran, G.R. No. 147270, August 15, 2001)
The order of the respective severity of the penalties shall be followed
so that they may be executed successively.

The penalties which can be simultaneously served are:
(a)

TITLE THREE

Perpetual absolute disqualification,

(b)

Perpetual special disqualification,

(c)

Temporary absolute disqualification,

(d)

Temporary special disqualification,

(e)

Suspension,

(f)

Destierro,

(g)

Public censure,

(h)

Fine and bond to keep the peace,

(i)

Civil interdiction, and

(j)

Confiscation and payment of costs.

Thus, where the convict was sentenced on October 28, 1905, to
imprisonment for six months for one offense, and on November 11,
1905, he was sentenced to imprisonment for four months and one day
for another offense, it was held that he should serve the two terms
successively and the time of the second sentence did not commence to
run until the expiration of the first. (Gordon v. Wolfe, 6 PHiL. 76, 78)
Where the defendant was sentenced to three distinct terms
of imprisonment for the separate offenses of frustrated homicide,
trespass, and less serious physical injuries, the three penalties should
be served successively in the order of their severity. (People v. Dola,
59 Phil. 134, 138)
Imprisonment must he served before destierro. Arresto menor
is more severe than destierro. (People v. Misa, CA., 36 O.G. 3697)
System of juridical accumulation of penalties.

The above penalties, except destierro, can be served simultaneously with imprisonment.

Under this system, the maximum duration of a culprit's
confinement shall not exceed three times the most serious of the

764

765

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

penalties imposed upon him, but shall not in any case exceed forty
years. This rule applies although the penalties were imposed for
different crimes or under separate informations or proceedings,
because whether the culprit was tried and convicted in one or several
proceedings, the reasons for the legal precept are the same, namely,
to avoid the absurdity of a man being sentenced to imprisonment for
a longer period than h.is natural life. (Rodriguez v. Director ofPrisons,
L-35386, September 28, 1972)

The three-fold rule applies only when the convict has to serve at
least four sentences.

Art. 70

The three-fold rule.
According to the three-fold rule, the maximum duration of the
convict's sentence shall not be more than three times the length of
time corresponding to the most severe of the penalties imposed upon
him.
Example: A person is sentenced to suffer - 14 years, eight
months and one day for homicide; 17 years, four months and one day
in another case; 14 years and eight months in the third case; and in
a case of frustrated homicide, he is sentenced to 12 years, or a total
of 59 years, eight months and two days.
The most severe of those penalties is 17 years, four months
and one day. Three times that penalty is 52 years and three days.
But since the law has limited the duration of the maximum term of
imprisonment to not more than 40 years, the accused will have to
suffer 40 years only. (See People v. Alisub, 69 Phil. 362, 366; People
v. Lag0y, G.R. No. L-5112, May 14, 1954, 94 Phil. 1050 [Unrep.})
The phrase "the most severe of the penalties" Includes equal
penalties.
Thus, the petitioner for habeas corpus who had been sentenced
in six different cases of estafa, in each of which he was penalized
with three months and 11 days of arresto mayor, cannot be made to
suffer more than three months and 11 days multiplied by three or
nine months and 33 days.
Hence, the petitioner who was in jail for one year and three
months remained there beyond the period allowed under the threefold rule. (Aspra v. Director of Prisons, 85 Phil. 737, 738)

766

Art. 70

If only two or three penalties corresponding to different crimes
committed by the convict are imposed, it is hardly possible to apply
the three-fold rule.
Illustration:
A was convicted of three crimes of homicide for each of
which he was sentenced to 12 years and one day of reclusion
temporal. Adding all the three penalties, you will find a total of
36 years and three days; or multiplying one of the penalties, each
of 12 years and 1 day, by three you will find the same result.
Suppose, for the first homicide A was sentenced to 12 years
and one day; for the second, l4 years, eight months and one day;
and for the third, 17 years, four months and one day; in this
case, the total of all the penalties is 44 years and three days. On
the other hand, 17 years, four months and one day multiply by
three equals 52 years and three days. The three-fold rule does
not apply, because the total of all the penalties is less than the
most severe multiplied by three.
But if A was convicted of four crimes of homicide, for each
of which he was sentenced to 12 years and one day or to different
penalties, the three-fold rule can properly be applied.
Follow the same computation on the basis of four
convictions, the fourth penalty at least equal to any one of the
penalties mentioned, and you will find that the most severe
multiplied by three is less than the sum total of all the penalties.
If the sum total of all the penalties does not exceed the most severe
multiplied by three, the three-fold rule does not apply.
Thus, if A was sentenced to one year for theft, two years for
robbery, one year for estafa, four months for physical injuries, and
four months and one day for slander, the total of all the penalties
being only four years, eight months and one day, which is less than
two years multiplied by three or six years, the three-fold rule does
not apply. The three-fold rule applies only when the total of all the
penalties imposed exceeds the most severe multiplied by three.
767

Art. 70

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Criminal Law
All the penalties, even if by different courts at different times, cannot
exceed three-fold the most severe.

The three-fold rule applies although the penalties were
imposed for different crimes, at different times, and under separate
informations. (Torres v. Superintendent, 58 Phil. 847, 848)
Reason for the ruling.

The Rules of Court specifically provide that an information must
not charge more than one offense. Necessarily, the various offenses
punished with different penalties must be charged under different
information which may be filed in the same court or in different courts,
at the same time or at different times.
Duration of the convict's sentence refers to several penalties for
different offenses, not yet served out.

Note, however, that this rule applies only when the convict has
to serve continuous imprisonment for several offenses. If the convict
already served sentence for one offense, that imprisonment will not be
considered, for the purpose of the three-fold rule, if after this release
he commits again and is convicted of new offenses. Note the opening
sentence ofArticle 70 which says: "When the culprit has to serve two
or more penalties, he shall serve them simultaneously if the nature
of the penalties will so permit." Only penalties which have not yet
been served out can be served simultaneously.
No prisoner shall be required to remain in prison continuously
for more than 40 years. The duration of perpetual penalties is 30
years.
Ifthe sentence is indeterminate, the maximum term is lo be considered.
If the sentence is indeterminate, the basis of the three-fold rule
is the maximum term of the sentence. (People v. Desierto, C.A., 45
O.G. 4542)

Art. 70

has to serve, plus the payment of all indemnities with or without
subsidiary imprisonment, provided the principal penalty does not
exceed six years. (Bagtas v. Director ofPrisons, 84 Phil. 692, 698)
Example: A was found guilty in 17 criminal cases, the most
severe of the 17 sentences being six months and one day plus a fine
of P1,000.00, with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.
After serving 18 months and three days in prison, A filed a
petition for habeas corpus, contending that under Article 70, the
maximum duration of his sentence cannot exceed three-fold the length
of time corresponding to the most severe of the penalties imposed
upon him, which in this case was 18 months and three days. A further
contended that the subsidiary imprisonment for nonpayment of the
fine should be eliminated, because Article 70 provides that "no other
penalty to which he may be liable shall be inflicted after the sum total
of those imposed equals the maximum period."
The subsidiary imprisonment for nonpayment of the fine cannot
be eliminated so long as the principal penalty is not higher than six
years of imprisonment.
The provision of Article 70 that "no other penalty to which he
may be liable shall be inflicted after the sum total of those imposed
equals the said maximum period," simply means that the convict shall
not serve the excess over the maximum of three-fold the most severe
penalty. For instance, if the aggregate of the principal penalties is
six years and that is reduced to two years under the three-fold rule,
he shall not be required to serve the remaining four years.
If the petitioner would not be able to pay the fine, the maximum
duration of his imprisonment shall be 18 months and three days
of the principal penalty plus six months and one day of subsidiary
imprisonment for failure to pay the fine, or a total of two years and
four days. (See Bagtas v. Director of Prisons, supra)
Indemnity is a penalty.

Subsidiary imprisonment forms part of the penalty.

The imposition of three-fold maximum penalty under Article 70
does not preclude subsidiary imprisonment for failure to pay a fine.
The rule is to multiply the highest penalty by three and the
result will be the aggregate principal penalty which the prisoner
768

The accused contended that in applying the three-fold rule, the
court should not have taken into account the indemnity of P498.00
or its con·esponding subsidiary imprisonment.
Held: This contention is without merit for an indemnity, to all
intents and purposes, is considered a penalty, although pecuniary
769

Art. 71

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Different systems of penalty.
There are three different systems of penalty relative to the
execution of two or more penalties imposed on one and the same
accused. They are:

TITLE THREE
Penalties

The courts, in applying such lower or higher penalty,
shall observe the following graduated scales:

SCALENO. l

(1)

The material accumulation system;

(2)

The juridical accumulation system; and

2.

Reclusion perpetua

(3)

The absorption system (the lesser penalties are absorbed
by the graver penalties).

3.

Reclusion temporal

1.

Death

4.

Prision mayor

The material accumulation system.

5.

Previous legislation adopted the theory of absolute accumulation
of crimes and penalties and established no limitation whatever and,
accordingly, all the penalties for all the violations were imposed even
if they reached beyond the natural span of human life. (Guevara)

6.

Prision correccional
Arresto mayor

7.

Destierro

8.

Arresto menor

Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of Article 70 follow the material
accumulation system.

Art. 71

9.

Public censure

10.

Fine.

The juridical accumulation system.
Paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of Article 70 are in accordance with the
juridical accumulation system. The service of the several penalties
imposed on one and the same culprit is limited to not more than
three-fold the length of time corresponding to the most severe and
in no case to exceed 40 years.

SCALE NO. 2
1.

Perpetual absolute disqualification

2.

Temporary absolute disqualification

3.

Suspension from public office, the right to vote and

be voted for, and the right to follow a profession or

The absorption system.

calling

The absorption system is observed in the imposition of the
penalty in complex crimes (Art. 48), continuing crimes, and specific
crimes like robbery with homicide, etc.

Art. 71. Graduated scales. - In the cases in which the law
prescribes a penalty lower or higher by one or more degrees
than another given penalty, the rules prescribed in Article 61
shall be observed in graduating such penalty.

4.

Public censure

6.

Fine.

Death shall no longer form part of the equation In the graduation
of penalties, pursuant to Republic Act No. 9346.

The lower or higher penalty shall be taken from the
graduated scale in which is comprised the given penalty.

The negation of the word "death" as previously inscribed in
Article 71 will have the effect of appropriately downgrading the
proper penalties attaching to accomplices, accessories, frustrated
and attempted felonies to the level consistent with the rest of our
penal laws. Thus, a convicted accomplice in kidnapping for ransom,

772

773

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

would now bear the penalty of reclusion temporal, the penalty one
degree lower than what the principal would bear (reclusion perpetua).
Such sentence would be consistent with Article 52 of the R.P.C., as
well as Article 71, as amended, to remove the reference to "death."
Moreover, the prospect of the accomplice receiving the same sentence
as the principal, an anomalous notion within our penal laws, would
be eliminated. Thus, the same standard would prevail in sentencing
principals and accomplices to the crime of kidnapping in ransom, as
that prescribed to the crime of simple kidnapping.

not from two degrees lower than death, but two degrees lower than
reclusion perpetua. Hence, the maximum term of his penalty shall no
longer be reclusion temporal, as ruled by the Court of Appeals, but
instead, prision mayor. (People v. Bon, G.R. No. 166401, October 30,
2006)

Art. 71

The harmonization that would result if R.A. No. 9346 were
construed as having eliminated the reference to "death" in Article
71 would run across the board in our penal laws. Consistent with
Article 51 of the R.P.C., those convicted of attempted qualified rape
would receive the penalty two degrees lower than that prescribed by
law, now R.A. No. 9346, for qualified rape.
For purposes of legal hermeneutics, the critical question is
whether R.A. No. 9346 intended to delete the word "death" as
expressly provided for in the graduated scale of penalties under
Article 71.
Since Article 71 denominates "death" as an element in the
graduated scale of penalties, there is no question that the operation
of Article 71 involves the actual application of the death penalty as
a means of determining the extent which a person's liberty is to be
deprived. Since R.A. No. 9346 unequivocally bars the application of
the death penalty, as well as expressly repeals all such statutory
provisions requiring the application of the death penalty, such effect
necessarily extends to its relevance to the graduated scale of penalties
under Article 71.
We cannot find basis to conclude that R.A. No. 9346 intended to
retain the operative effects of the death penalty in the graduation of
the other penalties in our penal laws. Henceforth, "death," as utilized
in Article 71 of the R.P.C., shall no longer form part of the equation in
the graduation of penalties. (People v. Bon, G.R. No. 166401, October
30, 2006)
Example:
In the case of an appellant convicted of attempted rape, the
determination of his penalty for attempted rape shall be reckoned
774

Art. 71

What is the penalty next lower in degree from arresto mayor?
Article 71 provides in Scale No. 1 that the penalty next lower
in degree from arresto mayor is destierro.
. Destierro, although a correctional penalty consisting in
banishment (Art. 87) with a duration of six months and one day to
SIX years (Art. 27) is considered not higher than arresto mayor which
is imprisonment of one month and one day to six months.
According to the case of Uy Chin Hua v. Dingalasan, 86 Phil.
617, the scale of penalties in Article 71 which places destierro below
arresto mayor cannot be disregarded and the respective severities of
arresto mayor and destierro must not be judged by the duration ofeach
of these penalties, but by the degree of deprivation ofliberty involved.
The penalty next lower in degree from arresto mayor is destierro.
The metropolitan and municipal courts can impose destlerro.
.
. Offenses penalized by destierro fall under the jurisdiction of
justice of the peace and municipal courts. (People v. Santos, 87 PhI
687,688)
'
•
Under the Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980, B.P. BIg. 129,
as amended by R.A. No. 7691, metropolitan trial courts, municipal
trial courts, and municipal circuit trial courts shall exercise exclusive
original jurisdiction over all offenses punishable with imprisonment
not exceeding six years irrespective of the amount of fine, and
regardless ofother imposable accessory or other penalties, including
the civil liability arising from such offenses or predicated thereon,
Irrespective of kind, nature, value, or amount thereof: Provided,
however, That in offenses involving damage to property through
criminal negligence they shall have exclusive original jurisdiction
thereof.

775

Art. 71

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Must destierro be applied only when it is specifically Imposed by
law?
No. Destierro may be imposed when it is the penalty next lower
and the circumstances require the imposition of a penalty one degree
lower.
The penalty two degrees lower from arresto mayor in its medium
and maximum periods is destierro in its minimum and medium
periods.
max - -}
med.
-

Arresto mayor
(

Destierro

min. - -}

(:::==}

Penalty prescribed by law.

One degree lower.
Two degrees lower.

mln.

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Arts. 72-73

In Article 71, the different principal penalties provided for
in Article 25 are classified and grouped into two graduated scales.
Under Scale No. 1, all personal penalties, such as deprivation of life
and liberty, are grouped together. Under Scale No. 2 are grouped all
penalties consisting in deprivation of political rights.

Art. 72. Preference in the payment of the civil liabilities.
- The civil liabilities of a person found guilty of two or more
offenses shall be satisfied by following the chronological order
of the dates of the final judgments rendered against him,
beginning with the first in order of time.

The person guilty of two or more offenses has two or more civil
liabilities.
This article applies when the offender who is found guilty of two
or more offenses is required to pay the corresponding civil liabilities
resulting from different offenses.

Articles 25, 70, and 71, compared:
Under Article 25, penalties are classified into (1) principal and
(2) accessory penalties. The principal penalties are subdivided into

The order of payment of civil liabilities is based on dates of final
judgments.

capital, afflictive, correctional, and light.

The order of payment of civil liabilities is not based on the dates
of the commission of the offense.

Article 70 classifies the penalties, for the purpose of the
successive service of sentences, according to their severity.
Article 71 provides for the scales which should be observed in
graduating the penalties by degrees in accordance with Article 61.
Note that in Article 71, destierro is placed above arresto menor. The
reason for this is that destierro, being classified as a correctional
penalty, is higher than arresto menor, a light penalty. Article 71,
paragraph 2, speaks of "lower or higher" penalty. Article 70 speaks
of "severity."
Under Article 70, destierro is placed under arresto menor,
according to their respective severity. Destierro is considered lighter
than arresto menor. Under Article 25, destierro is placed above arresto
menor, because it is classified as a correctional penalty.

776

While criminal liability is satisfied by successive service of
sentences in the order of respective severity (Art. 70), civil liability is
satisfied by following the chronological order of the dates of the final
judgments.

Section Three. - Provision common to the last two
preceding sections
Art. 73. Presumption in regard to the imposition of
accessory penalties. - Whenever the courts shall impose
a penalty which by provision of law, carries with it other
penalties, according to the provisions of Articles 40, 41, 42,
777

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

43, 44, and 45 of this Code, it must be understood that the
accessory penalties arc also imposed upon the convict.

next higher by two degrees." (Art. 310) Under Article 71, "in the
cases in which the law prescribes a penalty x x x higher by one or
more degrees than another given penalty," two degrees higher than
reclusion temporal would be death according to Scale No. 1 in said
article.

Art. 74

Accessory penalties are deemed imposed.
The accessory penalties provided for in Articles 40 to 45 are
deemed imposed by the courts without the necessity of making an
express pronouncement of their imposition.
In a case, the Solicitor General suggested that the decision below
be modified to show expressly that appellants were also sentenced to
the accessory penalties provided by law. It was held that there was no
necessity for such modification, as the accessory penalties are deemed
imposed. (People v. Baltazar, CA-G.R. No. 14882-R, May 25, 1956)
Subsidiary Imprisonment, not an accessory penalty.
Subsidiary imprisonment is not an accessory penalty and
therefore, the judgment of conviction must expressly state that
the offender shall suffer the subsidiary imprisonment in case of
insolvency. (People v. Fajardo, 65 Phil. 539, 542)

Art. 75

But under the provisions of Article 74, when a given penalty
has to be raised by one or two degrees and the resulting penalty is
death according to the scale, but is not specifically provided by law as
a penalty, the latter cannot be imposed. The given penalty (reclusion
temporal) and the accessory penalties of death when not executed by
reason of commutation or pardon (Art. 40) shall be imposed.
Application of this article.
The Code has meant to say here that the judgment should
provide that the convict should not be given the benefit of Article 27
(that he should be pardoned after undergoing the penalty for 30 years)
until 40 years have elapsed; otherwise, there would be no difference
at all between reclusion perpetua when imposed as the penalty next
higher in degree and when it is imposed as the penalty fixed by law.
(Albert) In this opinion, the given penalty is reclusion perpetua.
Reason for the provision of this article.

Art. 74. Penalty higher than reclusion perpetua in certain
cases. - In cases in which the law prescribes a penalty higher
than another given penalty, without specifically designating
the name of the former, if such higher penalty should be that
of death, the same penalty and the accessory penalties of
Article 40, shall be considered as the next higher penalty.

Death cannot be the penalty next higher in degree when not provided
bylaw.
Suppose that an employee of the Registry Section of the Bureau
of Posts stole a registered package of diamonds worth P250,000.00.
The penalty for simple theft involving that amount is reclusion
temporal. (Art. 309) The property stolen being mail matter, the crime
is qualified theft and "shall be punished by the penalties (penalty)
778

The penalty higher than reclusion perpetua cannot be death,
because the penalty of death must be specifically imposed by law as
a penalty for a given crime.

Art. 75. Increasing or reducing the penalty offine by one
or more degrees. - Whenever it may be necessary to increase
or reduce the penalty of fine by one or more degrees, it shall
be increased or reduced, respectively, for each degree, by onefourth of the maximum amount prescribed by law, without
however, changing the minimum.
The same rules shall be observed with regard to fines that
do not consist of a fixed amount, but are made proportional.

779

Art. 75

TITLE THREE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Fines are graduated Into degrees for the accomplices and
accessories and for the principals in frustrated and attempted
felonies.
Fines are also graduated into degrees for the imposition of the
proper amount of the fine on accomplices and accessories or on the
principals in frustrated or attempted felonies. (Arts. 50 to 57)
Increasing or reducing the penalty of fine.

Penalties

Art. 76

A, a minor l years and two months old, committed acts tending
to prevent the meeting of a provincial board under Article 143. The
penalty is prision correccional or a fine from P200.00 to P2,000.00 or

both. Being a minor, A must be given a penalty one degree lower in
accordance with Article 68. The penalty one degree lower is arresto
mayor or a fine from 1'200.00 to P1,500.00. Under Article 75, the court
cannot change the minimum of P200.00, even if the offender is a poor
man. (See People v. Rodriguez, G.R. No. L-6300, April 20, 1954)
This article, therefore, does not apply when the law does not fix
the minimum of the fine.

Example:
If the fine is from P20,000.00 to P200,000.00, each degree is
1/4 of P200,000.00 or P50,000.00. The minimum of P20,000.00 is not
changed.
Thus, one degree lower would be P20,000.00 as minimum to
P150,000.00 (P200,000.00 less P50,000.00) as maximum. Two degrees
lower would be P20,000.00 as minimum to P100,000.00 [P200,000.00
less P100,000.00 (P 50,000.00 x 2)] as maximum.
Conversely, one degree higher would be P20,000.00 as minimum
to P250,000.00 (P200,000.00 plus P50,000.00) as maximum. Two
degrees higher would be P20,000.00 as minimum to P300,000.00
[P200,000.00 plus Pl00,000.00 (P50,000.00 X 2)] as maximum.
For the guidance of the bench and bar, in reducing the penalty of
fine by one or more degrees, the basis for the reduction of the first as
well as the second degree must necessarily be the penalty prescribed
by Jaw for the consummated felony. Thus, where the maximum fine
fixed for the consummated offense is not more than P2,000.00, the
fine for the frustrated felony is determined by reducing the maximum
by one-fourth, which is Pl,500.00. Reducing it further by one degree
for attempted felony, the second reduction by one-fourth should be
based on P2,000.00, not on the penalty as reduced (P1,500.00) so that
the maximum fine as reduced by two degrees would be P1,000.00.(De
Los Angeles v. People, 103 Phil. 295, 297-298)

Determination of amount of reduced fine.
There are cases where it becomes necessary to reduce the fines,
because the penalty has to be lowered by one or two degrees. In
determining the amount of the reduced fine, a distinction should be
made between cases where the minimum of the fine is fixed by law
and those where the minimum is not fixed by Jaw.
In Articles 143, 144, and 150, for instance, the Code fixes the
minimum as well as the maximum of the fines. In Articles 114, 115,
and 129, for instance, the minimum of the fine is not fixed.
When the minimum Is not fixed by law.
When only the maximum of the fine is fixed, the determination
of the amount to be imposed is left to the sound discretion of the
courts, without exceeding the maximum authorized by law. (People
v. Quinto, 60 Phil. 351, 357)
Distinctions between fine with a minimum and fine without a
minimum.
1.

In both, the Jaw fixes the maximum of the fine.

2.

When the law fixes the minimum of the fine, the court cannot
change that minimum; whereas, when the law does not state
the minimum of the fine but only the maximum, the court can
impose any amount not exceeding such maximum.

3.

When the law fixes both the minimum and the maximum, the
court can impose an amount higher than the maximum; whereas,
when only the maximum is fixed, it cannot impose an amount
higher than the maximum.

"Without changing the minimum."
This article specifically mentions the word "minimum" of the fine.
Under this article, the fine must have a minimum and a maximum
fixed by law.
780

781

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 76

As to "fines that do not consist of a fixed amount, but are made
proportional."
The last paragraph of this article speaks of fines which are not
of fixed amount, but are made proportional.

Art. 76

(2)

Subtract the minimum (disregarding the 1 day) from the
maximum; thus-

(3)

Divide the difference by 3; thus

(4)

Use the minimum of 12 years and 1 day of reclusion
temporal as the minimum of the minimum period. Then
add 2 years and 8 months to the minimum (disregarding
the 1 day) to get the maximum of the minimum period.
Thus, we have 14 years and 8 months as the maximum of
the minimum period. The range of the minimum period is,
therefore, 12 years and 1 day to 14 years and 8 months.

(5)

Use the maximum of the minimum period as the minimum
of the medium period, and add 1 day to distinguish it from
the maximum of the minimum period; we have 14 years,
8 months and 1 day. Then add 2 years and 8 months to
the minimum of the medium period (disregarding the 1
day); we have ll years and 4 months, as the maximum
of the medium period. The range of the medium period is,
therefore, 14 years, 8 months and 1 day to 17 years and 4
months.

(6)

Use the maximum of the medium period as the minimum of
the maximum period, and add 1 day to distinguish it from
the maximum of the medium period; we have 17 years, 4
months and 1 day. Then add 2 years and 8 months to the
minimum of the maximum period (disregarding the 1 day);
and we have 20 years. Hence, the range of the maximum
period is 17 years, 4 months and 1 day to 20 years.

20 years- 12years = 8 years
8years : 3 = 2years and 8 months.

Examples:
When the negligent act resulted in damage to property of
another, the fine shall be from an amount equal to the value of the
damage to three times such value, but shall in no case be less than
25 pesos. (Art. 365, par. 3)
In the crime of direct bribery (Art. 210) involving a bribe of
P2,300.00, the maximum fine is P6,900.00 (three times the value of the
gift), and that amount (P6,900.00) should be the basis for lowering the
penalty by two degrees, which is the penalty for attempted bribery.
(De los Angeles v. People, 103 Phil. 295, 298-299)
In this case, the minimum of the fine is P2,300.00 and the
maximum is P6,900.00. The fine for attempted bribery is determined,
as follows: Take one-fourth of P6,900.00, which is P1,725.00. Reducing
the maximum by one-fourth, we have P5,175.00. Reducing it further
by one-fourth of the maximum, we have P3,450.00. This amount is
the maximum of the fine for attempted bribery. The court can fix any
amount of the fine from P2,300.00 to P3,450.00.

Art. 76. Legal period of duration of divisible penalties.
-- The legal period of duration of divisible penalties shall be
considered as divided into three parts, forming three periods,
the minimum, the medium, and the maximum in the manner
shown in the following table. (Seep. 786)

Article 76 shows the manner divisible penalties are divided Into
three periods.

When the penalty is composed of three periods corresponding to
different divisible penalties.

For instance, the time included in each of the periods of reclusion
temporal is determined, as follows:

If the R.P.C. prescribes the penalty of prision correccional in
its medium and maximum periods to prision mayor in its minimum
period, what is the duration of each of its three periods?

Reclusion temporal has a duration of 12 years and 1 day
as the minimum to 20 years, as the maximum.

The time included in the prescribed penalty is from 2 years,
4 months and 1 day to 8 years.

(1)

782

783

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE

Criminal Law

Penalties

Must the duration of each of the three periods of the prescribed
penalty be that of the period of the corresponding divisible penalty
included in the prescribed penalty, as follows:

each of the divisible penalties mentioned in the table in that article,
except that of arresto mayor, is divided into three equal portions.

Art. 76

Minimum -

2 years, 4 months and 1 day to 4 years and 2
months (the medium ofprision correccional),

Medium -

4 years, 2 months and 1 day to 6 years (the
maximum of prision correccional), and

Maximum - 6 years and 1 day to 8 years (the minimum of
prision mayor),
or must the time included in the prescribed penalty be divided into
three equal portions, each to form one period, as follows:
Minimum -

2 years, 4 months and 1 day to 4 years, 2 months
and 20 days,

Medium

4 years, 2 months and 21 days to 6 years, 1 month
and 10 days, and

-

Maximum - 6 years, 1 month and 11 days to 8 years?
It will be noted that, in the first, the duration of the minimum
period of the penalty is the time included in the medium period of
prision correccional; the duration of the medium period of the penalty
is the time included in the maximum period of prision correccional;
and the duration of the maximum period is the time included in the
minimum period of prision mayor. The penalty is not divided into
three equal parts to form the three periods. While the time included
in its minimum and medium periods is one year and eight months,
the time included in its maximum period is two years.
It seems that the intention of the Legislature when it enacted
the law (R.P.C.) is to give the three periods of a divisible penalty equal
or uniform duration. Even in cases in which the penalty prescribed
by law is not composed of three periods, the courts shall divide "into
three equal portions the time included in the penalty prescribed,
xxxforming one period of each of the three portions." (Art. 66)

It is noted that Article 76 provides that "divisible penalties shall
be considered as divided into three parts, forming three periods,"
without stating that the three parts must be the three equal portions
of the time included in the divisible penalties, but the time included in
784

Art. 76

It may be argued that the duration of each of the periods of those
divisible penalties is fixed by Article 76 and must be maintained even
if it is included in a different three-period penalty. But Article 76
does not even remotely suggest it. On the contrary, the phrase in that
article, which reads: "in the manner shown in the following table,"
indicates merely the way or method of dividing into three periods the
divisible penalties as those mentioned in the table.
Those which are fixed in the table are respectively the periods of
the divisible penalties mentioned therein. To maintain the durations
of those periods even when one or two of them form part of a prescribed
three-period penalty is to give the periods of the prescribed penalty
different durations as earlier indicated. It would be the only divisible
penalty where the duration of one of its three periods is not equal
to that of the others. When the prescribed penalty does not have
three periods, it has to be divided into three equal portions for the
application of the rules contained in Article 64. When the penalty
prescribed is any of the divisible penalties enumerated in Article 25,
its three periods, except those of arresto mayor, are the three equal
portions of the divisible penalty. The penalty composed of several
periods corresponding to different divisible penalties cannot be the
exception, for there is no legal or practical basis for the exception.
It is clear that the duration of each of the periods of the divisible
penalties as fixed in the table in Article 76 of the R.P.C. is not
controlling when the penalty prescribed is composed of three periods
corresponding to different divisible penalties.
The division of arresto mayor into three equal periods does not
follow the rule.
According to the table prepared under Article 76, the three
periods of arresto mayor are:
Minimum period

1 month and 1 day to 2 months.

Medium period

- 2 months and 1 day to 4 months.

Maximum period

4 months and 1 day to 6 months.

785

Art. 76

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 77

Distinction between "period" and "degree."
co

The R.P.C., unlike the old Penal Code, clearly establishes a
distinction between "period" and "degree," by designating as a "period"
each of the three equal parts of a divisible penalty and designating
as a "degree" the diverse penalties mentioned by name in the R.P.C.
(People u. Padilla, 36 O.G. 2404)

., 0

.c-

c

>,
0 ...
8 'ti

1l

o

"'s

·Zz
8 C O
0 ..
le

8

r..

[i:l

s

: fl)
6
h

r..

"' .
sz

«

e0 o8

r!:

co

.cs

i:0 >,.. .
s ;! :5
8 aC O
o .. e

r!:

?

Art. 77. When the penalty is a complex one composed of
three distinct penalties. In cases in which the law prescribes
a penalty composed of three distinct penalties, each one shall
form a period; the lightest of them shall be the minimum, the
next the medium, and the most severe the maximum period.
Whenever the penalty prescribed does not have one of
the forms specially provided for in this Code, the periods shall
be distributed, applying by analogy the prescribed rules.

s
What is a complex penalty?
It is a penalty prescribed by law composed of three distinct
penalties, each forming a period; the lightest of them shall be the
minimum, the next the medium, and the most severe the maximum
period. (Art. 77)
When the penalty ls composed of three distinct penalties.
When the law prescribes a penalty composed of three distinct
penalties, each one shall form a period.
Example: Reclusion temporal to death (Art. 114).

786

Maximum -

Death.

Medium

Reclusion perpetua (this is between reclusion
temporal and death).

Minimum

reclusion temporal.

787

Art. 77

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Application by analogy of the rules.
Examples:
1.

Article 114, paragraph 3, provides a penalty of prision
mayor to death. The penalty is composed of four distinct
penalties, namely, prision mayor, reclusion temporal,
reclusion perpetua, and death.
The maximum period must be death, it being
indivisible; the medium period must be reclusion perpetua,
it being also indivisible; and the minimum period must be
composed of prision mayor and reclusion temporal.

2.

Article 294, paragraph 2, provides a penalty of reclusion
temporal in its medium period to reclusion perpetua. The
penalty is composed of two distinct penalties.
The maximum is reclusion perpetua, it being indivisible; the medium is reclusion temporal in its maximum
period; and the minimum is reclusion temporal in its
medium period.

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW
(Act No. 4103 as amended by Act No. 4225)
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR AN INDETERMINATE
SENTENCE AND PAROLE FOR ALL PERSONS CONVICTED
OF CERTAIN CRIMES BY THE COURTS OF THE PHILIP PINE
ISLANDS; TO CREATE A BOARD OF INDETERMINATE
SENTENCE AND TO PROVIDE FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES.
SECTION 1. Hereafter, in imposing a prison sentence for an
offense punished by the Revised Penal Code, or its amendments, the
court shall sentence the accused to an indeterminate sentence the
maximum term of which shall be that which, in view of the attending
circumstances, could be properly imposed under the rules of the said
Code, and the minimum of which shall be within the range of the
penalty next lower to that prescribed by the Code for the offense; and
if the offense is punished by any other law, the court shall sentence
the accused to an indeterminate sentence, the maximum term of which
shall not exceed the maximum fixed by said law and the minimum
shall not be less than the minimum term prescribed by the same. (As
amended by Act No. 4225)
SECTION 2. This Act shall not apply to persons convicted of
offenses punished with death penalty or life-imprisonment; to those
convicted of treason, conspiracy or proposal to commit treason; to those
convicted of misprision of treason, rebellion, sedition or espionage; to
those convicted of piracy; to those who are habitual delinquents; to
those who shall have escaped from confinement or evaded sentence;
to those who having been granted conditional pardon by the Chief
Executive shall have violated the terms thereof; to those whose
maximum term of imprisonment does not exceed one year, nor to
those already sentenced by final judgment at the time of approval of
this Act, except as provided in Section five hereof. (As amended by
Act No. 4225)

788

789

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

SECTION 3. There is hereby created a Board of Pardons and
Parole to be composed of the Secretary of Justice who shall be ita
chairman, and four members to be appointed by the President, with
the consent of the Commission on Appointments who shall hold office
for a term of six years: Provided, That one member of the board shall
be a trained sociologist, one a clergyman or educator, one psychiatrist
unless a trained psychiatrist be employed by the board, and the other
members shall be persons qualified for such work by training and
experience. At least one member of the board shall be a woman. Of
the members of the present board, two shall be designated by the
President to continue until December thirty, nineteen hundred and
sixty-nine. In case of any vacancy in the membership of the Board, a
successor may be appointed to serve only for the unexpired portion of
the term of the respective members. (As amended by RA. No. 4203,
approved June 19, 1965)

with the rules and regulations prescribed and from the study and
investigation made by the Board itself, that such prisoner is fitted
by his training for release that there is a reasonable probability that
such prisoner will Jive and remain at liberty without violating the
law, and that such release will not be incompatible with the welfare of
society, said Board of Indeterminate Sentence may, in its discretion,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder,
authorize the release of such prisoner on parole, upon such terms
and conditions as are herein prescribed and as may be prescribed
by the Board. The said Board of Indeterminate Sentence shall also
examine the records and status of prisoners who shall have been
convicted of any offense other than those named in Section two hereof,
and have been sentenced for more than one year by final judgment
prior to the date on which this Act shall take effect, and shall make
recommendations in all such cases to the Governor General (President
of the Philippines) with regard to the parole of such prisoners as they
shall deem qualified for parole as herein provided, after they shall
have served a period of imprisonment not less than the minimum
period for which they have been sentenced under this Act for the
same offense.

SECTION 4. The Board of Pardons and Parole is authorized to
adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for carrying
out its functions and duties. The Board is empowered to call upon
any bureau, office, branch, subdivision, agency, or instrumentality
of the Government for such assistance as it may need in connection
with the performance of its functions. A majority of all the members
shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote shall be necessary to
arrive at a decision. Any dissent from the majority opinion shall be
reduced to writing and filed with the records of the proceedings. Each
member of the Board, including the Chairman and Executive Officer,
shall be entitled to receive as compensation Fifty pesos for each
meeting actually attended by him, notwithstanding the provisions
of Sec. 259 of the Revised Administrative Code, and in the addition
thereto, reimbursement of actual and necessary traveling expenses
incurred in the performance of duties: Provided, however, That the
Board meeting will not be more than three times a week. (As amended
by R.A. No. 4203, approved June 19, 1965)

SECTION 6. Every prisoner released from confinement on parole
by virtue of this Act shall, at such times and in such manner as may
be required by the conditions of his parole, as may be designated by
the said Board for such purpose, report personally to such government
officials or other parole officers hereafter appointed by the Board of
Indeterminate Sentence for a period of surveillance equivalent to
the remaining portion of the maximum sentence imposed upon him
or until final release and discharge by the Board of Indeterminate
Sentence as herein provided, x x x. The limits of residence of such
paroled prisoner during his parole may be fixed and from time
to time changed by the said Board in its discretion. If during the
period of surveillance such paroled prisoner shall show himself to
be a Jaw-abiding citizen and shall not violate any of the Jaws of the
Philippine Islands, the Board of Indeterminate Sentence may issue
a final certification of release in his favor, which shall entitle him to
final release and discharge.

SECTION 5. It shall be the duty of the Board oflndeterminate
Sentence to look into the physical, mental and moral record of the
prisoners who shall be eligible to parole and to determine the proper
time of release of such prisoners. Whenever any prisoner shall have
served the minimum penalty imposed on him, and it shall appear
to the Board of Indeterminate Sentence, from the reports of the
prisoner's work and conduct which may be received in accordance

SECTION 7. The Board shall file with the court which passed
judgment on the case and with the Chief of Constabulary, a certified
copy of each order of conditional or final release and discharge issued
in accordance with the provisions of the next preceding two sections.

790

791

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

SECTION 8. Whenever any prisoner released on parole by
virtue of this Act shall, during the period of surveillance, violate any
of the conditions of his parole, the Board of Indeterminate Sentence
may issue an order for his arrest which may be served in any part
of the Philippine Islands by any police officer. In such case the
prisoner so rearrested shall serve the remaining unexpired portion
of the maximum sentence for which he was originally committed
to prison, unless the Board of Indeterminate Sentence shall, in its
discretion, grant a new parole to the said prisoner. (As amended by
Act No. 4225) x xx

The law should be applied in imposing a prison sentence for a
crime punishable either by special law or by the Revised Penal Code.

The Indeterminate Sentence Law (ISL).
The ISL requires the courts to impose an indeterminate sentence
with a maximum and minimum term for offenses punishable by the
R.P.C. and special laws. With the passage of the ISL, the law created
a prison term which consists of a minimum and maximum term called
the indeterminate sentence.
The penalty is considered "indeterminate" because after the
convict serves the minimum term, he or she may become eligible
for parole under the provisions of the ISL, which leaves the period
between the minimum and maximum term indeterminate in the
sense that he or she may, under the conditions set out in said Act,
be released from serving said period in whole or in part. (People v.
Ducosin, 59 Phil. 109, 114)
Purpose.
The purpose of the Indeterminate Sentence Law is "to uplift
and redeem valuable human material, and prevent unnecessary and
excessive deprivation of personal liberty and economic usefulness."
(People v. Ducosin, 59 Phil. 109, 117)
The Indeterminate Sentence Law aims to individualize the
administration of our criminal law.
The court must determine two penalties.
The court must, instead of a single fixed penalty, determine
two penalties, referred to in the Indeterminate Sentence Act as the
"MAXIMUM" and "MINIMUM" terms.
792

When the crime is punished by the Code Maximum term: that which could be properly imposed under
the R.P.C., in view of the attending circumstances
Minimum term: within the range of the penalty next lower to
that prescribed by the Code for the offense
The mitigating or aggravating circumstance is required to
be considered only in the imposition of the maximum term of the
indeterminate sentence. (People v. De Joya, 98 Phil. 238, 240)
The court cannot put the minimum penalty in the same period
and the same degree as the maximum penalty, because the minimum
penalty "shall be within the range of the penalty next lower to that
prescribed by the Code for the offense."
The penalty next lower must be based on the penalty prescribed
by the Code for the offense, without considering in the meantime the
modifying circumstances, such as, the mitigating or aggravating
circumstances. (People v. Gonzales, 73 Phil. 549, 552)
In determining the "minimum" penalty, Act No. 4103, as
amended, confers upon the courts in fixing the penalties the widest
discretion that the courts have ever had. (People v. Ducosin, supra;
Basan v. People, No. L-39483, November 29, 1974, 61 SCRA 275, 277)
In determining the minimum term, it is left entirely within
the discretion of the court to fix it anywhere within the range of the
penalty next lower without reference to the periods into which it may
be subdivided. (People v. Ducosin, supra, at 117)
Hence, if the minimum term of the indeterminate sentence
is arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods, which has a
duration of two months and one day to four months, the court may
impose four months of imprisonment, even if there is no aggravating
circumstance. For the same reason, the court may impose two months
and one day, even if there is an aggravating circumstance, it being
discretionary to the court to impose the minimum term anywhere
within its range.
793

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

Criminal Law

When there is a privileged mitigating circumstance, so that
the penalty has to be lowered by one degree, the starting point for
determining the minimum term of the indeterminate penalty is the
penalty next lower from that prescribed by the Code for the offense.
(People v. Gonzales, 73 Phil. 549, 552)
When the crime is punished by a special lawMaximum term: shall not exceed the maximum fixed by such

Therefore, the indeterminate sentence will be:
MAXIMUM

prision mayor minimum, in its proper period
after considering the mitigating circumstance.

MINIMUM

prision correccional, in any of its periods
or anywhere within the range of prision
correccional without reference to any of its
periods.

law
Minimum term: shall not be less than the minimum term
prescribed by such law
Examples of application of Indeterminate Sentence Law -

Under Special law:
A is convicted of illegal possession of firearm punishable by
imprisonment from one year and one day to five years.
The court can impose an indeterminate sentence from two years
and one day, as the minimum term, to four years, as the maximum
term; two years and one day to three years; or three years and one
day to five years.
The maximum term of each of the different examples does not
exceed the maximum of five years prescribed by the law, and the
minimum term is not less than the minimum of one year and one day
prescribed by the said law.
Under the Revised Penal Code:
A is convicted of falsification of official document committed by
a public officer penalized by prision mayor. There is one mitigating
circumstance of plea of guilty.
To determine the penalty next lower, disregard first the
mitigating circumstance of pica of guilty. Hence, prision mayor in its
full extent, the penalty prescribed by the Code for the offense, should
be the basis, and not prision mayor minimum, because it is not the
penalty "prescribed by the Code for the offense."

The maximum term is determined according to the rules of the Code.

The maximum term of the indeterminate penalty is determined
in any case punishable under the R.P.C. in accordance with the rules
and provisions of the Code exactly as if the Indeterminate Sentence
Law had never been enacted.
The rules and provisions which must be applied to determine
the maximum term of the indeterminate penalty are those provided
in Articles 46, 48, 50 to 57, 61, 62 (except par. 5), 64, 65, 68, 69,
and 71.
The rules of the Code are not applicable in fixing the minimum term.

The rules and provisions in those articles, particularly Articles
50 to 57, 62, 64, and 65, are not applicable in fixing the minimum term
of the indeterminate penalty. The duration of the minimum term is
within the range of the penalty next lower to that prescribed by the
Code for the offense, without regard to its three periods. The court has
the discretion to fix as the minimum term any period of imprisonment
within the penalty next lower to that prescribed by the Code for the
offense.
When modifying circumstances considered.

Prision mayor minimum becomes the proper penalty only
because of the presence of the mitigating circumstance of plea of
guilty. The penalty next lower is prision correccional.

Under the Indeterminate Sentence Law, the maximum term of
the penalty shall be 'that which, in view of the attending circumstances,
could be properly imposed' under the R.PC., and the minimum shall
be 'within the range of the penalty next lower to that prescribed' for
the offense, without first considering any modifying circumstance
attendant to the commission of the crime. The determination of the
minimum penalty is left by law to the sound discretion of the court
and it can be anywhere within the range of the penalty next lower

794

795

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

account of his rank or age (Art. 14, No. 3, R.P.C.), which shall
be merged into one circumstance (People v. Kho Choc, 50 0.G.
1667), the penalty imposable on A is reclusion temporal in its
maximum period. (Art. 64, No. 3, R.P.C.) The minimum term of
the indeterminate penalty is also anywhere within the range of
prision mayor with or without reference to the period into which
it may be subdivided.

without any reference to the periods into which it might be subdivided.
The modifying circumstances are considered only in the imposition of
the maximum term of the indeterminate sentence. (People v. Gabres,
267 SCRA 581)
Illustrations of Indeterminate penalty based on Articles 48, 61, 64,
68, 69, etc. of the Revised Penal Code.
l. Indeterminate penalty, when neither mitigating circumstance
nor aggravating circumstance attended the commission of the
crime. (Art. 64, par. 1)

4.

In the example under No. 1, if after committing homicide
at nighttime purposely sought by A to better accomplish his
purpose (Art. 14, par. 6), he surrendered voluntarily to the agent
of authority and during the arraignment pleaded guilty to the
charge (Art. 13, par. 7), there is one mitigating circumstance
left after offsetting the aggravating circumstance of nighttime
with the two mitigating circumstances. Hence, the penalty of
reclusion temporal should be imposed in the minimum period.
(Art. 64, par. 4)

A was prosecuted for, and was found guilty after a regular
trial of, homicide under Article 249 which prescribes the penalty
of reclusion temporal. There being no mitigating or aggravating
circumstance, the maximum term of the indeterminate penalty,
which is reclusion temporal, should be imposed in the medium
period. (Art. 64, par. 1) The minimum term of the indeterminate
penalty is anywhere within the range of prision mayor, the
penalty next lower from reclusion temporal (Art. 71), with or
without reference to the period into which it may be subdivided.
2.

3.

The MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is reclusion
temporal minimum and the MINIMUM is prision mayor in any
of its periods or anywhere within its range.

Indeterminate penalty, when there is one ordinary mitigating
circumstance. (Art. 64, par. 2)
In the preceding example, if A pleaded guilty before the
presentation of evidence by tbe prosecution, there being no
aggravating circumstance to offset it, the maximum term of the
indeterminate penalty, which is reclusion temporal, should be
imposed in the minimum period. (Art. 64, par. 2) The minimum
term of the indeterminate penalty is also anywhere within the
range of prision mayor, the penalty next lower from reclusion
temporal, with or without reference to the period into which it
may be subdivided. His plea of guilty is required to be considered
(by way of mitigation) only in the imposition of the maximum
term of his sentence. (People v. De Joya, 98 Phil. 238, 240)
Indeterminate penalty, when there is only an aggravating
circumstance. (Art. 64, par. 3)
In the example under No. 1, if in the execution of the
crime concurred the generic aggravating circumstances of
relationship (Art. 15, R.P.C.) and that it was committed with
insult or in disregard of the respect due the offended party on
796

Indeterminate penalty, when there are mitigating and
aggravating circumstances. (Art. 64, par. 4)

5.

Indeterminate penalty, when the crime committed is complex
under Article 48.
(a) A was convicted of a complex crime of frustrated
homicide with assault upon an agent of a person in authority
under Article 249, in relation to Article 6, Article 148, and Article
48 of the R.P.C. The penalty for homicide is reclusion temporal.
Being frustrated, the penalty should be one degree lower
(Art. 50) or prision mayor. The penalty for assault is prision
correccional in its medium and maximum periods. Therefore,
the penalty for the complex crime is prision mayor, the penalty
for the graver offense, the same to be applied in its maximum
period. The MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is prision
mayor maximum and the MINIMUM is prision correccional in
its maximum period. (People v. Dosal, 92 Phil. 877)
(b) Where the accused was convicted of the complex crime
of estafa through falsification of a public document (Art. 315,
case No. 4, in connection with Arts. 171 and 48 of the Code),
797

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
and the penalty is prision mayor to be applied in its maximum
period plus a fine not to exceed P5,000.00 (now P 1,000,000.00,
the penalty for falsification which is the graver offense), the
MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is within the maximum
period of prision mayor and the MINIMUM is within that next
lower in degree to prision mayor, namely, prision correccional.
(Lontoc v. People, 74 Phil. 513, 520)
6.

7.

Indeterminate penalty, when the penalty is next lower by two
degrees than that prescribed by law for the crime threatened and
there is one aggravating circumstance.
A threatened to kill B if the latter would not give him a
certain sum of money. A failed to attain h.is purpose, because he
was arrested by the police upon complaint by B. Under Article
282, No. 1, of the R.P.C., the crime of grave threats, when the
offender did not attain his purpose, is punishable with a penalty
next lower by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the
crime threatened, which in this case is homicide. The penalty
for homicide is reclusion temporal. In the execution of the crime
concurred the generic aggravating circumstances of relationship
(Art. 15, R.P.C.) and that it was committed with insult or in
disregard of the respect due the offended party on account of
h.is rank or age (Art. 14, No. 3, R.P.C.), which shall be merged
into one circumstance.
Held: The penalty imposable on A is prision correccional
in its maximum period or from four years, two months and one
day to six years. (People v. Kho Choe, 50 O.G. 1667)
It will be noted that the penalty of reclusion temporal, the
penalty for the crime threatened to be committed, is lowered
first by two degrees to determine the penalty for the crime of
grave threats actually committed by A, before fixing the latter
penalty in its proper period. The penalty ofprision correccional
was fixed in its maximum period, because of the presence of one
aggravating circumstance ofrelationship or disregard ofrespect
due the offended party.
Therefore, the maximum term of the indeterminate
penalty is prision correccional in its maximum period and the
minimum term of the indeterminate penalty is anywhere within
the range of arresto mayor, the penalty next lower from prision
correccional.
798

1

13
+

J

1
1

l

:j
4

l

$

1

Indeterminate penalty, when the accused is convicted ofa complex
crime and there are two mitigating circumstances without any
aggravating circumstance. (Arts. 48 and 64, par. 5)
(a) The crime committed is estafa through falsification
by a public officer under No. 4, Article 315, in connection with
Article 171, of the R.P.C. The penalty to be imposed is that
which is provided for the more serious offense to be applied in
its maximum period, pursuant to Article 48, it being a complex
crime. The penalty for the more serious offense, which is
falsification, is prision mayor in its full extent and fine. There
being two mitigating circumstances of (1) voluntary surrender
and (2)plea of guilty, without any aggravating circumstance, the
penalty next lower to that provided by law should be imposed.
(Art. 64, par. 5)
For purposes of the Indeterminate Sentence Law, the
penalty next lower should be determined without regard as
to whether the basic penalty provided by the Code should be
applied in its maximum or minimum period as circumstances
modifying liability may require.
When however - and this may be the only exception to the
rule - the number of the mitigating circumstances is such as
to entitle the accused to the penalty next lower in degree, this
penalty in the application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law
should be the starting point for the determination of the penalty
next lower in degree (the MINIMUM of the indeterminate
penalty).
For the purpose of determining the penalty next lower in
degree, the penalty that should be considered as the starting
point is the whole prision mayor, it being the penalty prescribed
by law for the crime of falsification (Art. 171), and not prision
mayor in its maximum period which happens to be the penalty,
because the crime committed is complex under Article 48.
The penalty next lower from prision mayor is prision
correccional and this latter penalty should be applied in its
maximum period, as the MAXIMUM of the indeterminate
penalty. The MINIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is arresto
mayor, the penalty next lower in degree, wh.ich may be imposed
by the court in any of its periods.
799

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The penalty next lower in degree (the MINIMUM of the
indeterminate penalty) should be determined first, before
imposing the penalty prescribed by law for the offense in its
proper period, because Section 1 of the Indeterminate Sentence
Law provides that the MINIMUM of the indeterminate penalty
"shall be within the range of the penalty next lower to that
prescribed by the Code for the offense."
Although the penalty prescribed by the Code for the offense
is prision mayor in its full extent, in this case, it should not be
the starting point for determining the MINIMUM, because there
is a privileged mitigating circumstance. This is the exception to
the general rule.
The penalty next lower in degree should be the starting point
for determining the MINIMUM of the indeterminate penalty.
Thus - prision correccional will be the starting point.
Arresto mayor will be the penalty next lower. (People v. Gonzalez,
73 Phil. 549, 552)
(b) Accused committed the complex crime of malversation
of public funds through falsification of public document. He
was found to be entitled to three mitigating circumstances of
voluntary surrender, restitution, and lack of intention to commit
so grave a wrong.
The penalty prescribed for the offense of malversation of
public funds, when the amount involved exceeds six thousand
pesos but does not exceed twelve thousand pesos, is prision
mayor in its maximum period to reclusion temporal in its
minimum period. The penalty of prision mayor and a fine
is prescribed for the crime of falsification. Since the penalty
for malversation is more severe than that imposed for the
falsification, then the applicable prescribed penalty for
malversation shall be imposed in its maximum period. The
actual attendance of two separate mitigating circumstances of
voluntary surrender and restitution entitles the accused to the
penalty next lower in degree.
For purposes of determining that next lower degree, the
full range of the penalty prescribed by law for the offense, not
merely the imposable penalty because of its complex nature,
800

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

should, a priori, be considered. In fine, the one degree lower
than prision mayor maximum to reclusion temporal minimum
is prision mayor minimum to prision mayor medium, the full
range of which is six years and one day to ten years. This one
degree lower penalty should, conformably with Article 48 of
the Code (the penalty for complex crimes), be imposed in its
maximum period or from eight years, eight months and one day
to ten years. The presence of the third mitigating circumstance
ofpraeter intentionem would result in imposing a period the court
may deem applicable. Considering, however, that the penalty
has to be imposed in the maximum period, the only effect of
this additional mitigating circumstance is to impose only the
minimum portion of that maximum period, that is, from eight
years, eight months and one day to nine years, six months and
ten days, from which range the maximum of the indeterminate
sentence shall be taken. (Nzurtado v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No.
107383, December 7, 1994)
(c) The accused pleaded guilty to and was convicted
of the crime of direct assault upon a person in authority with
homicide. This being a complex crime, the penalty for the more
serious crime should be imposed, the same to be applied in its
maximum period. (Art. 48, R.P.C.) The more serious crime is
homicide punishable by reclusion temporal.
The accused, who was 17 years, nine months and 12
days old on the date of the commission of the crime, has to his
credit two mitigating circumstances: the special or privileged
mitigating circumstance of minority (Art. 68, par. 2) and the
ordinary mitigating circumstance of plea of guilty. (Art. 13, par.
7) Therefore, under Article 64, par. 5 (should be Art. 68, par. 2)
of the R.P.C., the penalty imposable is the penalty next lower
to that prescribed by law. Under Article 71, R.P.C., the penalty
next lower to reclusion temporal is prision mayor. Because of
the complex nature of the crime committed by the accused,
the penalty of prision mayor is to be applied in its maximum
period. However, having in his favor the ordinary mitigating
circumstance of plea ofguilty without any offsetting aggravating
circumstance, applying Article 64, paragraph 2 of the R.P.C.,
the penalty of prision mayor maximum should be imposed in
its minimum range.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

Criminal Law

Parenthetically, [the Court] must state that the lower
court erred in the imposition of the correct penalty despite its
proper appreciation of the privileged mitigating circumstance of
minority and the ordinary circumstance of plea of guilty in favor
of the appellant because it applied first the imposable penalty
to its maximum degree, i.e., reclusion temporal maximum,
and then imposed the penalty immediately inferior to it, i.e.,
reclusion temporal medium. This latter penalty is imposed as
the maximum of the indeterminate sentence, but applied in the
minimum range because of the ordinary mitigating circumstance
of plea of guilty. As the minimum of the indeterminate sentence,
it imposed the minimum of the penalty next lower, i.e.,reclusion
temporal minimum.

MINIMUM of the indeterminate penalty. Once the MINIMUM
is determined, by lowering by another degree, the penalty next
lower, the penalty which is made the starting point should be
imposed in the proper period. That penalty in the proper period
will be the MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty.
Problem:
A, a minor 15 years and two months old, was found guilty
of murder upon a plea of guilty. The court suspended the
sentence and ordered the commitment of the minor to the
Training School for Boys in the Welfareville in accordance
with Article 80. Because he became incorrigible in the
Training School for Boys, A was returned to the court for
the imposition of the proper penalty. (Art. 68) The court
imposed an indeterminate penalty of from five years of
prision correccional, as the MINIMUM, to 10 years and one
day of prision mayor, as the MAXIMUM. Is this penalty
correctly imposed?

The proper method is to start from the penalty imposed
by the R.P.C., i.e., reclusion temporal; then apply the privileged
mitigating circumstance of minority and determine the penalty
immediately inferior in degree, i.e., prision mayor; and finally
apply the same in its maximum degree but within the minimum
range thereof because of the ordinary mitigating circumstance
of plea of guilty. Prision mayor being the maximum of the
indeterminate sentence, the minimum of the indeterminate
penalty is within the range of the penalty next lower to it as
prescribed by the R.P.C., i.e., prision correccional.
All told, and applying now the Indeterminate Sentence
Law, the accused should be sentenced to an indeterminate
penalty of not less than six years ofprision correccional, to not
more than 10 years and eight months of prision mayor. (People
v. Cesar, G.R. No. L-26185, March 13, 1968, 22 SCRA 1024,
1028)
8. Indeterminate sentence, when there are privileged mitigating
and ordinary mitigating circumstances. (Arts. 68 and 64)
When there is a privileged mitigating circumstance (such
as, minority or incomplete defense) and ordinary mitigating
circumstance (such as, plea of guilty or voluntary surrender to
the authorities), the rule is: lower first the penalty prescribed by
the Code for the offense by one degree (because of the privileged
mitigating circumstance), using the scale in Article 71, and make
the penalty next lower as the starting point for determining the
802

Yes. The penalty for murder is reclusion temporal in its
maximum period to death. (Art. 248) The penalty next
lower in degree is prision mayor in its maximum period to
reclusion temporal in its minimum and medium periods
(Art. 61, par. 3), computed as follows:
Death
} Penalty for murder
Reclusion perpetua
Max.
{ Med.
Reclusion temporal
(12 years and 1 day to Min.
20 years)

One degree lower - MAXIMUM
of indeterminate sentence

Max.
{ Med.
Prision mayor
(6 years and 1 day to
Min.
12 years)

MINIMUM of indeterminate
sentence

803

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Prision correccional
(6 months and 1 day
to 6 years)

Max.
{ Med.

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

10.

Min.

A woman who stabbed and k.illed a man who had placed
his hand on her upper thigh, without any provocation on her
part, was given a reduced penalty by two degrees. (Art. 69)
The penalty for homicide is reclusion temporal. Two degrees
lower (Art. 61, in relation to Art. 71) is prision correccional; and
pursuant to the Indeterminate Sentence Law, the indeterminate
penalty is from arresto mayor in its medium period, as the
MINIMUM , to prision correccional in its medium period, as the
MAXIMUM. (People v. Jaurigue, 76 Phil. 174, 183)

There being a mitigating circumstance of plea of guilty,
without any aggravating circumstance to offset it, the penalty
one degree lower (prision mayor in its maximum period to
reclusion temporal in its minimum and medium periods) should
be imposed in its minimum period, which is prision mayor in its
maximum period.
Prision mayor maximum has a duration of from 10 years
and one day to 12 years. Prision correccional in its maximum
period to prision mayor in its minimum and medium periods
has a duration of from four years, two months and one day to 10
years. Hence, the sentence imposed (from 5 years to 10 years and
1 day) by the court is within the limits of the penalty prescribed
by law. (See People v. Ong Ta, 70 Phil. 553,555; People v. Cesar,
supra)
9.

11. Indeterminate penalty, when there is incomplete defense with two
ordinary mitigating circumstances, and without any aggravating
circumstance. (Arts. 69 and 64, par. 5)
A killed B in incomplete self-defense. There was unlawful
aggression on the part of B and lack of sufficient provocation
on the part of A. But the means employed by A in defending
himself was not reasonable. A acted with obfuscation and, after
killing B, surrendered himself to the authorities. There was no
aggravating circumstance.

Indeterminate penalty, when there are two privileged mitigating
and ordinary mitigating circumstances. (Arts. 68 and 69)

Held: The penalty of reclusion temporal for homicide
should be reduced by two degrees (Art. 69) and because of two
ordinary mitigating circumstances without any aggravating
circumstance, the reduced penalty should be further reduced
by another degree or arresto mayor in its medium period or two
months and one day. (People v. Nicolas, C.A., 50 O.G. 2133)

A, a minor under 18 years, k.illed B who was the unlawful
aggressor. A did not give sufficient provocation to B. But the
means employed by A to defend himself was not reasonable.
After killing B, A surrendered to the authorities.
Held: There are two privileged mitigating circumstances
in this case, namely: (1) minority under Article 68, and (2)
incomplete self-defense under Article 69. The penalty of
reclusion temporal prescribed for homicide should be lowered
by two degrees or prision correccional, which should be applied
in the minimum period, in view of one ordinary mitigating
circumstance ofvoluntary surrender. The indeterminate penalty
is not less than two months and 21 days of arresto mayor and
not more than one year, one month and 11 days of prision
correccional. (People v. Maula, G.R. No. L-7191, October 18,
1954, 96 Phil. 963 Unrep.J)

804

Indeterminate penalty, when there is incomplete defense, without
any ordinary mitigating or aggravating circumstance. (Art. 69)

12.

Indeterminate penalty, when the penalty prescribed by the Code
is reclusion temporal in its maximum period to death (penalty
for murder) and there are two or more mitigating circumstances
and no aggravating circumstance. (Art. 64, par. 5)

A committed murder, qualified by treachery, with the
mitigating circumstances of voluntary plea of guilty and
voluntary surrender, and without any aggravating circumstance.
Held: Under Article 64, No. 5 of the R.P.C., the next
lower penalty should be imposed, that is, prision mayor in its
maximum period to reclusion temporal in its medium period or
805

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
from 10 years and one day to 17 years and four months. (People
v. Soriano, 70 Phil. 334)
The penalty for murder is reclusion temporal in its
maximum period to death. (Art. 248) One degree lower is
prision mayor in its maximum period to reclusion temporal in
its medium period, in accordance with Article 61, No. 3, of the
Code.
The penalty of prision mayor maximum to reclusion
temporal medium should be subdivided into three periods, as
follows:
Time included Time included Time included Time included
in the entire in its minimum in its medium in its maximum
period
period
penalty
period
From 10 yrs., From 10 yrs.,
and l day to 17 and I day to 12
yrs. and 4 mos. yrs.,5 mos. and
10 days.

From 14 yrs.,
5 mos. and 11 10 mos. and 21
days to 14yrs., days to 17 yrs.
10 mos. and 20 and 4 mos.
days.

From 12 yrs.,

The penalty next lower, as the MAXIMUM of the
indeterminate penalty, is to be imposed in the medium period,
because the two mitigating circumstances are already considered
in lowering the penalty by one degree. It is not proper to consider
any one or both of them again in fixing the proper period of the
penalty to be imposed. Therefore, as regards the penalty next
lower, there is neither mitigating nor aggravating circumstance.
Hence, the MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is
the medium period of prision mayor maximum to reclusion
temporal medium or 12 years, five months and 11 days to 14
years, 10 months and 20 days (at the discretion of the court). The
MINIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is anywhere within the
range of the penalty next lower or prision correccional maximum
to prision mayor medium. (Art. 61, par. 3)
13.

Indeterminate penalty, when the crime committed is robbery in
inhabited house, and the penalty is to be lowered by one degree.
A pleaded guilty to the charge of robbery in an inhabited
house defined and penalized in Article 299 of the Code. The
806

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

penalty for robbery in an inhabited house is reclusion temporal.
There being no allegation that A was armed and it appearing
that the value of the property taken did not exceed P250.00,
the penalty to be imposed is the minimum period of the penalty
next lower, that is, prision mayor in its minimum period. That
penalty is to be imposed in the medium period, there being no
aggravating or mitigating circumstance. The MINIMUM of the
indeterminate penalty is within the range of the penalty next
lower in degree from prision mayor in its full extent (disregard
first the fact that it shall be imposed in the minimum period).
The MAXIMUM of the indeterminate penalty is the medium
period ofprision mayor minimum or six years, eight months and
one day to seven years and four months. (People v. De Lara, 98
Phil. 584, 586)
Indeterminate sentence, applied to estafa.
The prescribed penalty for estafa under Article 315, paragraph
2(d) of the R.P.C., when the amount defrauded exceeds P22,000.00,
is prision correccional maximum to prision mayor minimum. The
minimum term is taken from the penalty next lower or anywhere
within prision correccional minimum and medium (i.e., from 6 months
and 1 day to 4 years and 2 months). Consequently, the RTC correctly
fixed the minimum term for the five estafa cases at four years and
two months of prision correccional since this is within the range of
prision correccional minimum and medium.
On the other 'hand, the maximum term is taken from the
prescribed penalty ofprision correccional maximum to prision mayor
minimum in its maximum period, adding one year of imprisonment
for every P10,000.00 in excess of P22,000.00, provided that the total
penalty shall not exceed 20 years. However, the maximum period of the
prescribed penalty ofprision correccional maximum toprision mayor
minimum is not prision mayor minimum as apparently assumed by
the RTC. To compute the maximum period of the prescribed penalty,
prision correccional maximum to prision mayor minimum should
be divided into three equal portions of time each of which portion
shall he deemed to form one period in accordance with Article 65 of
the R.P.C. Following this procedure, the maximum period of prision
correccional maximum to prision mayor minimum is from six years,
eight months and 21 days to eight years. The incremental penalty,
807

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

when proper, shall thus be added to anywhere from six years, eight
months and 21 days to eight years, at the discretion of the court.
In computing the incremental penalty, the amount defrauded
shall be subtracted by P22,000.00, and the difference shall be
divided by P10,000.00. Any fraction of a year shall be discarded as
was done starting with the case of People v. Pabalan (331 Phil. 64
(1996]) in consonance with the settled rule that penal laws shall be
construed liberally in favor of the accused. (People v. Temporada,
G.R. No. 173473, December 17, 2008)

5.

Those who are habitual delinquents.

6.

Those who shall have escaped from confinement or evaded
sentence.

7.

Those who violated the terms ofconditional pardon granted
to them by the Chief Executive.

8.

Those whose maximum term of imprisonment does not
exceed one year.

9.

Those who, upon the approval of the law (December 5
1933), had been sentenced by final judgment. (Sec. 2, Act
No. 4103)

10.

Those sentenced to the penalty of destierro or suspension.

Not applicable when unfavorable to the accused.
A was convicted of illegal possession of grease guns and two
Thompson sub-machine guns punishable by imprisonment from five
years to 10 years. The trial court imposed a sentence that the accused
should suffer imprisonment offive years and one day. Is this penalty
correct?
Yes. In cases where the application of the law on indeterminate
sentence would be unfavorable to the accused, resulting in the
lengthening of Iris prison sentence, said law on indeterminate sentence
should not be applied. If we had no law on indeterminate sentence,
considering the plea of guilty entered by the appellant, the trial court
could well and lawfully have given him a prison sentence offive years.
If we are to apply the law, the prison term would have to be more
than five years, as the minimum could not be less than five years.
(People v. Nang Kay, 88 Phil. 515, 519)
The law on indeterminate sentence as a rule is intended to favor
the defendant in a criminal case particularly to shorten his term of
imprisonment depending upon his behavior, etc.
Indeterminate Sentence Law not applicable to the following:
1.

Persons convicted of offenses punished with death penalty
or life imprisonment.

2.

Those convicted of treason, conspiracy or proposal to
commit treason.

3.

Those convicted of misprision of treason, rebellion, sedition,
or espionage.

4.

Those convicted of piracy.

"Persons convicted of offenses punished with death penalty or life
Imprisonment."
The trial court did not err in convicting the appellant of simple
rape which is penalized with reclusion perpetua. But it erred in giving
him the benefit of the Indeterminate Sentence Law. Article 63 of the
R.P.C. (not its Art. 641], which was cited by tbe lower court), applies
to the case. (People v. Amores, No. L-32996, August 21, 1974, 58 SCRA
505, 510-511)
"
"Those who evaded the service of the sentence."
A was sentenced to destierro. Whi le serving sentence, A entered
the prohibited area and committed robbery therein. Is A entitled to an
indeterminate sentence in case he is found guilty of robbery? No. By
entering the prohibited area, he evaded the service of his sentence.
The Indeterminate Sentence Law is not applicable.
"Those who shall have escaped from confinement."
Defendant was found guilty of robbery. By h.is own admission,
appearing in his confession, Exhibit F, it appears that defendant
is an escaped prisoner. He is not entitled to the benefits of the
Indeterminate Sentence Law. (People v. Rivera, CA., 44 0.G. 123)
A minor who escaped from the Philippine Training School for
Boys does not acquire the status of escaped prisoner as to be excluded
from the benefits bestowed by the Indeterminate Sentence Law,

808
809

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

because his confinement therein is not considered imprisonment.
(People v. Perez, CA., 44 O.G. 3884, citing People v. Soler, 63 Phil.
868)

The application of the ISL is based on the penalty actually imposed.

While there is evidence that prior to the incident in question the
appellant has had several brushes with the law, there is no showing
that he has been prosecuted and found guilty thereof. It appears that
he was an escapee from the National Mental Hospital. Later, the
appellant was convicted of homicide. Is he entitled to the benefits of
the Indeterminate Sentence Law?
It is true, as provided in Section 2 thereof, that the Indeterminate
Sentence Law shall also not apply "to those who shall have escaped
from confinement or evaded sentence." However, we do not think that
the appellant's escape from the National Mental Hospital falls within
the purview of said provision. Confinement as a patient in the National
Mental Hospital is not imprisonment. By escaping from said hospital,
the appellant did not acquire the status of an escaped prisoner as to be
excluded from the benefits bestowed by the Indeterminate Sentence
Law. (People u. Co, CA., 67 O.G. 7451)
Those whose maximum period of penalty does not exceed one year.

The Indeterminate Sentence Law does not apply to non-divisible
penalties. It covers only divisible penalties and does not include
indivisible penalties. (People v. Gonzales, 148 SCRA 649)
Application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law is mandatory
where imprisonment would exceed one year. (People v. Lee, Jr., 132
SCRA 66)
A is convicted of a crime for which the penalty imposed is eight
months of prision correccional. Is A entitled to an indeterminate
penalty? No. The penalty imposed does not exceed one year. (People
v. Arellano, 68 Phil. 678, 683)
ISL does not apply to destierro.

In view of the nature of the penalty of destierro, the convict is
not entitled to the provisions of the Indeterminate Sentence Law,
since the benefits of the law are expressly granted to those who are
sentenced to imprisonment exceeding one year. (People v. Almeda,
CA.-G.R. No. 1583, June 8, 1938)
This ruling applies to the penalty of suspension.

The Indeterminate Sentence Law uses the word "punished,"
not the word "punishable." It is the penalty actually imposed, not
the penalty that may be imposed, that should be considered. (People
v. Moises, No. L-32495, August 13, 1975, 66 SCRA 151, 164; People
v. Cempron, G.R. No. 66324, July 6, 1990, 187 SCRA 248, 256)
Thus, if the accused was charged with the crime of acts of
lasciviousness punishable by prision correccional (Art. 336), the
duration of which is from six months and one day to six years, and
the court imposed upon him six months and one day, the minimum
of prision correccional, the Indeterminate Sentence Law does not
apply, because the application of that law is based upon the penalty
actually imposed in the discretion of the court. (People v. Dimalanta,
92 Phil. 239, 242; People v. Moises, No. L-32495, Aug. 13, 1975, 66
SCRA 151, 163-164)
The ISL applies to penalties imposed as a result of plea bargaining.

The fact that the lesser offense, and its necessarily lower penalty,
resulted from a plea bargaining agreement is ofno moment as far as
the penalty to be imposed is concerned. Plea bargaining is authorized
by the present Rules and is in fact required to be considered by
the trial court at the pre-trial conference. It follows that ISL shall
necessarily apply. It should be kept in mind that to determine whether
an indeterminate sentence and not a straight penalty is proper, what
is considered is the penalty actually imposed by the trial court, after
considering the attendant circumstances, and not the imposable
penalty. Corollarily, it would be an unduly strained postulate that
a sentence arrived at by a court after a valid pica bargaining should
constitute an exception to the ISL. (Ladino v. Garcia, G.R. No. 123991,
December 23, 1996)
The ISL applies to recidivists.

While habitual delinquents arc not entitled to an indeterminate
sentence, a recidivist for the first time may be given the benefits of
the law. (People • Yu Lian, C.A., 40 O.G. 4205; People v. Venus, 63
Phil. 435, 442) Although recidivists, appellants are not habitual
delinquents. They are entitled to an indeterminate sentence. (People
v. Jaranilla, L-28547, February 22, 1974)
811

INDETERMINATE SENTENCE LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Factors to be taken into consideration by the court in fixing the
minimum penalty.

2.

Whenever such prisoner released on parole shall, during the
period of surveillance, violate any of the conditions of his parole,
the Board may issue an order for his arrest. In such case, the
prisoner so rearrested shall serve the remaining unexpired
portion of the maximum sentence. (Secs. 5 and 8, Act No. 4103)

3.

Even if a prisoner has already served the minimum, but he
is not fitted for release on parole, he shall continue to serve
imprisonment until the end of the maximum.

It is necessary to consider the criminal, first, as an individual
and, second, as a member of society.
Considering the criminal as an individual, some of the factors
that should be considered are: (1) his age, especially with reference
to extreme youth or old age; (2) his general health and physical
conditions; (3) his mentality, heredity and personal habits; (4) his
previous conduct, environment and mode oflife (and criminal record,
if any); (6) his previous education, both intellectual and moral;
(6) his proclivities and aptitudes for usefulness or injury to society;
(7) his demeanor during trial and his attitude with regard to the crime
committed; (8) the manner and circumstances in which the crime was
committed; (9) the gravity of the offense. (Note that Sec. 2 of Act No.
4103 excepts certain grave crimes - this should be kept in mind in
assessing the minimum penalties for analogous crimes.)

Mandatory.
It is mandatory in the cases specified therein, for it employs the
phrases "convicts shall be sentenced" and "the court shall sentence
the accused to an indeterminate sentence." (People v. Yu Lian, CA.,
40 0.G. 4205)

In considering the criminal as a member of society, his
relationship, first, toward his dependents, family and associates and
their relationship with him, and second, his relationship towards
society at large and the State, are important factors. The State is
concerned not only in the imperative necessity of protecting the social
organization against the criminal acts of destructive individuals
but also in redeeming the individual for economic usefulness and
other social ends. In a word, the Indeterminate Sentence Law aims
to individualize the administration of our criminal law to a degree
not heretofore known in this country. With the foregoing principles
in mind as guides, the courts can give full effect to the beneficent
intention of the Legislature. (People v. Ducosin, 59 Phil. 109, 118)
Reason for fixing the MINIMUM and MAXIMUM penalties in the
indeterminate sentence.
1.

Whenever any prisoner shall have served the minimum
penalty imposed on him, and it shall appear to the Board of
Indeterminate Sentence that such prisoner is fitted for release,
said Board may authorize the release of such prisoner on parole,
upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the
Board.
812

813

PROBATION LAW

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 968,
AS AMENDED BY PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1257,
AND AS FURTHER AMENDED BY
BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 76,
PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1990,
AND REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10707
ESTABLISHING A PROBATION SYSTEM, APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
SECTION 1. Title and Scope of the Decree. - This
Decree shall be known as the Probation Law of 1976. It shall
apply to all offenders except those entitled to the benefits under
the provisions of Presidential Decree Numbered Six Hundred
and Three and similar laws.

sentenced a defendant and upon application by said defendant
within the period for perfecting an appeal, suspend the execution
of the sentence and place the defendant on probation for such
period and upon such terms and conditions as it may deem best.
No application for probation shall be entertained or granted
if the defendant has perfected the appeal from the judgment
of conviction: Provided, That when a judgment of conviction
imposing a non-probationable penalty is appealed or reviewed,
and such judgment is modified through the imposition of a
probationable penalty, the defendant shall be allowed to apply
for probation based on the modified decision before such decision
becomes final. 'The application for probation based on the modified
decision shall be filed in the trial court where the judgment of
conviction imposing a non-probationable penalty was rendered,
or in the trial court where such case has since been re-raffled.
In a case involving several defendants where some have taken
further appeal, the other defendants may apply for probation by
submitting a written application and attaching thereto a certified
true copy of the judgment of conviction.

SEC. 2. Purpose. -- This Decree shall be interpreted so

The trial court shall, upon receipt of application filed,
suspend the execution of the sentence imposed in the judgment.

(a) Promote the correction and rehabilitation of an
offender by providing him with individualized treatment;

This notwithstanding, the accused shall lose the benefit of
probation should he seek a review of the modified decision which
already imposes a probationable penalty.

(b) Provide an opportunity for the reformation of a
penitent offender which might be less probable if he were to serve
a prison sentence; and

Probation may be granted whether the sentence imposes a
term of imprisonment or a fine only. The filing of the application
shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.

as to:

(c)

Prevent the commission of offenses.

SEC. 3. Meaning of Terms. - As used in this Decree,
the following shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be
construed thus:
(a) "Probation" is a disposition under which a defendant,
after conviction and sentence, is released subject to conditions
imposed by the court and to the supervision ofa probation officer.
(b)

"Probationer" means a person placed on probation.

An order granting or denying probation shall not be
appealable. (As amended by P.D. No. 1257, P.D. No. 1990, and
RA. No. 10707, November 26, 2015)
SEC. 5. Post-sentence Investigation. - No person shall
be placed on probation except upon prior investigation by the
probation officer and a determination by the court that the ends
ofjustice and the best interest of the public as well as that of the
defendant will be served thereby.

(c) "Probation Officer" means one who investigates for
the court a referral for probation or supervises a probationer or
both.

SEC. 6. Form of Investigation Report. - The
investigation report to be submitted by the probation officer under
Section 5 hereof shall be in the form prescribed by the Probation
Administrator and approved by the Secretary of Justice.

SEC. 4. Grant of Probation. - Subject to the provisions of
this Decree, the trial court may, after it shall have convicted and

SEC. 7. Period for Submission of Investigation Report.
- The probation officer shall submit to the court the investigation

814

815

PROBATION LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

the order of said court to conduct the investigation. The court

to Section 33 hereof. (As amended by B.P. Big. 76, P.D. No. 1990,
and RA. No. 10707)

shall resolve the application for probation not later than fifteen
days after receipt of said report. (As amended by P.D. No. 1257,
December 1, 1977)

SEC. 10. Conditions of Probation. - Every probation
order issued by the court shall contain conditions requiring that
the probationer shall:

report on a defendant not later than sixty days from receipt of

Pending submission of the investigation report and the
resolution of the petition, the defendant may be allowed on

temporary liberty under his bail filed in the criminal case:
Provided, That in case where no bail was filed or that the
defendant is incapable of filing one, the court may allow the
release of the defendant on recognizance to the custody of a

(a) present himselfto the probation officer designated to
undertake his supervision at such pince as may be specified in
the order within seventy-two hours from receipt of said order;

(b) report to the probation officer at least once a month
at such time and place as specified by said officer.

responsible member of the community who shall guarantee his
appearance whenever required by the court.

The court may also require the probationer to:

SEC. 8. Criteria for Placing an Offender on Probation.
- In determining whether an offender may be placedon probation,
the court shall consider all information relative to the character,
antecedents, environment, mental and physical condition of the
offender, and available institutional and community resources.

(a)

cooperate with a program of supervision;

(bl

meet his family responsibilities;

Probation shall be denied if the court finds that:

(c) devote himself to a specific employment and not to
change said employment without the prior written approval of
the probation officer;

(a)
The offender is in need of correctional treatment
that can be provided most effectively by his commitment to an

examination and treatment and enter and remain in a specified

institution; or

institution, when required for that purpose;

(b)

(e)

There is an undue risk that during the period of

probation the offender will commit another crime; or

(c)

(d)

CO

sentenced to serve a maximum term of imprisonment

of more than six (6) years;
convicted of any crime against the national security;

(c) who have previously been convicted by final judgment
of an offense punished by imprisonment of more than six (6)
months and one (1) day and/or a fine of more than one thousand
pesos (PhP1,000.00);
(d)

attend or reside in a facility established for instruction,

recreation or residence of persons on probation;

SEC. 9. Disqualified offenders. -- The benefits of this
Decree shall not be extended to those:

(b)

pursue a prescribed secular study or vocational

training;

Probation will depreciate the seriousness of the

offense committed.

(a)

undergo medical, psychological or psychiatric

who have been once on probation under the provisions

of this Decree; and

(e) who are already serving sentence at the time the
substantive provisions ofthis Decree became applicable pursuant
816

(g)

refrain from visiting houses of ill-repute;

(h)

abstain from drinking intoxicating beverages to

excess;

(i)
permit the probation officer or an authorized social
worker to visit his home and place of work;

.

(i_)

reside at premises approved by it and not to change

his residence without its prior wri tten approval; or

(k) satisfy any other condition related to the rehabilitation
of the defendant and not unduly restrictive of his liberty or
incompatible with his freedom of conscience.
SEC. 11. Effectivity of Probation Order. -- A probation
order shall take effect upon its issuance, at which time the
court shall inform the offender of the consequences thereof and
817

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

PROBATION LAW

explain that upon his failure to comply with any ofthe conditions
prescribed in the said order or his commission ofanother offense,
he shall serve the penalty imposed for the offense under which
he was placed on probation.

of the conditions of probation. The probationer, once arrested
and detained, shall immediately be brought before the court for
a hearing of the violation charged. The defendant may be admitted to bail pending such hearing. In such case, the provisions
regarding release on bail of persons charged with a crime shall
be applicable to probationers arrested under this provision.

SEC. 12. Modification of Conditions of Probation. During the period of probation, the court may, upon application
ofeither the probationer or the probation officer, revise or modify
the conditions or period of probation. The court shall notify either
the probationer or the probation officer of the filing of such an
application so as to give both parties an opportunity to be heard
thereon.
The court shall inform in writing the probation officer
and the probationer of any change in the period or conditions of
probation.
SEC. 13. Control and Supervision of Probationer. The probationer end his probation program shall be under the
control of the court who placed him on probation subject to actual
supervision and visitation by a probation officer.
Whenever a probationer is permitted to reside in a place
under the jurisdiction of another court, control over him shall be
transferred to the Executive Judge of the Court of First Instance
ofthat place, and in such a case, a copy ofthe probation order, the
investigation report and other pertinent records shall be furnished
said Executive Judge. Thereafter, the Executive Judge to whom
jurisdiction over the probationer is transferred shall have the
power with respect to him that was previously possessed by the
court which granted the probation.
SEC. 14. Period of Probation, (a) The period of probation ofa defendant sentenced to a
term of imprisonment of not more than one year shall not exceed
two years, and in all other cases, said period shall not exceed six
years.
(b) When the sentence imposes a fine only and the
offender is made to serve subsidiary imprisonment in case of
insolvency, the period of probation shall not be less than nor
be more than twice the total number of days of subsidiary
imprisonment as computed at the rate established in Article
thirty-nine of the Revised Penal Code, as amended.

In the hearing, which shall be summary in nature, the
probationer shall have the right to be infonned of the violation
charged and to adduce evidence in his favor. The court shall
not be bound by the technical rules of evidence but may inform
itselfof all the facts which are material and relevant to ascertain
the veracity of the charge. The State shall be represented by a
prosecuting officer in any contested hearing. If the violation is
established, the court may revoke or continue his probation and
modify the conditions thereof. If revoked, the court shall order
the probationer to serve the sentence originally imposed. An
order revoking the grant of probation or modifying the tenns and
conditions thereof shall not be appealable. (As amended by P.D.
No. 1257)
SEC. 16. Termination of Probation. - After the
period of probation and upon consideration of the report and
recommendation of the probation officer, the court may order
the final discharge of the probationer upon finding that he has
fulfilled the terms and conditions ofhis probation and thereupon,
the case is deemed terminated.
The final discharge of the probationer shall operate to
restore to him all civil rights lost or suspended as a result of his
conviction and to totally extinguish his criminal liability as to
the offense for which probation was granted.
The probationer and the probation officer shall each be
furnished with a copy of such order. (As amended by R.A. No.
10707)

SEC. 15. Arrest of Probationer; Subsequent Dispositions. - At any time during probation, the court may issue a
warrant for the arrest of a probationer for any serious violation

SEC. 17. Confidentiality of Records. -- The investigation
report and the supervision history ofa probationer obtained under
this Decree shall be privileged and shall not be disclosed directly
or indirectly to anyone other than the Probation Administration
or the court concerned, except that the court, in its discretion,
may permit the probationer or his attorney to inspect the
aforementioned documents or parts thereof whenever the best
interest of the probationer makes such disclosure desirable or
helpful: Provided, further, 'That any government office or agency

818

819

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

PROBATION LAW

engaged in the correction or rehabilitation of offenders may, if

to serve a maximum term of imprisonment of more than six years
are disqualified from availing of probation under Section 9 of the
Probation Law.

necessary, obtain copies of said documents for its offcial use from
the proper court or the Administration.
xXX

Procedure in applying for probation:
1.

Within the period for perfecting an appeal, an application
for probation must be filed with the trial court.

2.

Upon receipt of the application for probation, the court
shall suspend the execution of the sentence.

3.

The court shall issue an order to probation officer to conduct
a post-sentence investigation.

4.

Pending submission of the investigation report and the
resolution of the application, the defendant may be allowed
on temporary liberty under his bail filed in the criminal
case. If no bail was filed or the defendant is incapable of
filing one, the court may allow the release of the defendant
on recognizance to the custody of a responsible member
of the community who shall guarantee his appearance
whenever required by the court.

5.

The probation officer shall submit the investigation report
to the court not later than 60 days from receipt of the order
of said court to conduct the investigation.

6.

The court shall resolve the application for probation not
later than 15 days aft.er receipt of the investigation report.

7.

If application is granted, the court shall issue a probation
order.

Probation, defined.
Probation is a disposition under which a defendant, after
conviction and sentence, is released subject to conditions imposed by
the court and to the supervision of a probation officer. (See. 3, P.D.
No. 968)
Nature of order granting probation.
An order placing defendant on "probation" is not a "sentence"
but is rather in effect, a suspension of the imposition of sentence.
It is not a final judgment but is rather an "interlocutory judgment"
in the nature of a conditional order placing the convicted defendant
under the supervision of the court for his reformation, to be followed
by a final judgment of discharge, if the conditions of the probation are
complied with, or by a final judgment of sentence if the conditions are
violated. (Baclayon v. Mutia, No. L-59298, April 30, 1984, 129 SCRA
148, 154)
Purpose of the Decree establishing a probation system.
The three-fold purpose of the Decree is to
(a)

promote the correction and rehabilitation of an offender
by providing him with individualized treatment;

(b)

provide an opportunity for the reformation of a penitent
offender, which might be less probable if he were to serve
a prison sentence; and

(c)

prevent the commission of offenses.

Penalty, to be entitled to probation.
Probation may be granted whether the sentence imposes
a term of imprisonment or a fine only. The maximum term of
imprisonment imposed should not exceed six years. Those sentenced
820

Time for filing application for probation; purpose and effect.
What the law requires is that the application for probation must
be filed within the period for perfecting an appeal. The need to file
it within such period was intended to encourage offenders, who are
willing to be reformed and rehabilitated, to avail of probation at the
first opportunity. Such provision was never intended to suspend the
period for the perfection ofan appeal, and the filing of the application
for probation operates as a waiver of the right to appeal. (Palo v.
Militante, G.R. No. 76100, April 18, 1990, 184 SCRA 395, 400)
821

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

PROBATION LAW

Criminal Law

Where application for probation filed.
An application for probation shall be filed with the trial court
which rendered the judgment of conviction.
If application is based on a modified decision imposing a
probationable penalty, it shall be filed in the trial court where the
judgment of conviction imposing a non-probationable penalty was
rendered, or where such case has since been re-raffled.
General rule: Convict who flied an application for probation cannot

appeal.
The filing of the application for probation is a waiver of the right
to appeal.
Exception: Convict may file for probation If appeal Is for conviction

Imposing a non-probationable penalty which is modified on appeal
to a probationable penalty.
When a judgment of conviction imposing a non-probationable
penalty is appealed or reviewed, and such judgment is modified
through the imposition of a probationable penalty, the defendant
shall be allowed to apply for probation based on the modified decision
before such decision becomes final.
The benefit of probation shall be lost if a review of the modified
decision which already imposes a probationable penalty is sought.
Republic Act No. 10707 amended Presidential Decree No. 968
by allowing an application for probation if appeal Is filed on
non-probationable penalty and penalty Imposed on appeal is
probationable.
Prior to said amendment, the Supreme Court granted the right
to apply for probation even if accused filed an appeal if appealed
judgment will not allow him to apply for probation.
Facts: Accused was found guilty of frustrated homicide and
sentenced to a penalty which did not qualify the accused to apply
for probation. On appeal to the Court of Appeals, the CA affirmed
the RTC decision. Accused appealed to the Supreme Court and the
SC held him liable only for attempted homicide, imposing a penalty
which would allow him the right to apply for probation.
822

Issue: Is the accused entitled to probation considering that
Section 4 of the Probation Law (P.D. No. 968) provides: "That no
application for probation shall be entertained or granted if the
defendant has perfected the appeal from the judgment of conviction"?
Held: The accused may apply for probation. He did not appeal
from a judgment that would have allowed him to apply for probation.
He did not have a choice between appeal and probation. He was not
in a position to say, "By taking this appeal, I choose not to apply
for probation." The stiff penalty that the trial court imposed on him
denied him that choice. Thus, a ruling that would allow Arne! to now
seek probation under this Court's greatly diminished penalty will not
dilute the sound ruling in Francisco v. Court ofAppeals, 313 Phil. 241,
255 (1995), that the probation law requires that an accused must not
have appealed his conviction before he can avail himself of probation.
It remains that those who will appeal from judgments of conviction,
when they have the option to try for probation, forfeit their right to
apply for that privilege.
The Probation Law never intended to deny an accused his right
to probation through no fault of his. The underlying philosophy of
probation is one of liberality towards the accused. Such philosophy
is not served by a harsh and stringent interpretation of the statutory
provisions. As Justice Vicente V. Mendoza said in his dissent in
Francisco, the Probation Law must not be regarded as a mere privilege
to be given to the accused only where it clearly appears he comes
within its letter; to do so would be to disregard the teaching in many
cases that the Probation Law should be applied in favor of the accused
not because it is a criminal law but to achieve its beneficent purpose.
(Colinares v. People. G.R. No. 182748, December 13, 2011)
Waiver of right to appeal, revocable.
There can be no real reformation of a wrongdoer which is the
reason for probation unless there is a willingness on his part to
right the wrong he has committed. Probation is envisioned for the
accused. He may or may not avail of its benefits. Although probation
is founded on consent, waiver and/or contract, public policy requires
that interpretational objectives set forth in Section 2 of P.D. No. 968 be
given full effect. Probation cannot therefore be forced or compelled on a
convict. To permit this would only serve to invite its violation. Instead,
a greater emphasis should be exerted in securing the probationer's
effective participation in society's major social institution.
823

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

PROBATION LAW

Since 'probation is an island of technicalities surrounded
by sea of discretion' (Carl H. Imlay & Charles R. Galsheen, 'See
What Condition Your Condition Are In,' Federal Probation, XXXV
June 1971)', it should, therefore, be liberally construed in favor of
the accused. Having opted to discontinue with the application for
probation in its initial stages and prior to the submission of a post
sentence investigation report and within the period interposed an
appeal from the adverse decision, petitioners should be allowed to
withdraw their application for probation and pursue their right to
appeal therefrom. (Yusi v. Hon. Morales, L-61958, April 28, 1983)

The grant or denial of an application for probation does not
rest solely on the offender's potentiality to reform but also on the
observance of demands of justice and public interest. These are
expressed in statutes enacted by the lawmaker. (Amandy v. People,
No. L-76258, May 23, 1988, 161 SCRA 436, 440, citing Tolentino v.
Alconcel, 121 SCRA 92)

Application for probation involving several defendants where some
have appealed.
Defendants who did not file an appeal may apply for probation
by submitting a written application and attaching a certified true
copy of the judgment of conviction.
Criteria for placing an offender on probation.
The court shall consider (1) all information relative to the (a)

character,

(b)

antecedents,

(c)

environment,

(d)

mental condition, and

(e)

physical condition of the offender,

and (2) available institutional and community resources.
When probation shall be denied.
Probation shall be denied if the court finds that:
(a)

the offender is in need of correctional treatment that can
be provided most effectively by his commitment to an
institution; or

(b)

there is an undue risk that during the period of probation,
the offender will commit another crime; or

(c)

probation will depreciate the seriousness of the offense
committed.
824

Discretion of the court on probation.
Even if a convicted person falls within the classes of those
qualified for probation, the grant of probation is not automatic or
ministerial. Probation is a privilege and its grant rests upon the
discretion of the court. The discretion is exercised primarily for the
benefit of society as a whole and only secondarily for the personal
advantage of the accused. (Amandy v. People, No. L-76258, May 23,
1988, 161 SCRA 436, 443)
Resolution on application for probation Is not appealable except
when there Is grave abuse of discretion.
An order granting or denying probation is not appealable. (Sec.
4, P.D. 968, as amended) However, when there is grave abuse of
discretion in granting or denying probation, a petition for certiorari
may be filed to assail the order. (Balleta, Jr. v. Leviste, L-49907,
August 21, 1979)
In the Balleta case, petitioner was accused of consented
abduction. Upon fling a petition for probation, the probation officer
recommended favorable action. However, the trial court denied the
petition on the ground that it would be better for the accused if he
served his sentence so that he could reform himself, correct his selfish
tendencies, and avoid the scandal in the community that would be
caused by the grant of probation so that the sanctity of marriage and
the dignity of womanhood would be upheld. The Court held that the
trial court gravely abused its discretion in not granting probation.
Who are the offenders disqualified from being placed on probation?
The benefits of the Decree shall not be extended to
(a)

those sentenced to serve a maximum term of imprisonment
of more than six years;

(b)

those convicted of any crime against the national security;
825

PROBATION LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

(c)

those who were previously convicted by final judgment
of an offense punished by imprisonment of more than six
months and one day and/or a fine of more than P1,000.00;

(d)

those who have been once on probation under the provisions
of the Decree; and

(e)

those who are already serving sentence at the time the
substantive provisions of the Decree became applicable
pursuant to Section 33 thereof.

Previous offense punished by imprisonment of more than 6 months
and 1 day and/or a fine of more than P1,000.00.
A was previously sentenced for an offense punished by 30
days imprisonment and/or by a fine of Pl00.00. A may be placed
on probation, if convicted of a new offense. But if A was previously
sentenced to six months and 15 days imprisonment and/or to pay a
fine of P2,000.00, he is disqualified from being placed on probation if
convicted of a new offense.
Effect of multiple prison terms on eligibility for probation.

correccional sixteen (16) times as he was sentenced to serve the prison
term for "each crime committed on each date of each case, as alleged
in the information(s)," and in each of the four (4) informations, he
was charged with having defamed the four (4) private complainants
on four (4) different, separate days, he was still eligible for probation,
as each prison term imposed on petitioner was probationable.
The Probation Law, as amended, disqualifies only those who
have been convicted of grave felonies as defined in Article 9 in relation
to Article 25 of The Revised Penal Code, and not necessarily those who
have been convicted of multiple offenses in a single proceeding who are
deemed to be less perverse. Hence, the basis of the disqualification is
principally the gravity of the offense committed and the concomitant
degree of penalty imposed. Those sentenced to a maximum term not
exceeding six years are not generally considered callous, hard core
criminals, and thus may avail of probation. (Francisco u. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 108747, April 6, 1995)
Probation under Republic Act No. 9165.
The Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act makes the Probation
Law inapplicable to persons convicted of drug trafficking or pushing,
regardless of the penalty imposed by the court. (Sec. 24) However,
a first-time minor offender may avail of probation of the crimes of
possession or use of dangerous drugs, even if the sentence provided
under the Act is higher than that provided under the existing law on
probation. (Sec. 70 in relation to Secs. 66 and 68)

Multiple prison terms imposed against an accused found guilty
of several offenses in one decision are not, and should not be, added
up. And, the sum of the multiple prison terms imposed against
an applicant should not be determinative of his eligibility for, nay
his disqualification from, probation. The multiple prison terms
are distinct from each other, and if none of the terms exceeds the
limit set out in the Probation Law, i.e., not more than six (6) years,
then he is entitled to probation, unless he is otherwise specifically
disqualified. The number of offenses is immaterial as long as all the
penalties imposed, taken separately, are within the probationable
period. For, Section 9, par. (a), P.D. No. 968, as amended, uses
the word maximum not total when it says that "[t]he benefits of
this Decree shall not be extended to those .... sentenced to serve
a maximum term ofimprisonment of more than six years." Evidently,
the law does not intend to sum up the penalties imposed but to take
each penalty separately and distinctly with the others. Consequently,
even if petitioner was supposed to have served his prison term of one
(1)year and one (1) day to one (1) year and eight (8) months ofprision

The court may also require the probationer to do any of those
enumerated in sub-paragraphs (a) to (k) of Section 10 of the Decree.

826

827

What are the conditions of probation?
Every probation order issued by the court shall contain
conditions requiring the probationer to:
(a)

present himself to the probation officer designated to
undertake Iris supervision at such place as may be specified
in the order within 72 hours from receipt of the order;

(b)

report to the probation officer at least once a month at such
time and place as specified by said officer.

PROBATION LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
Mandatory conditions and discretionary conditions.
The conditions which trial courts may impose on a probationer
may be classified into general or mandatory and special or
discretionary.
The mandatory conditions, enumerated in Section 10 of the
Probation Law, require that the probationer should (a) present himself
to the probation officer designated to undertake his supervision at
such place as may be specified in the order within 72 hours from
receipt of said order, and (b) report to the probation officer at least
once a month at such time and place as specified by said officer.
Special or discretionary conditions are those additional
conditions, listed in the same Section 10 of the Probation Law, which
the courts may additionally impose on the probationer towards his
correction and rehabilitation outside of prison. The enumeration,
however, is not inclusive. Probation statutes are liberal in character
and enable courts to designate practically any term it chooses as long as
the probationer's constitutional rights are not jeopardized. There are
innumerable conditions which may be relevant to the rehabilitation
of the probationer when viewed in their specific individual context.
It should, however, be borne in mind that the special or discretionary
conditions of probation should be realistic, purposive and geared to
help the probationer develop into a law-abiding and self-respecting
individual. Conditions should be interpreted with flex.ibility in their
application and each case should be judged on its own merits - on
the basis of the problems, needs and capacity of the probationer. The
very liberality of the probation should not be made a tool by trial
courts to stipulate instead unrealistic terms. (Baclayon v. Mutia, No.
L-59298, April 30, 1984, 129 SCRA 148, 152-153; Salgado v. Court
ofAppeals, G.R. No. 89606, August 30, 1990, 189 SCRA 304, 311)
Example of condition that may not be imposed.
The court may not impose as a condition for the grant of
probation that the probationer should refrain from continuing her
teaching profession. (Baclayon v. Muta, supra)
Effect of probation on accessory penalties.
Accessory penalties are deemed suspended once probation is
granted. (Baclayon v. Mutia, supra, at 154)
828

The accessory penalties of suspension from public office, from
the right to follow a profession or calling, and that of perpetual special
disqualification from the right of suffrage, attendant to the penalty
of arresto mayor in its max.imum period to prision correccional in its
minimum period imposed upon the accused, are similarly suspended
upon the grant of probation. It appears then that during the period of
probation, the probationer is not even disqualified from running for a
public office because the accessory penalty of suspension from public
office is put on hold for the duration of the probation.xx xx. During
the period of probation, the probationer does not serve the penalty
imposed upon him by the court but is merely required to comply
with all the conditions prescribed in the probation order. (Villareal
v. People, G.R. No. 151258, December 1, 2014)
For how long may a convict be placed on probation?
1.

If the convict is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than one year, the period of probation shall not
exceed two years.

2.

In all other cases, ifhe is sentenced to more than one year,
said period shall not exceed six years.

3.

When the sentence imposes a fine only and the offender
is made to serve subsidiary imprisonment, the period
of probation shall be twice the total number of days of
subsidiary imprisonment.

What are the effects of violation of probation order?
Upon the failure of the probationer to comply with any of the
conditions prescribed in the order, or upon his commission ofanother
offense, he shall serve the penalty imposed for the offense under which
he was placed on probation.
Revocation of probation.
Petitioner does not deny the fact that he has been convicted,
and that he has served out his sentence for another offense while on
probation. Consequently, his commission of another offense is a direct
violation of Condition No. 9 of his Probation Order. Section 11 of the
Probation Law provides that the commission of another offense shall
render the probation order ineffective. Based on the foregoing, the
829

' PROBATION LAW

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
CA was correct in revoking the probation of petitioner and ordering
him to serve the penalty for the offense for which he was placed on
probation. (Suyan v. People, G.R. No. 189644, July 2, 2014)
When may a probationer be arrested, and what is the disposition
once he Is arrested?
At any time during probation, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest ofa probationer for any serious violation of the conditions
of probation. The probationer, once arrested and detained, shall
immediately be brought before the court for a hearing of the violation
charged. The defendant may be admitted to bail pending such hearing.
In such a case, the provisions regarding release on bail of persons
charged with a crime shall be applicable to probationers arrested
under this provision.
In the hearing, which shall be summary in nature, the
probationer shall have the right to be informed of the violation
charged and to adduce evidence in his favor. The court shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence but may inform itself of all
the facts which are material and relevant to ascertain the veracity of
the charge. The State shall be represented by a prosecuting officer in
any contested hearing. If the violation is established, the court may
revoke or continue his probation and modify the conditions thereof.
If revoked, the court shall order the probationer to serve the sentence
originally imposed. An order revoking the grant of probation or
modifying the terms and conditions thereof shall not be appealable.
Notes:
1.

The violation of the conditions of probation must be serious
to justify the issuance of a warrant of arrest.

2.

The defendant may be admitted to bail pending hearing.

3.

The hearing is summary in nature, but the probationer
shall have the right to be informed of the violation charged
and to adduce evidence in his favor.

4.

Court is not bound by the technical rules of evidence.

5.

If the violation is established, the court may revoke or
continue his probation and modify the conditions thereof.
830

6.

If revoked, the court shall order the probationer to serve
the sentence originally imposed.

7.

The order revoking the grant of probation or modifying the
term and conditions thereof is not appealable.

When and how Is probation terminated, and what are the effects
of termination?
Afte r the period of probation and upon consideration of the report
and recommendation of the probation officer, the court may order the
final discharge of the probationer upon finding that he has fulfilled
the terms and conditions of his probation and thereupon the case is
deemed terminated.
The final discharge of the probationer shall operate to restore to
him all civil rights lost or suspended as a result of his conviction and
to totally extinguish his criminal liability as to the offense for which
probation was granted.
The expiration of the probation period alone does not
automatically termin ate probation. Probation is not coterminous with
its period. There must first be issued by the court, an order of final
discharge based on the report and recommendation of the probation
officer. Only from such issuance can the case of the probationer be
deemed terminated. (Bala v. Martinez, G.R. No. 67301, January 29,
1990, 181 SCRA 459, 465-466)
Effect of final discharge of probationer.
Prior to the amendment of P.D. No. 968 by R.A. No. 10707, the
final discharge operated to restore all civil rights and to fully discharge
his liability for any fine imposed. The amendment by R.A. No. 10707
totally extinguished his criminal liability, instead of merely fully
discharging his liability for fine imposed.
Extinction of criminal liability does not necessarily mean that
the civil liability is also extinguished. (Petralba v. Sandiganbayan,
G.R. No. 81337, August 16, 1991, 200 SCRA 644, 649)
Probation affects only the criminal aspect of the case.
Probation affects only the criminal aspect of the case. The
suspension of the sentence imposed on the accused who is granted
831

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

PROBATION LAW

probation has no bearing on his civil liability. The court must hear
the civil aspect. (Budlong u. Apalisok, No. L-60151, June 24, 1983,
122 SCRA 935, 942-943, 945)

the Igorots should be considered as a mitigating circumstance. (People
v. Cawol [Unrep.], 96 Phil. 972)

Penalty on Moros and Non-Christians (Sec. 106, Administrative
Code of Mindanao and Sulu).
Sec. 106. Sentences upon Moros and Non-Christians.
- In pronouncing sentence upon a Moro or other non-Christian
inhabitants of the Department convicted of crime or misdemeanor,
the judge or justice may ignore any minimum penalty provided by
law for the offense, and may impose such penalty not in excess of the
highest penalty provided by law, as, in his opinion, after taking into
consideration all the circumstances of the case, including the state
of enlightenment of the accused and the degree of moral turpitude
which attaches to the offense among his own people, will best subserve
the interest ofjustice. The judge or justice may also, in his discretion
at any time before the expiration of the period allowed for appeal,
suspend the execution of any penalty or part thereof so imposed,
subject to such condition as he may prescribe.

He cannot even invoke in his favor what Section 106 of the
Administrative Code of Mindanao and Sulu accords to a Moro
who commits a crime and is convicted, for even then said section
gives to the court ample discretion to determine the penalty to be
imposed considering the circumstances of the case, the degree of his
instruction, and the nature of the crime committed, the court being
justified in imposing the penalty which would best serve the interest
ofjustice. This is a case where the degree of perversity of the criminal
warrants not mercy but the enforcement of the law to the full extent.
(People u. Salazar, 105 Phil. 1058, 1065)

The application of Section 106 of the Administrative Code of
Mindanao and Sulu is discretionary on the court.
In the imposition of penalty to non-Christian inhabitants, it is
within the discretion of the trial court to apply the special provision
of Section 106 of the Administrative Code of Mindanao and Sulu.
(People v. Pawin, 85 Phil. 528, 532)
Where the accused-appellant is a Mohammedan, inhabitant
of Mindanao, the penalty to be imposed upon him, regardless of
the attending circumstances, lies in the discretion of the trial court
pursuant to Section 106 of the Administrative Code of Mindanao
and Sulu. Ruling in People v. Pawin, supra, reiterated. (People u.
Disimban, 88 Phil. 120, 124)
In the Administrative Code of Mindanao and Sulu, the court is
granted discretion to impose the proper penalty taking into account
the degree of instruction of the Moros without following a fixed rule.
The Igorots are in worse condition than the Moros; the latter are
Mohammedans and the former Pagans; their culture in embryonic
stage is subject to their savage spirit. The lack of instruction among
832

833

TITLE THREE

Art. 79

Penalties

If the judgment does not condemn the accused to suffer
subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency, the accused cannot be
required to suffer the same in case of inability to pay the fine imposed
upon him. (People v. ,Jarumayan, 52 O.G. 249)

Chapter Five
EXECUTION AND SERVICE OF PENALTIES
Section One. - General provisions
Art. 78. When and how a penalty is to be executed. - No
penalty shall be executed except by virtue of a final judgment.
A penalty shall not be executed in any other form than
that prescribed by law, nor with any other circumstances or
incidents than those expressly authorized thereby.
In addition to the provisions of the law, the special
regulations prescribed for the government of the institutions
in which the penalties are to be suffered shall be observed
with regard to the character of the work to be performed,
the time of its performance, and other incidents connected
therewith the relations of the convicts among themselves and
other persons, the relief which they may receive, and their
diet.
The regulations shall make provision for the separation
of the sexes in different institutions, or at least into different
departments, and also for the correction and reform of the
convicts.

Art. 79. Suspension of the execution and service of
the penalties in case of insanity. - When a convict shall
become insane or an imbecile after final sentence has been
pronounced, the execution of said sentence shall be suspended
only with regard to the personal penalty, the provisions of
the second paragraph of circumstance number 1 of Article
12 being observed in the corresponding cases.
If at any time the convict shall recover his reason, his
sentence shall be executed, unless the penalty shall have
prescribed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
The respective provisions of this section shall also be
observed if the insanity or imbecility occurs while the convict
is serving his sentence.

Rules regarding execution and service of penalties in case of
insanity.
1.

When a convict becomes insane or imbecile after final
sentence has been pronounced, the execution of said
sentence is suspended only as regards the personal penalty.

2.

If he recovers his reason, his sentence shall be executed,
unless the penalty has prescribed.

3.

Even if while serving his sentence, the convict becomes
insane or imbecile, the above provisions shall be observed.

4.

But the payment of his civil or pecuniary liabilities shall
not be suspended.

Only penalty by final judgment can be executed.
Paragraph one of this Article provides that "no penalty shall be
executed except by virtue of a final judgment."
The judgment must be final before it can be executed, because
the accused may still appeal within 15 days from its promulgation.
But if the defendant has expressly waived in writing his right to
appeal, the judgment becomes final immediately. (Rule 120, Sec. 7,
Rules of Court)

After the judgment of conviction has become final, the accused
becomes insane. He has enough property to cover the civil liability.

834

835

Only execution of personal penalty is suspended in case of insanity;
civil liability may be executed even in case of insanity of convict.

TITLE THREE
Art. 80

Art. 80

Penalties

Can the offended party ask for the execution-of the judgment with
respect to civil liability?
Yes, because while the execution of the sentence is suspended
as regards the personal penalty, the payment of his civil or pecuniary
liability shall not be suspended.
An accused person may become Insane:
1.

At the time of the commission of the offense;

2.

At the time of trial;

3.

At the time of final judgment; or

4.

Whi le servin g sentence.

lfhe was insane at the time of the commission of the offense, he
is exempt from criminal liability. (Art. 12, par. 1) If he was sane at
the time of the commission of the offense but subsequently becomes
insane during the trial of the case, in such a way that he cannot have
a fair trial or make proper defense even with the help of counsel (U.S.
v. Guendia, 37 Phil. 337, 345), the court shall suspend proceedings
and order his confinement in a hospital until he recovers his reason.
(Art. 12, par. 1) If his insanity should come after final sentence or
while serving his sentence, the execution thereof shall be suspended
with regard to the personal penalty only.

Article 80 of the Revised Penal Code has been repealed by Chapter
Three of P.D. No. 603 (The Child and Youth Welfare Code), and
by R.A. No. 9344 (Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006), as
amended by R.A. No. 10630 (An Act Strengthening the Juvenile
Justice System in the Philippines).

defective, and delinquent children, or to the custody or care
of any other responsible person in any other place subject to
visitation and supervision by the Director of Public Welfare
or any of his agents or representatives, if there be any, or
otherwise by the superintendent of public schools or his
representatives, subject to such conditions as are prescribed
hereinbelow until such minor shall have reached his majority
or for such less period as the court may deem proper. (As
amended by RA. No. 47)
The court, in comm itting said minor as provided above,
shall take into consideration the religion of such minor, his
parents or next of kin, in order to avoid his comm itment to
any private institution not under the control and supervision
of the religious sect or denomination to which they belong.
The Director of Public Welfare or his duly authorized
representatives or agents, the superintendent of public
schools or his representatives, or the person to whose custody
or care the minor has been committed, shall submit to the
court every four months and as often as required in special
cases, a written report on the good or bad conduct of said
minor and the moral and intellectual progress made by him.
The suspension of the proceedings against a min or may be
extended or shortened by the court on the recomm endation of
the Director of Public Welfare or his authorized representatives
or agents, or the superintendent of public schools or his
representatives, according as to whether the conduct of such
minor has been good or not and whether he has complied with
the conditions imposed upon him, or not. The provisions of the
first paragraph of this article shall not, however, be affected
by those contained herein.

Art. 80. Suspension of sentence of minor delinquents. Whenever a minor of either sex, under sixteen years of age
at the date of the comm ission of a grave or less grave felony,
is accused thereof, the court, after hearing the evidence in
the proper proceedings, instead of pronouncing judgment of
conviction shall suspend all further proceedings and shall
commit such minor to the custody or care of a public or private,
benevolent or charitable institution, established under the law
for the care, correction, or education of orphaned, homeless,

If the minor has been committed to the custody or care of
any of the institutions mentioned in the first paragraph of this
article, with the approval of the Director of Public Welfare and
subject to such conditions as this official in accordance with
law may deem proper to impose, such minor may be allowed
to stay elsewhere under the care of a responsible person.

836

837

If the minor has behaved properly and has complied with
the conditions imposed upon him during his confinement,

Art. 80

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

in accordance with the provisions of this article, he shall be
returned to the court in order that the same may order his
final release.
In case the minor fails to behave properly or to comply
with the regulations of the institution to which he has been
committed or with the conditions imposed upon him when
he was comm itted to the care of a responsible person, or in
case he should be found incorrigible or his continued stay in
such institution should be inadvisable, he shall be returned
to the court in order that the same may render the judgment
corresponding to the crime commi tted by him,
The expenses for the maintenance of a minor delinquent
confined in the institution to which he has been committed,
shall be borne totally or partially by his parents or relatives
or those persons liable to support him, if they are able to do
so, in the discretion of the court: Provided, That in case his
parents or relatives or those persons liable to support him
have not been ordered to pay said expenses, the municipality
in which the offense was committed shall pay one-third of said
expenses; the province to which the municipality belongs shall
pay one-third; and the remaining one-third shall be borne by
the National Government: Provided, however, That whenever
the Secretary of Finance certifies that a municipality is not
able to pay its share in the expenses above mentioned, such
share which is not paid by said municipality shall be borne
by the National Governm ent. Chartered cities shall pay twothirds of said expenses; and in case a chartered city cannot
pay said expenses, the internal revenue allotments which may
be due to said city shall be withheld and applied in settlement
of said indebtedness in accordance with section five hundred
and eighty-eight of the Administrative Code. (As amended by
CA. No. 99 and RA. No. 47)

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 80

Exemption from criminal liability.
A child 15 years of age or under at the time of the commission of
the offense shall be exempt from criminal liability. The child shall be
immediately released to the custody of his/her parents or guardian,
or the child's nearest relative, and be subjected to a community-based
intervention program, unless the best interest of the child requires
the referral of the child to a youth care facility or "Bahay Pag-asa."
A child above 15 years but below 18 years of age shall likewise
be exempt from criminal liability and be subjected to an intervention
program, unless he/she has acted with discernment, in which case,
such child shall be subjected to the diversion proceedings.
The exemption from criminal liability does not include exemption
from civil liability, wh.ich shall be enforced in accordance with existing
laws. (Sec. 6, R.A. No. 9344)

Duties during initial investigation.
(1)

The law enforcement officer shall determine where the
case involving the child in conflict with the law should be
referred.

(2)

The Local Social Welfare and Development Officer
(LSWDO) shall conduct an initial assessment to determine
the appropriate interventions and whether the child acted
with discernment, using the discernment assessment tools
developed by the DSWD. He shall do either of the following:
(a)

Proceed with an intervention program if the child is
15 years or below or above 15 but below 18 years old,
who acted without discernment; and

(b)

Proceed to diversion if the child is above 15 years old
but below 18 and who acted with discernment.

Intervention program for children 15 years and belo.

Child in Conflict with the Law.
Under Section 4 of R.A. No. 9344, a "Child" is defined as "a
person under eighteen (18) years" while a "Child in Conflict with the
Law" refers to "a child who is alleged as, accused of, or adjudged as,
having committed an offense under Philippine laws."
838

If it has been determined that the child taken into custody is 15
years old or below, the authority which will have an initial contact
with the child has the duty to immediately release the child to the
custody of his/her parents or guardian, or in the absence thereof the
child's nearest relative. '
839

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 80

The child shall be subjected to a community-based intervention
program supervised by the LSWDO, unless the best interest of the
child requires the referral of the child to a youth care facility or 'Bahay
Pag-asa.'
If the child has been found by the LSWDO to be dependent,
abandoned, neglected or abused by his/her parents and the best
interest of the child requires that he/she be placed in a youth care
facility or 'Bahay Pag-asa,' the child's parents or guardians shall
execute a written authorization for the voluntary commitment of the
child.
The minimum age for children committed to a youth care facility
or 'Bahay Pag-asa' shall be 12 years old. (Sec. 20, R.A. No. 9344, as
amended)

Petition for involuntary commitment.
If the child 15 years old and below has no parents or guardians or
if they refuse or fail to execute the written authorization for voluntary
commitment, the proper petition for involuntary commitment shall
be immediately filed by the DSWD or the LSWDO. (See. 20, R.A. No.
9344, as amended)

Diversion program for children over 15 and under 18 who acted
with discernment.
(1)

Where the imposable penalty is not more than six years
imprisonment - the Jaw enforcement officer or punong
barangay, with the assistance of the LSWDO, shall conduct
mediation, family conferencing and conciliation and,
where appropriate, adopt modes of conflict resolution in
accordance with the best interest of the client. The child
and the family shall be present in these activities.

Art. 80

Duty ofthe law enforcement officer when there is no diversion.
Where the imposable penalty for the crime committed exceeds
six years imprisonment, or if the child, his/her parents or guardian
does not agree to diversion, the Women and Children Protection Desk
of the PNP or other Jaw enforcement officer handling the case shall,
within eight days from determination of absence ofjurisdiction over
the case or termination of diversion proceedings, forward the records
of the case to the prosecutor or judge for the conduct of inquest and/
or preliminary investigation to determine whether or not the child
should remain under custody and correspondingly charged in court.
(Sec. 28, R.A. No. 9344)

Preliminary investigation and fling ofinformation.
The prosecutor shall conduct a preliminary investigation in the
following instances:
(a)

when the child in conflict with the Jaw does not qualify for
diversion;

(b)

when the child, his/her parents or guardian does not agree
to ctiversion; and

(c)

when considering the assessment and recommendation of
the LSWDO, the prosecutor determines that ctiversion is
not appropriate for the child in conflict with the Jaw.

Upon serving the subpoena and the affidavit of complaint, the
prosecutor shall notify the Public Attorney's Office of such service, as
well as the personal information, and place of detention of the child
in conflict with the Jaw.
Upon determination of probable cause by the prosecutor, the
information against the child shall be filed before the Family Court
within 45 days from the start of the preliminary investigation. The
information must allege that the child acted with discernment. (Sec.
33, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)

(2)

In victimless crimes where the imposable penalty is not
more than six years imprisonment, the LSWDO shall
meet with the child and his/her parents or guardians
for the development of the appropriate diversion and
rehabilitation program.

Automatic suspension of sentence under Republic Act No. 9344.

(3)

Where the imposable penalty for the crime committed
exceeds six years imprisonment, diversion measures may
be resorted to only by the court.

Once the child who is under 18 years of age at the time of the
commission of the offense is found guilty of the offense charged, the
court shall determine and ascertain any civil liability which may have

840

841

Art. 80

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

resulted from the offense committed. However, instead of pronouncing
the judgment of conviction, the court shall place the child in conflict
with the law under suspended sentence, without need of application:
Provided, however, That suspension of sentence shall be applied even
if the juvenile is already 18 years of age or more at the time of the
pronouncement of his/her guilt. (See Sec. 38, R.A. No. 9344)
Automatic suspension of sentence applies to a child in conflict with
the law found guilty of a heinous crime.
In People v. Sarcia, 15 Phil. 97, 128 (2009), the Supreme Court
ruled on the applicability of Section 38, R.A. No. 8344 even if the
minor therein was convicted of reclusion perpetua and ratiocinated
as follows:
The above-quoted (Sec. 38 ofR.A. No. 9344) provision makes no
distinction as to the nature of the offense committed by the child in
conflict with the law, unlike P.D. No. 603 and AM. No. 02-1-18-SC.
The said P.D. and Supreme Court (SC) Rule provide that the benefit
of suspended sentence would not apply to a child in conflict with
the law if, among others, he/she has been convicted of an offense
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment. In
construing Section 38 of R.A. No. 9344, the Court is guided by the
basic principle of statutory construction that when the law does not
distinguish, we should not distinguish. Since R.A. No. 9344 does not
distinguish between a minor who has been convicted of a capital
offense and another who has been convicted of a lesser offense, the
Court should also not distinguish and should apply the automatic
suspension of sentence to a child in conflict with the law who has
been found guilty of a heinous crime.
Suspension of sentence lasts only until the child in conflict with
the law reaches 21 years of age.
The suspension of sentence lasts only until the child in conflict
with the law reaches the maximum age of21 years. Section 40 of the
Jaw and Section 48 of the Rule are clear on the matter. Unfortunately,
appellant is now 25 years old.
Be that as it may, to give meaning to the legislative intent of the
Act, the promotion of the welfare of a child in conflict with the Jaw
should extend even to one who has exceeded the age limit of21 years,

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 80

so long as he/she committed the crime when he/she was still a child.
The offender shall be entitled to the right to restoration, rehabilitation
and reintegration in accordance with the Act in order that he/she is
given the chance to live a normal life and become a productive member
of the community. The age of the child in conflict with the law at the
time of the promulgation of the judgment of conviction is not material.
What matters is that the offender committed the offense when he/
she was still of tender age.
Thus, appellant may be confined in an agricultural camp or any
other training facility in accordance with Section 51 of R.A. No. 9344.
(People v. Jacinto, G.R. No. 182239, March 16, 2011)
Detention of the child pending trial.
Children detained pending trial may be released on bail or
recognizance. In all other cases and whenever possible, detention
pendmg tnal may be replaced by alternative measures such as
close supervision, intensive care or placement with a family or in an
education setting or home. Institutionalization or detention of the
child pending trial shall be used only as a measure of last resort and
for the shortest possible period of time.
Whenever detention is necessary, a child will always be detained
in youth detention homes established by local governments, pursuant
to Section 8 of the Family Courts Act, in the city or municipality where
the child resides.
. In the absence of a youth detention home, the child in conflict
with the law may be committed to the care of the DSWD or a local
rehabilitation center recognized by the government in the province,
city or municipality within the jurisdiction of the court. The center
or agency concerned shall be responsible for the child's appearance
mn court whenever required. (Sec. 36, R.A. No. 9344)
Discharge of the child In conflict with the law.
Upon the recommendation of the social worker who has custody
of the child, the court shall dismiss the case against the child whose
sentence has been suspended and against whom disposition measures
have been issued, and shall order the final discharge of the child if it
finds that the objective of the disposition measures have been fulfilled.

842
843

Art. 80

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The discharge of the child in conflict with the law shall not affect
the civil liability resulting from the commission of the offense, which
shall be enforced in accordance with law. (Sec. 39, R.A. No. 9344)

province to which the municipality belongs, and 1/3 shall
be borne by the national governm ent;
b)

Chartered cities shall pay 2/3 of said expenses. In case
a chartered city cannot pay said expenses, part of the
internal revenue allotments applicable to the unpaid
portion shall be withheld and applied to the settlement of
said obligations;

c)

In the event that the child in conflict with the law is not
a resident of the municipality/city where the offense was
committed, the court, upon its determination, may require
the city/municipality where the child in conflict with the
law resides to shoulder the cost.

Return of the child in conflict with the law to court
If the court finds that the objective of the disposition measures
imposed upon the child in conflict with the law have not been fulfilled,
or if the child in conflict with the law has willfully failed to comply
with the conditions of his/her disposition or rehabilitation program,
the child in conflict with the law shall be brought before the court for
execution ofjudgment.
If said child in conflict with the law has reached 18 years of age
while under suspended sentence, the court shall determine whether to
discharge the child in accordance with this Act, to order execution of
sentence, or to extend the suspended sentence for a certain specified
period or until the child reaches the maximum age of 21 years. (Sec.
40, R.A. No. 9344)
Credit In service of sentence.
The child in conflict with the law shall be credited in the service
of his/her sentence with the full time spent in actual commitment and
detention under this Act. (Sec. 41, R.A. No. 9344)
Probation as an alternative to imprisonment.
The court may, aft.er it shall have convicted and sentenced a child
in conflict with the law, and upon application at any time, place the
child on probation in lieu of service of his/her sentence taking into
account the best interest of the child. (Sec. 42, R.A. No. 9344)
Care and maintenance of the child In conflict with the law.
The expenses for the care and maintenance of a child in conflict
with the law under institutional care shall be borne by his/her parents
or those persons liable to support him/her.
In case his/her parents or those persons liable to support him/
her cannot pay all or part of said expenses:
a)

1/3 of said expenses shall be shouldered by the municipality
where the offense was committed, 1/3 shall be paid by the
844

Art. 80

Confinement of convicted children in agricultural camps and other
training facilities.
A child in conflict with the law may, after conviction and upon
order of the court, be made to serve his/her sentence, in lieu of
confinement in a regular penal institution, in an agricultural camp
and other training facilities that may be established, maintained,
supervised and controlled by the Bureau of Corrections, in coordination
with the Department of Social Welfare and Development. (Sec. 51,
R.A. No. 9344)
Civil liability.
The parents shall be liable for damages unless they prove, to
the satisfaction of the court, that they were exercising reasonable
supervision over the child at the time the child committed the offense
and exerted reasonable effort and utmost diligence to prevent or
discourage the child from committing another offense. (Sec. 20-D,
R.A. No. 9344)
Exploitation of children for commission of crimes.
Any person who, in the commission of a crime, makes use, takes
advantage of, or profits from the use of children, including any person
who abuses his/her authority over the child or who, with abuse of
confidence, takes advantage of the vulnerabilities of the child and
shall induce, threaten or instigate the commission of the crime, shall
be imposed the penalty prescribed by law for the crime committed.
(Sec. 20-C, R.A. No. 9344, as amended)
845

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Liability of parents or guardian or any person in the commission
of delinquent acts by their children or wards.

The death sentence shall be carried out not earlier than
one (1) year nor later than eighteen (18) months after the
judgment has become final and executory without prejudice
to the exercise by the President of his executive clemency
powers at all times. (As amended by RA. No. 7659 and RA.
No.8177)

Art. 81

A person whether the parent or guardian of the child or not,
who knowingly or willfully,
(1)

Aids, causes, abets or connives with the commission by a
child of a delinquency, or

(2)

Does any act producing, promoting, or contributing to a
child's being or becoming a juvenile delinquent, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred pesos or to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years, or both
such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court.
(Art. 204, P.D. No. 603)

Section Two.

Execution of principal penalties

Art. 81. When and how the death penalty is to be executed.
- The death sentence shall be executed with preference to any
other penalty and shall consist in putting the person under
sentence to death by lethal injection. The death sentence
shall be executed under the authority of the Director of the
Bureau of Corrections, endeavoring so far as possible to
mitigate the sufferings of the person under sentence during
the lethal injection as well as during the proceedings prior
to the execution.
The Director of the Bureau of Corrections shall take
steps to ensure that the lethal injection to be administered is
sufficient to cause the instantaneous death of the convict.
Pursuant to this, all personnel involved in the
administration of lethal injection shall be trained prior to
the performance of such task.
The authorized physician of the Bureau of Corrections,
after thorough examination, shall officially make a
pronouncement of the convict's death and shall certify thereto
in the records of the Bureau of Corrections.

846

Art. 81

Republlc Act No. 9346 expressly repealed Republic Act No. 8177
which prescribed death by lethal injection.
Section 1 of R.A. No. 9346 provides as follows:
"SECTION 1. The imposition of the penalty of death is
hereby prohibited. Accordingly, Republic Act No. Eight Thousand
One Hundred Seventy-Seven (R.A. No. 8177), otherwise known
as the Act Designating Death by Lethal Injection, is hereby
repe aled. Republic Act No. Seven Thousand Six Hundred Fif.yNine (R.A. No. 7659), otherwise known as the Death Penalty
Law, and all other laws, executive orders and decrees, insofar as
they impose the death penalty are hereby repealed or amended
accordingly."
In view of the enactment of Republic Act No. 9346, the death penalty
may not be imposed. Thus, Articles 81 to 85 of the Revised Penal
Code have no application.
Death sentence shall be executed with preference to any other
penalty.
According to Article 81, the death sentence shall be executed with
preference to any other penalty. This is in accordance with Article 70
providing for successive service of sentences. Death penalty is No. 1
in the order of the severity of the penalties listed there.
Death sentence is executed by lethal injection.
Under R.A. No. 8177 which was approved on March 20, 1996, the
death sentence shall be executed by means of lethal injection. Prior
to the enactment of R.A. No. 8177, the death sentence was executed
by electrocution.
847

Art. 82

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Criminal Law

When death sentence shall be carried out.
The death sentence shall be carried out not earlier than one
year nor later than 18 months after the judgment becomes final and
executory, without prejudice to the exercise by the President of his
executive clemency powers.

Art. 82. Notification and execution of the sentence and
assistance to the culprit. - The court shall designate a working
day for the execution, but not the hour thereof; and such
designation shall not be communicated to the offender before
sunrise of said day, and the execution shall not take place
until after the expiration of at least eight hours following the
notification, but before sunset. During the interval between
the notification and the execution, the culprit shall, insofar
as possible, be furnished such assistance as he may request
in order to be attended in his last moments by priests or
ministers of the religion he professes and to consult lawyers,
as well as in order to make a will and confer with members
of his family or person in charge of the management of his
business, of the administration of his property, or of the care
of his descendants.

A convict sentenced to death may make a will.
Such convict shall have the right to consult a lawyer and to make
a will for the disposition of his property.
May a convict sentenced to death dispose of his property by an act
or conveyance inter vivos?
According to Article 40, one of the accessory penalties of death
is civil interdiction. According to Article 34, civil interdiction shall
deprive the offender of the right to dispose of his property by any act
or conveyance inter uiuos. But Article 40 specifically provides that
civil interdiction is its accessory penalty only when the death penalty
is not executed by reason of commutation or pardon.
848

Art. 83

Problem:
A had been sentenced to death which was affirmed by the
Supreme Court. After he was notified of the date of execution A
asked for his friend B and by means of a deed of donation inter vivos,
transferred all his property to him who accepted the donation. If A
had no forced heirs, is the transfer valid?

It seems that the transfer is valid, because ifA was put to death
subsequently, he was not suffering civil interdiction at the time he
executed the deed of donation inter uiuos.
Complication may arise if A was not executed by reason of
commutation or pardon, for in that case, he would suffer civil
interdiction. A question may be asked whether the deed of donation
inter uiuos could still be considered valid.

Art. 83. Suspension ofthe execution ofthe death sentence.
- The death sentence shall not be inflicted upon a woman
within one (1) year after delivery, nor upon any person over
seventy years of age. In this last case, the death sentence shall
be commuted to the penalty of reclusion perpetua with the
accessory penalties provided in Article 40.
In all cases where the death sentence has become final,
the records of the case shall be forwarded immediately by
the Supreme Court to the Office of the President for possible
exercise of the pardoning power. (As Amended by RA. No,
7659)

Death sentence shall be suspended when the accused is a (1)

Woman, while pregnant;

(2)

Woman, within one year after delivery;

(3)

Person over 70 years of age.
The suspension of the execution of the death sentence
as regards a person over 70 years old is necessary to give
the President time to act, because only the President can
commute the sentence.
849

Art. 83

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The accused was 56 years old when he testified in
1962. An agent of the National Bureau of Investigation
reported that in 1972, he was already 70 years old. The
death penalty cannot be imposed upon any person over 70
years of age. It should be commuted to reclusion perpetua
with the accessory penalties provided in Article 40.(People
v. Yu, No. L-29667, November 29, 1977, 80 SCRA 382, 395)
The appellant was found guilty of the complex crime
of murder with frustrated murder with the aggravating
circumstances of evident premeditation, craft and dwelling
and was sentenced to death. However, since he was already
more than 70 years old, the penalty of reclusion perpetua
was imposed. (People v. Miraflores, Nos. L-32144-45, July
30, 1982, 115 SCRA 570, 593-594; People w. Del Mundo,
No. L-39051, June 29, 1982, 114 SCRA 719, 724)
(4)

Convict who becomes insane after final sentence of death
has been pronounced. (See Article 79)
But when he recovers his reason and before the
penalty has prescribed, he may be put to death.

Distinguish Article 83 from Article 47.
Article 47 provides for cases in which death penalty is not to be
imposed. They are:
l.

When the guilty person is more than 70 years of age;

2.

When upon appeal or automatic review of the case by the
Supreme Court, the required majority vole is not obtained
for imposing the death penalty; and

3.

When the convict is a minor under 18 years of age.

Note:

No. 3 may be added in view of Article 68.

On the other hand, Article 83 provides for suspension only of
the execution of death sentence.
Regional Trial Court (formerly CFI) can suspend execution of death
sentence.
The Regional Trial Court which imposes death penalty has the
power to suspend temporarily the execution of the sentence, after
850

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Art. 84

the judgment has become final, and after the date has been fixed for
execution, upon petition on behalf of the prisoner, based upon grounds
arising after judgment has become final, the adjudication of which
does not challenge the validity of the judgment or involve a review
or reconsideration of the proceedings.
Among such grounds are the alleged (1) insanity or pregnancy of
the convict, (2) the alleged non-identity of the prisoner with the person
actually convicted and sentenced, (3) the alleged lack of a suitable
opportunity to be heard on an application for executive clemency, and
the like. (Director of Prisons v. Judge of First Instance of Cavite, 29
Phil. 265, 271-274)
But the court cannot grant indefinite, permanent or conditional
suspension of the execution of sentences pronounced in criminal cases.
Execution of death sentence after delivery of pregnant woman.
Under the old Code, the death sentence could be executed only
after the lapse of 40 days from delivery.
Under R.A. No. 7659, the execution of the death sentence upon a
pregnant woman will be carried out only one year after her delivery.
Records to be forwarded to the Office of the President, when the
death sentence has become final.
In all cases where the death sentence has become final, the
records of the case shall be forwarded to the Office of the President
for possible exercise of the pardoning power. (Art. 83, par. 2)

Art. 84. Place of execution and persons who may witness
the same. - The execution shall take place in the penitentiary
or Bilibid in a space closed to the public view and shall be
witnessed only by the priests assisting the offender and by
his lawyers and by his relatives, not exceeding six, if he so
requests, by the physician and the necessary personnel of the
penal establishment, and by such persons as the Director of
Prisons may authorize.

861

TITLE THREE
Penalties

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 85

Criminal Law

Place of execution.
The execution shall take place in the penitentiary or Bilibid in
a space closed to the public view.
Persons who may witness execution.
1)

priests assisting the offender,

2)

offender's lawyers,

3)

offender's relatives, not exceeding six, if so requested,

4)

physician, and

5)

necessary personnel of penal establishment.

A person below 18 years of age may not be allowed to witness
an execution. (Sec. 23, par. 2, Amended Rules and Regulations to
Implement R.A. No. 8177)

Art. 85. Provisions relative to the corpse of the person
executed and its burial.
Unless claimed by his family, the
corpse of the culprit shall, upon the completion of the legal
proceedings subsequent to the execution, be turned over to
the institute of learning or scientific research first applying
for it, for the purpose of study and investigation, provided
that such institute shall take charge of the decent burial of
the remains. Otherwise, the Director of Prisons shall order
the burial of the body of the culprit at government expense,
granting permission to be present thereat to the members
of the family of the culprit and the friends of the latter. In
no case shall the burial of the body of a person sentenced to
death be held with pomp.
The "burial of the body of a person sentenced to death" should not
"be held with pomp."
The last sentence ofArticle 85 prohibits the buryi ng of the corpse
of a person sentenced to death with pomp. This is penalized under
Article 153. The purpose of the law is to prevent anyone from making
a hero out of a criminal.

862

Arts. 86-87

Art. 86. Reclusion perpetua, reclusion temporal, prision
mayor, prision correccional and arresto mayor. - 'The
penalties of reclusion perpetua, reclusion temporal, prision
mayor, prision correccional and arresto mayor, shall be
executed and served in the places and penal establishments
provided by the Administrative Code in force or which may
be provided by law in the future.

Art, 87. Destierro. - Any person sentenced to destierro
shall not be permitted to enter the place or places designated
in the sentence, nor within the radius therein specified, which
shall be not more than 250 and not less than 26 kilometers
from the place designated.

Illustration of destierro imposed as a penalty.
A was sentenced to the penalty of destierro, according to which
he should not enter the place within the radius of 25 kilometers from
the City Hall of Manila, for a period of two years, four months and
one day.
In this case, A was not completely deprived of his liberty, as
he could go freely to whatever place except within the radius of 25
kilometers from the City Hall of Manila.
Destierro is imposed:
1.

When death or serious physical injuries is caused or are
inflicted under exceptional circumstances. (Art. 247)

2.

When a person fails to give bond for good behavior. (Art.
284)

3.

As a penalty for the concubine in the crime of concubinage.
(Art . 334)

4.

When after lowering the penalty by degrees, destierro is
the proper penalty.

853

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE THREE
Penalties

Entering the prohibition area Is evasion of the service of the
sentence.

her means of subsistence and that of her husband are a retail store.
(People v. Torrano, C.A., 40 0.G., 12th Supp., 18)

Facts: For the crime committed, the accused was sentenced to
the penalty of destierro, according to which he should not enter while
serving the sentence within the radius of 25 kilometers of the City
Hall of Manila. (Art. 87)In that penalty ofdestierro, the convict could
freely go to whatever place, except within the radius of25 kilometers
from the City Hall of Manila. But the accused entered Manila while
serving the sentence of destierro.

But where the accused was sentenced to 30 days imprisonment
under Act 3992 and he was suffering from tuberculosis, requiring
outside treatment, he was allowed to serve his sentence in his house.
(People v. Dayrit, C.A., 40 O.G., 11th Supp., 280)

Art. 88

Held: There is evasion of the service of the sentence ofdestierro.
(People v. De Jesus, 80 Phil. 748, 750)

Art. 88. Arresto menor. -- The penalty of arresto menor
shall be served in the municipal jail, or in the house of the
defendant hims elf under the surveillance of an officer of the
law, when the court so provides in its decision, taking into
consideration the health of the offender and other reasons
which may seem satisfactory to it,
Penalty that may be served in the house of defendant.
This article provides that the penalty of arresto menor may be
served in the house of the defendant.
But it is required as a condition that it should be under the
surveillance of an officer of the law.
"When the court so provides In Its decision."
Note the use of the clause in the law.
Hence, unless the court makes a statement in its decision that
the accused can serve the sentence in his house, the accused cannot
be permitted to do so by the jailer.
The grounds are the health of the offender and other reasons
satisfactory to the court.
It is not a satisfactory, plausible reason that the accused is a
woman of 50 years, respectable member of the community and that
854

866

Art. 88

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 89

Causes of extinction of criminal liability distinguished from causes
of justification or exemption.

Title Four
EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL
LIABILITY

Causes of extinction of criminal liability arise after the
commission of the offense; while the causes of justification or
exemption from criminal liability arise from circumstances existing
either before the commission of the crime or at the moment of its
commission.
That criminal liability is totally extinguished is a ground for motion

Chapter One
TOTAL EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY
Art. 89. How criminal liability is totally extinguished. Criminal liability is totally extinguished:
I.
By the death of the convict, as to the personal
penalties; and as to pecuniary penalties, liability therefor
is extinguished only when the death of the offender occurs
before final judgment;
2.

By service of the sentence;

3.
By amnesty, which completely extinguishes the
penalty and all its effects;
4.

By absolute pardon;

5.

By prescription of the crime;

6.

By prescription of the penalty;

7.
By the marriage of the offended woman, as provided
in Article 344 of this Code.

Extinction of criminal liability does not automatically extinguish
the civil liability.
Extinction of criminal liability does not necessarily mean that
the civil liability is also extinguished. (Petralba v. Sandiganbayan,
G.R. No. 81337, August 16, 1991, 200 SCRA 644, 649)
856

to quash.
Under Section 3(g) of Rule 117 of the Revised Rules of Criminal
Procedure, one of the grounds for motion to quash is that the criminal
action has been extinguished. The order sustaining a motion to quash
on this ground constitutes a bar to another prosecution for the same
offense. (Sec. 6, Rule 117)
By the death of the convict.
The death of the convict, whether before or after final judgment,
extinguishes criminal liability, because one of the juridical conditions
of penalty is that it is personal.
Civil liability is extinguished only when death occurs before final
judgment.
The death of the convict also extinguishes pecuniary penalties
only when the death of the offender occurs before final judgment.
Hence, if the offender dies after final judgment, the pecuniary
penalties are not extinguished.
Where a person is charged with homicide, for instance, the civil
liability for indemnity is based solely on the finding of guilt. If he is
acquitted because of self-defense, the heirs of the deceased have no
right to indemnity. Should the offender die before final judgment,
their right to indemnity is likewise extinguished as there is no basis
for the civil liability. Civil liability exists only when the accused is
convicted by final judgment.
Criminal and civil liability is extinguished when the offender dies
before final judgment.
When the accused died while the judgment of conviction
against him was pending appeal, his civil and criminal liability was
857

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

Art. 89

Criminal Law

of physical injuries, entirely separate and distinct from
the criminal action (See Belamala v. Polinar, No. L-24098,
November 18, 1967, 21 SCRA 700);

extinguished by his death. (People v. Alison, No. L-30612, April 27,
1972, 44 SCRA 523, 525)
In view of the death of the accused during the pendency of
this case he is relieved of all personal and pecuniary penalties
attendant to his crime, his death occurring before rendition of final
judgment. (People v. Jose, No. L-28397, June 17, 1976, 71 SCRA
273, 282)

b)

Definition of "final judgment."
The term "final judgment" employed in the R.P.C. means
judgment beyond recall. As long as a judgment has not become
executory, it cannot be truthfully said that defendant is definitely
guilty of the felony charged against him. (People v. Bayotas, G.R.
No. 152007, September 2, 1994, 236 SCRA 239) Section 7, Rule 16
of the Rules of Court likewise states that a judgment in a criminal
case becomes final after the lapse of the period for perfecting an
appeal or when the sentence has been partially or totally satisfied
or served, or the defendant has expressly waived in writing his right
to appeal.
Effect of the death of the accused pending appeal on his crlmlnal
and civil liability.

If the private offended party, upon extinction, of the civil liability
ex delicto, desires to recover damages from the same act or omission
complained of, he must, subject to Section 1, Rule 111 of the Revised
Rules of Criminal Procedure, file a separate civil action, this time
predicated not on the felony previously charged but on other sources
of obligation. The source of obligation upon which the separate civil
action is premised determines against whom the same shall be
enforced. Thus a)

If the same act or omission complained of also arises from
quasi-delict or may, by provision oflaw, result in an injury
to person or property (real or personal), the separate civil
action must be filed against the executor or administrator
of the estate of the accused pursuant to Section 1, Rule 87
of the Rules of Court.

b)

If the same act or omission complained of also arises from
contract, the separate civil action must be filed against the
estate of the accused, pursuant to Section 5, Rule 86 of the
Rules of Court. (People v. Bayotas, supra)

Death ofthe accused pending appeal of his conviction extinguishes
his criminal liability as well as the civil liability based solely on the
offense committed.
Exception:
The claim for civil liability survives notwithstanding the death of
accused, if the same may also be predicated on a source of obligation
other than delict, such as law, contracts, quasi-contracts and quasidelicts. (People v. Bayotas, supra)
Examples:
The claim for civil liability based on law may also be made
- in the offense of physical injuries, since Article 33 of the
Civil Code establishes a civil action for damages on account
858

Claim for civil liability based on contract may also be made
- in the offense of estafa when the civil liability springs
neither solely nor originally from the crime itself but from
a civil contract of purchase and sale (as when accused had
swindled the vendees of the property subject matter of
the contract of sale). (See Torrijos v. Court ofAppeals, No.
L-40336, October 24, 1975, 67 SCRA 394)

Where action for recovery of damages must be filed, when civil
liability survives.

General rule

a)

Art. 89

Right of offended party to file separate civil action not lost by
prescription when accused dies pending appeal.
The private offended party need not fear a forfeiture of his right
to file the separate civil action by prescription, in cases where during
the prosecution of the criminal action and prior to its extinction, the
859

Art. 89

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

private offended party instituted together therewith the civil action.
In such case, the statute oflimitations on the civil liability is deemed
interrupted during the pendency of the criminal case, confonnably
with provisions of Article 1155 of the Civil Code. (People v. Bayotas,
supra)

Amnesty may be granted after conviction.

Article 1155 of the Civil Code provides: The prescription of
actions is interrupted when they are filed before the court, when there
is a written extrajudicial demand by the creditors, and when there is
any written acknowledgment of the debt by the debtor.

Examples of amnesty:

Death of the offended party does not extinguish the criminal llablllty
of the offender.

The death of the offended party does not extinguish the criminal
liability of the offender, because the offense is committed against the
State. (People v. Misola, 87 Phil. 830, 833)
By service of sentence.

Crime is a debt incurred by the offender as a consequence of his
wrongful act and the penalty is but the amount of his debt. When
payment is made, the debt is extingu.ished.
Service of sentence does not extinguish the civil liability.
(Salgado v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No. 89606, August 30, 1990, 189
SCRA 304, 310)
By amnesty.

Art. 89

The amnesty proclamation in favor of the Hukbalahaps is
applicable to those already undergoing sentence upon the date of its
promulgation. (Tolentino v. Catoy, 82 Phil. 300)

1.

Proclamation No. 51, dated January 28, 1948, by President
Roxas, granting amnesty to those who collaborated with
the enemy during World War II. (See 44 O.G. 408)

2.

Proclamation No. 76, dated June 21, 1948, by President
Quirino, extending amnesty to the Huks and PKM
(Pambansang Kaisahan ng mga Magbubukid), who
committed rebellion, sedition, illegal association, etc. (See
44O.G. 1794)

3.

Proclamation No. 80, dated February 28, 1987, by President
Aquino, extending amnesty to those who, in the furtherance
of their political beliefs, may have committed treason,
conspiracy or proposal to commit the crime of treason,
misprision of treason, espionage, rebellion or insurrection,
conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion or insurrection,
inciting to rebellion or insurrection, sedition, conspiracy to
commit sedition, inciting to sedition, illegal assemblies,
illegal associations, direct assault, indirect assault,
resistance and disobedience to a person in authority or
agents of such person or persons, subversion, and illegal
possession of firearms and explosives.

Amnesty, defined.

Civil liability not extinguished by amnesty.

It is an act of the sovereign power granting oblivion or a general
pardon for a past offense, and is rarely, if ever, exercised in favor of
a single individual, and is usually exerted in behalf of certain classes
of persons, who are subject to trial but have not yet been convicted.
(Brown • Walker, 161 U.S. 602)

While amnesty wipes out all traces and vestiges of the crime,
it does not extinguish the civil liability of the offender. U.S. v.
Madlangbayan, 2 Phil. 426, 428-429)

Amnesty completely extinguishes the penalty and all its effects.
Note the clause in paragraph 3 of Article 89, which says: "which
completely extinguishes the penalty and all its effects."

860

By absolute pardon.

Pardon, defined.
It is an act of grace proceeding from the power entrusted with
the execution of the laws which exempts the individual on whom it is
bestowed from the punishment the law inflicts for the crime he has
committed.
861

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 89

involving violations of election laws, rules and regulations in which
there was no favorable recommendation coming from the COMELEC.
(Sec. 19 of Art. VII and Sec. 5 of Art. IX, 1987 Constitution)

Kinds ofpardon:
(a)

Absolute pardon.

(b)

Conditional pardon.

Art. 89

A pardon, whether absolute or conditional, is in the nature of a
deed, for the validity of which delivery is an indispensable requisite.
Until accepted, all that may have been done is a matter of intended
favor and may be cancelled. But once accepted by the grantee, the
pardon already delivered cannot be revoked by the authority which
granted it.
Pardon in adultery case.
A was charged with the crime ofadultery with a married woman.
The married woman, after conviction of both accused, was pardoned
by the Chief Executive.
Does the pardon of the woman have the effect of extinguishing
the criminal liability ofA?

Absolute Pardon.
Risos-Vidal • Comelec
(G.R. No. 206666, January 21, 2015)
The pardon granted by former President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo
to former President Estrada on October 25, 2007 states, in part: "In view
hereofand pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by the Constitution,
I hereby grant executive clemency to Joseph Ejercito Estrada, convicted by
the Sandiganbayan of Plunder and imposed a penalty ofReclusion Perpetua.
He is hereby restored to his civil and political rights."
Is former President Estrada qualified to vote and be voted for in public
office as a result of the pardon granted to him?

No, because (1) the power to extend executive clemency is
unlimited, and (2) that the exercise of that power lies in the absolute
and uncontrolled discretion of the Chief Executive. (U.S. v. Guarin,
30 Phil. 85, 87)

Held: Former President Estrada was granted an absolute pardon that
fully restored all his civil and political rights, which naturally includes the
right to seek public elective office. The pardon granted to former President
Estrada was absolute, meaning, it was not only unconditional, it was
unrestricted in scope, complete and plenary in character, as the term "political
rights" adverted to has a settled meaning in law and jurisprudence.

But if the one giving the pardon is the offended spouse in
adultery, both offenders must be pardoned by the offended party if
said pardon is to be effective. (People v. Infante, 57 Phil. 138, 139)

Conviction by final judgment prohibits grant of pardon during
pendency of appeal.

Pardon of murder after evasion of service of sentence.
A was convicted of murder. Subsequently, A evaded the service
of the sentence. A was prosecuted for and convicted of evasion. The
President thereafter pardoned A of the murder.

The "conviction by final judgment" limitation under Section 19,
Article VII of the present Constitution prohibits the grant of pardon,
whether full or conditional, to an accused during the pendency of his
appeal from his conviction by the trial court.

Limitation on the power of the President to grant pardon.

Any application therefor, if one is made, should not be acted upon
or the process toward its grant should not he begun unless the appeal
is withdrawn. Accordingly, the agencies or instrumentalities of the
Government concerned must require proof from the accused that he
has not appealed from his conviction or that he has withdrawn his
appeal. Such proof may be in the form of a certification issued by the
trial court or the appellate court, as the case may be.

The President may not extend pardon in: ( 1) impeachment cases;
(2) cases that have not yet resulted in a final conviction; and (3) cases

The acceptance of the pardon shall not operate as an
abandonment or waiver of the appeal, and the release of an accused

862

863

Held: The pardon refers only to the crime of murder and does
not have the effect ofremitting the penalty for evasion of the service
of the sentence committed prior to said pardon. (Alvarez v. Director
of Prisons, 80 Phil. 43)

Art. 89

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

by virtue of a pardon, commutation of sentence, or parole before
the withdrawal of an appeal shall render those responsible therefor
administratively liable. Accordingly, those in custody of the accused
must not solely rely on the pardon as a basis for the release of the
accused from confinement. (People v. Salle, G.R. No. 103567, December
4, 1995)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability
3.

Pardon by the President and pardon by the offended party,
distinguished.
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

Pardon by the President must come after final conviction; pardon
by the offended party in crimes against chastity must come
before the institution ofthe criminal action except for rape where
pardon by the offended may be made after final judgment.

Pardon by the President in election cases requires the favorable
recommendation of the COMELEC; pardon by the offended party
who is a minor in rape and crimes against chastity requires the
concurrence of the parents.
The power of the President to grant pardon and its limitations
are set forth in the Constitution while the effect of pardon by
the offended party is provided in the Revised Penal Code.

Amnesty and pardon distinguished.

Pardon looks forward and relieves the offender from the
consequences of an offense of which he has been convicted, that
is, it abolishes or forgives the punishment, and for that reason
it does "not work the restoration of the rights to hold public
office or the right of suffrage, unless such rights be expressly
restored by the terms ofthe pardon." On the other hand, amnesty
looks backward and abolishes and puts into oblivion the offense
itself; it so overlooks and obliterates the offense with wh.ich he
is charged that the person released by amnesty stands before
the law precisely as though he had committed no offense.
(Barrioquinto, et al. v. Fernandez, 82 Phil. 642, 646-647)
Thus-

Pardon by the President extinguishes criminal liability. Pardon
by the offended party does not extinguish criminal liability
except in rape and crimes of chastity where pardon by the
offended party is a bar to criminal prosecution and marriage
between the offended and the offended party extinguishes
criminal liability.
Both do not extinguish civil liability but in pardon by the
offended party, civil liability may be expressly waived.

Art. 89

(a)

Pardon does not alter the fact that the accused is a
recidivist, because it produces the extinction only of the
personal effects of the penalty. (U.S. v. Sotelo, 28 PHiL. 147,
160)

(b)

Amnesty makes an ex-convict no longer a recidivist,
because it obliterates the last vestige of the crime. (U.S.
v. Francisco, 10 Phil. 185, 187)

4.

Both do not extinguish the civil liability of the offender. (Art.
113)

5.

Pardon, being a private act of the President, must be pleaded
and proved by the person pardoned; wh.ile amnesty being by
Proclamation of the Chief Executive with the concurrence of
Congress, is a public act of which the courts should take judicial
notice. (Barrioquinto, et al. v. Fernandez, supra)

By prescription of crime and by prescription of penalty.
By prescription, the State or the People loses the right to
prosecute the crime or to demand the service of the penalty imposed.
(Santos v. Superintendent, 55 Phil. 345)

1.

Pardon includes any crime and is exercised individually by the
President; amnesty is a blanket pardon to classes of persons or
communities who may be guilty ofpolitical offenses.

Definitions.

2.

Pardon is exercised when the person is already convicted;
amnesty may be exercised even before trial or investigation is
had.

Prescription of the crime is the forfeiture or Joss of the right
of the State to prosecute the offender after the lapse of a certain
time.

864

865

Art. 90

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Prescription of the penalty is the loss or forfeiture of the right
of the Government to execute the final sentence after the lapse of a
certain time.
Two conditions necessary in prescription of penalty.
(a)

That there be final judgment.

(b)

That the period oftime prescribed by law for its enforcement
has elapsed.

By the marriage of the offended woman.
Marriage of the offender with the offended woman after the
commission of any of the crimes of rape, seduction, abduction or acts
of lasciviousness, as provided in Article 344, must be contracted by
the offender in good faith. Hence, marriage contracted only to avoid
criminal liability is devoid of legal effects. (People v. Santiago, 51
Phil. 68, 70)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability
Light offenses prescribe in two months.

. When the penalty fixed by law is a compound one, the
highest penalty shall be made the basis of the application of
the rules contained in the first, second, and third paragraphs
of this article. (As amended by R A. No. 4661)

Prescription of crimes.
Prescription of the crime is the loss by the State of the right
to prosecute and punish the same. Criminal liability is totally
extinguished by prescription of the crime.
Prescriptive period of felonies.
1.

Final discharge of probationer.

2.

The final discharge of the probationer shall operate to restore
to him all civil rights lost or suspended as a result of his conviction
and to totally extinguish his criminal liability as to the offense for
which probation was granted. (Sec. 16, P.D. No. 968, as amended by
R.A. No. 10707)

3.

Art. 90. Prescription of crimes. - Crimes punishable by
death, reclusion perpetua or reclusion temporal shall prescribe
in twenty years.
Crimes punishable by other afflictive penalties shall
prescribe in fifteen years.
Those punishable by a correctional penalty shall
prescribe in ten years; with the exception of those punishable
by arresto mayor, which shall prescribe in five years.
The crime of libel or other similar offenses shall prescribe
in one year.
The offenses of oral defamation and slander by deed shall
prescribe in six months.
866

Art. 90

4.

Crimes punishable by reclusion perpetua
and reclusion temporal

- 20 years
Crimes punishable by prision mayor, perpetual
or temporary absolute disqualification,
perpetual or temporary special disqualification - 15 years
Crimes punishable by prision correccional,
suspension, and destierro
10 years
Crimes punishable by arresto mayor
5 years

5.

Libel and similar offenses

6.

Oral defamation and slander by deed

6 months

7.

Crimes punishable by arresto menor

2 months

-

l year

In computing the period of prescription, the first day is to be
excluded and the last day included.
Facts: The accused committed slight physical injuries on May
28, 1953. An information was filed on July 27, 1953. This crime, being
a light offense, prescribes in two months according to Article 90.
The Municipal Court sustained the motion to quash and dismissed
the case, holding that the information was filed on the 61st day, not
on the 60th day from May 28, 1953, "the day on which the crime is
discovered by the offended party."
867

Art. 90

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Held: The information should be considered as filed on the
60th day. In the computation of a period of time within which an
act is to be done, the law in this jurisdiction has always directed
that the first day be excluded and the last included. (See Art. 13,
Civil Code)
A month is computed as the regular 30-day month. The running
of the prescriptive period should commence from the day following
the day on which the crime was committed. (People v. Del Rosario,
97 Phil. 67, 70)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 90

to one year) shall not apply to cases of libel already filed in court at
the time of approval of this amendatory Act. (Sec. 2, R.A. No. 4661,
approved June 18, 1966)
Crimes punishable by arresto menor or a fine not exceeding
P40,000.00 prescribe in two months.

Thus, where the prescriptive period was supposed to commence
on December 21, 1955, the filing of the action on December 21, 1965,
was done after the 10-year period had elapsed - since 1960 and 1964
were both leap years, and the case was thus filed two days too late.

The lower court ruled that the offense charged was a light felony
under paragraph 3 of Article 9 of the R.P.C., which, as provided in
Article 90, prescribes in two months. The Solicitor General cites
Article 26 of the same Code and contends that inasmuch as the
penalty imposable under Article 195 of the Code is arresto menor
or a fine not exceeding P200.00 (now P40,000.00), then a fine of
P200.00 (now P40,000.00), imposable as a single or as an alternative
penalty, may be considered as a correctional penalty and so under
Article 90, the offense charged prescribes in ten years and not two
months. This Court has already ruled that a violation of Article 195
of the R.P.C., punishable with arresto menor or a fine not exceeding
P200.00 (now P40,000.00) is a light felony under Article 9 of said Code
and prescribes in two months, according to Article 90, paragraph 6,
of the same Code. (People v. Canson, 101 Phil. 537, 538-539, citing
People v. Yu Hai, 99 Phil. 725, and People v. Aquino, 99 Phil. 1059)

Rule where the last day of the prescriptive period falls on a Sunday
or legal holiday.

Two months in Article 90, regarding the prescriptive period for
light felonies, means 60 days. (People v. Del Rosario, 97 Phil. 67, 71)

Where the last day of the prescriptive period for filing an
information falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the information can
no longer be filed on the next day as the crime has already prescribed.
Yapdiangco w. Buencamino, No. L-28841, June 24, 1983, 122 SCRA
713)

Penalty for attempted bribery is destierro, which prescribes in ten
years, being a correctional penalty.

A leap year should be counted as separate days in computing
periods of prescription.
But as regards the month of February of a leap year, February
28 and 29 should be counted as separate days in computing periods
of prescription. (Namarco v. Tuazon, 29 SCRA 70, cited in People v.
Ramos, No. L-25644, May 9, 1978, 83 SCRA 1, 13)

Prescription of oral defamation and slander by deed.
As to the prescription of oral defamation and slander by deed,
distinction should be made between simple and grave slander. Simple
slander prescribes in two months. Grave slander prescribes in six
months. (People v. Maceda, 73 Phil. 679, 681)
Republic Act No. 4661 not applicable to cases already flied in court
prior to June 18, 1966.
The provision of this amendatory Act (reducing the prescriptive
period of the crime of libel or other similar offenses, from two years
868

The period of prescription of the offense of attempted bribery,
penalized with destierro, is ten years according to Article 90, for the
reason that destierro is classified as a correctional penalty under
Article 25. (Dalao v. Geronimo, 92 Phil. 1042, 1043)
Prescription of crimes punishable by fines.
Fines are also classified as afflictive, correctional, or light
penalty. (Art. 26)
The crimes punishable by fines shall prescribe in 15 years, if the
fine is afflictive; or in 10 years, ifit is correctional; or in two months,
if the fine is light. The subsidiary penalty for nonpayment of the fine
should not be considered in determining the period of prescription of
such crimes. (People v. Basalo, 101 Phil. 57, 61-62)
869

Art. 90

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Note: Since light felony is specifically defined in Article 9 as
an infraction of the law for the commission of which
the penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding
P40,000.00, or both, is provided, a fine of P40,000.00
provided for a light felony should not be considered
correctional.
When the penalty Is a compound one, the highest penalty Is the
basis of the application of the rules in Article 90.
There is no merit in the contention that the crime of perjury,
which is punishable by arresto mayor in its maximum period to prision
correccional in its minimum period, has already prescribed. Where
the penalty fixed by law is a compound one, the highest penalty shall,
according to the last paragraph of Article 90, be made the basis of the
application of the rules contained therein. The penalty for the crime
of perjury being a compound one, the higher of which is correctional,
said crime prescribes in ten years. (People u. Cruz, 108 Phil. 255, 259)
When fine Is an alternative penalty higher than the other penalty
which is by imprisonment prescription of the crime Is based on
the fine.
Under Article 319 of the Code, the penalty for the offense is
arresto mayor or a fine double the value of the property involved.
The accused sold 80 cavans of pa lay with a value of P320.00, which
he had mortgaged to the PNB, without the knowledge and consent
of the mortgagee.
Held: The period of prescription applicable is ten years, instead of
five years. True, the offense under Article 319 insofar as it is penalized
with arresto mayor prescribes in five years, but the fine equivalent
to double the amount of the property involved may also be imposed
as a penalty, and when said imposable penalty is either correctional
or afflictive, it should be made the basis for determining the period
of prescription. (People v. Basalo, 101 Phil. 57, 61)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 90

of the application of the rules in Article 90. (People v. Crisostomo, G.R.
No. L-16945, August 31, 1962, 5 SCRA 1048, 1052-1053)
Prescriptive periods of offenses punished under special laws and
municipal ordinances.
Act No. 3763, amending Act No. 3326, provides:
1.

Offenses punished only by a fine or by imprisonment for
not more than 1 month, or both, prescribe after 1 year;

2.

Offenses punished by imprisonment for more than 1 month,
but less than 2 years - after 4 years;

3.

Offenses punished by imprisonment for 2 years or more
but less than 6 years - after 8 years;

4.

Offenses punished by imprisonment for 6 years or more after 12 years;

5.

Offenses under Internal Revenue Law - after 5 years;

6.

Violations of municipal ordinances - after 2 months;

7.

Violations of the regulations or conditions of certificate of
convenience by the Public Service Commission - after 2
months.

Act No. 3326 is not applicable where the special law provides
for its own prescriptive period. (People v. Ramos, No. L-25265, May
9, 1978, 83 SCRA 1, 12)
Defense of prescription may be raised during the trial or during
the appeal.

The ruling in the Basalo case applies even if the penalty is arresto
mayor and fine.

The rule in Section 10, Rule 113 of the Rules of Court (now
Section 9, Rule 117 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure) that
if the accused failed to move to quash before pleading, he must be
deemed to have waived all objections, which are grounds of a motion
to quash, cannot apply to the defense of prescription, which under
Article 89 of the R.P.C. extinguishes criminal liability. (People v.
Castro, 95 Phil. 462, 464-465)

When the penalty prescribed by the Code is arresto mayor
and fine (Art. 316, par. 2), and the fine is afflictive (P15,000.00 to
P45,000.00, now exceeding P1,200,000.00), the fine should be the basis

Prescription, although not invoked in the trial, may be invoked
on appeal. (Recebido v. People, G.R. No. 14193, December 4, 2000;
People v. Balagtas, 105 Phil. 1362-1363 [Unrep.))

870

871

Art. 90

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The accused cannot be convicted of an offense lesser than that
charged if the lesser offense had already prescribed at the time the
information was filed.
Where an accused has been found to have committed a lesser
offense includ.ible within the offense charged, he cannot be convicted of
the lesser offense, ifit has already been prescribed. To hold otherwise
would be to sanction the circumvention of the law on prescription by
the simple expedient of accusing the defendant of the graver offense.
(Francisco v. CA, 122 SCRA 545)
Damasco v. Laqui
(G.R. No. 81381, September 30, 1988)
Facts: In an Information filed on September 17, 1987, petitioner
Damasco was charged with the crime of grave threats committed on July 8,

1987. After trial, respondentjudge found that the evidence presented did not
establish the crime of grave threats but only of light threats. Petitioner fled
a Motion to Rectify and Set Aside the dispositive part of respondent Judges
decision contending that he cannot be convicted oflight threats, necessanly
included in grave threats charged in the information, as the lighter offense
had already prescribed when the information was fled. Petitioner states
that the information was filed only after the lapse of 71 days. (Incidentally
the affidavit complaint was filed with the Fiscal"s Office only after the lapse
of 61 days.) The crime of light threats, which is a light offense, prescribes in
two months which means 60 days.
Held: In the case ofFrancisco v. Court ofAppeals, supra, the Court held
that where an accused has been found to have committed a lesser offense

includible within the graver offense charged, he cannot be convicted of the
lesser offense if it has already prescribed. To hold otherwise, according to

the court must exercise jurisdiction, not inhibit itself, holding the
action to have prescribed and absolving the defendant. (Santos v.
Superintendent, 55 Phil. 345, 349)

Art. 91. Computation ofprescription of offenses. - The
period of prescription shall commence to nm from the day
on which the crime is discovered by the offended party, the
authorities, or their agents, and shall be interrupted by the
filing of the complaint or information, and shall commence
to run again when such proceedings terminate without the
accused being convicted or acquitted, or are unjustifiably
stopped for any reason not imputable to him.
The term of prescription shall not nm when the offender
is absent from the Philippine Archipelago.

Outline of the provisions:
1.

The period ofprescription commences to run from the day
on which the crime is discovered by the offended party, the
authorities or their agents.

2.

It is interrupted by the filing of the complaint or
information.

3.

It commences to run again when such proceedings

the Court, would be to sanction a circumvention of the law on prescription

terminate without the accused being convicted or acquitted
or are unjustifiably stopped for any reason not imputable
to him.

by the simple expedient of accusing the defendant of the graver offense.
Philippine jurisprudence considers prescription of a crime or offense

as a loss or waiver by the State of its right to prosecute an act prohibited
and punished by law. Hence, while it is the rule that an accused who fails
to move to quash before pleading, is deemed to waive all objections which
are grounds of a motion to quash, yet, this rule cannot apply to the defense
of prescription, which under Article 69 of the R.P.C. extinguishes criminal
liability. 'The decision of the respondent judge is set aside.

Art. 91

4.

The term of prescription shall not run when the offender
is absent from the Philippines.

Illustration of rules nos. 1, 2 and 3.

Prescription does not divest court of jurisdiction; it is a ground for
acquittal of the accused.

A committed serious oral defamation against Kin March, 1935.
As K came to know of the act complained of only on March 4, 1936,
K filed the complaint on that date.

When there is a plea of prescription by the defense and the
same appears from the allegation of the information or is established,

Because his official duties needed him to be in Mindanao, K was
not able to attend the hearing of the case. Upon motion of defendant

872

873

Art. 91

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

A, the case was dismissed on January 21, 1937, without prejudice to
the fiscal filing again the same action.
On February 13, 1937, the case was revived by the fiscal by filing
a new information. Serious oral defamation prescribes in six months.
From what date must the six-month period be counted?
It must be counted from January 21, 1937. (People v. Aquino,
68 Phil. 588, 590)
It cannot be counted from March 1935, when the crime was
committed, because it was discovered by the offended party only
on March 4, 1936, and the running of the period of prescription
stopped on that date by the filing of the complaint in court. Hence,
it must be counted from January 21, 1937, because when the case
was dismissed on that date, the period of prescription commenced
to run again. Note that the proceedings terminated without the
accused being convicted or acquitted.
The period of prescription commences to run from the date of
commission of crime if it Is known at the time of its commission.
Thus, if there is nothing that was concealed or needed to be
discovered, because the entire series of transactions was by public
instruments, duly recorded, the crime of estafa committed in
connection with said transactions was known to the offended party
when it was committed and the period of prescription commenced to
run from the date of its commission. (People u. Dinsay, C.A., 40 0.G.,
12th Supp., 50)
The offended party had constructive notice of the forgery
after the deed of sale, where his signature had been falsified, was
registered in the Office of the Register of Deeds on August 26, 1948.
(Cabral v. Puno, No. L-41692, April 30, 1976, 70 SCRA 606, 609)
From the date of commission or from the date of discovery.
The period of prescription of crime commences to run from the
commission of the offense or its discovery, if the commission of the
same was unknown. (People v. Tamayo, 40 O.G. 2313)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 91

would be dangerous as the successful concealment of an offense
during the period fixed for its prescription would be the very means
by which the offender may escape punishment. (People v. Monteiro,
G.R. No. 49454, December 21, 1990, 192 SCRA 548, 551)
Computation of prescriptive period in bigamy is from discovery of
second marriage.
The non-application to the crime of bigamy of the principle of
constructive notice is not contrary to the well entrenched policy that
penal laws should be construed liberally in favor of the accused.
To compute the prescriptive period for the offense of bigamy from
registration thereof would amount to almost absolving the offenders
thereof for liability therefor. While the celebration of the bigamous
marriage may be said to be open and made of public record by its
registration, the offender however is not truthful as he conceals from
the officiating authority and those concerned the existence of his
previous subsisting marriage. He does not reveal to them that he is
still a married person. He likewise conceals from his legitimate spouse
his bigamous marriage. And for these, he contracts the bigamous
marage in a place where he is not known to be still a married person.
And such a place may be anywhere, under which circumstance, the
discovery of the bigamous marriage is rendered quite difficult and
would take time. It is therefore reasonable that the prescriptive
period for the crime of bigamy should be counted only from the day
on which the said crime was discovered by the offended party, the
authorities or their agency. (Sermonia v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No.
109454, June 14, 1994)
It is discovery of crime, not discovery of offender.
The discovery of the crime should not be confused with the
discovery of the offender. The fact that the culprit is unknown will
not prevent the period of prescription from commencing to run.

It is not necessary that the accused be arrested. (People u. Joson
46 Phil. 380, 384)
"
Period of prescription of continuing crime never runs.

The period of prescription for the offense of failure to register
with the SSS shall begin from the day of the discovery of the violation
if this was not known at the time of its commission. A contrary view

Facts: The accused was charged with violation of a municipal
ordinance in that he constructed dikes in navigable waterways
(river and creek) of the public domain without authorization from

874

876

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

the Secretary of Public Works and Communications. The dikes were
constructed in 1939 while the case was filed in 1947. Did the crime
prescribe?

proceeding. Judicial proceedings having been taken against the
accused and his arrest having been ordered, which could not be carried
into effect on account of his default, the crime has not prescribed.
(People v. Para0, 52 Phil. 712, 715)

Art. 91

Held: The prescriptive period of continuing crime, cannot begin to
run because there could be no termination of continuity and the crime
does not end. The case would have been different had the information
alleged that the dikes existed until such date obstructing the course
of the streams, because the crime ended on that date. (Arches v.
Bellasillo, 81 Phil. 190, 192)
The crime is discovered by (1) the offended party, (2) the authorities,
or (3) their agents.

A saw the killing with treachery of B by C. Afte r the commission
of the crime, C threw the dead body of B into the river. The dead body
of B was never seen again or found. A was neither an authority nor an
agent of an authority, nor a relative of B. For 25 years, A kept silent
as to what he witnessed. After 25 years, A revealed to the authorities
that C murdered B.
May C be prosecuted for murder even if 25 years already elapsed?
Yes. The period of prescription did not commence to run. The
commission of the crime was known only to A, who was not the
offended party, an authority or an agent of an authority. It was
discovered by the authorities only when A revealed to them the
commission of the crime.
Period of prescription was interrupted when preliminary examination
was made by municipal mayor but accused could not be arrested
because he was in hiding.

The accused killed a man on June 19, 1911. The municipal
president, who began the preliminary investigation because the
justice of the peace was absent, issued a warrant of arrest. The
accused could not be arrested because they fled to an unknown
place. The information for homicide was filed on June 29, 1927.
Accused Isidro Parao was captured in July 1927. Did the offense
prescribe?

Art. 91

The crime of homicide prescribed in 15 years under the old
Penal Code. The proceedings in this case were stopped for reasons
imputable to the accused, that is, they fled to an unknown place,
making it difficult to arrest them for further proceedings.
Filing of complaint with the prosecutor's office interrupts running
of period of prescription of offense charged.

Article 91 of the Revised Penal Code, in declaring that the
prescriptive period "shall be interrupted by the filing of the complaint
or information," does not distinguish whether the complaint is filed
for preliminary examination or investigation only or for an action
on the merits. Thus, in Francisco v, Court of Appeals and People v.
Cuaresma, this Court held that the filing of the complaint even with
the fiscal's office suspends the running of the statute of limitations.
(Reodica v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No. 125066, July 8, 1998)
Section l, Rule llO, of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure
also provides:
"SEC. 1. Institution ofcriminal actions. - Criminal actions
shall be instituted as follows:
(a)

For offenses where a preliminary investigation is required
pursuant to Section 1 of Rule 112, by filing the complaint
with the proper officer for the purposes of conducting the
requisite preliminary investigation;

(b)

For all other offenses, by filing the complaint or information
directly with the Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal
Circuit Trial Courts or the complaint with the office of
the prosecutor. In Manila and other chartered cities, the
complaint shall be filed with the office of the prosecutor
unless otherwise provided in their charters.

Held: No. The preliminary investigation conducted by the
municipal president, in the absence of the justice of the peace or
auxiliary justice of the peace, partakes of the nature of a judicial

The institution of the criminal action shall interrupt the period
of prescription of the offense charged unless otherwise provided in
special laws." (Italics supplied.)

876

877

Art. 91

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

The filing of the complaint in the municipal court, even If It be merely
for purposes of preliminary examination or investigation, Interrupts
the period of prescription.
The case of People v. Olarte, 19 SCRA 494, finally decided the
issue on whether the filing of the complaint in the municipal courts
interrupts the period of prescription.
Prior to the Olarte case, there were two lines ofdecisions following
differing criteria in determining whether prescription of crimes has
been interrupted. One line of precedents held that the filing of the
complaint with the justice of the peace (or municipal judge) interrupts
the course of the prescriptive term (People v. Olarte, L-13027, June
30, 1960 and cases cited therein; People v. Uba, L-13106, October 16,
1959; People v. Aquino, 68 Phil. 588, 59) while the other line declared
that to produce interruption, the complaint or information must have
been filed in the proper court that has jurisdiction to try the case on
its merits. (People v. Del Rosario, L-15140, December 29, 1960; People
v. Coquia, L-15456, June 29, 1963) It was held:

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 91

the victim of the offense may do on his part to initiate the
prosecution is to file the requisite complaint.
Considering the foregoing reasons, the Court hereby
overrules the doctrine of the cases ofPeople v. Del Rosario,
L-15140, December 29, 1960, and People v. Coquia,
L-15456, promulgated June 29, 1963.
The complaint or Information that will Interrupt the period
of prescription must be the proper information or complaint
corresponding to the offense.
On April 1, 1959, Felipe Abuy was charged in the Municipal
Court of Zamboanga City with the crime of trespass to dwelling
committed against Ruperto Carpio. Upon motion of the prosecution,
the case was dismissed on the ground that the evidence so far
presented would not sustain accused's conviction. Subsequently, on
November 13, 1959, Abuy was charged before the same court with
the crime of unjust vexation committed on the person of Michaela de
Magadia. Abuy filed a motion to quash the information on the ground
of prescription. The court sustained the motion.

In view of this diversity of precedents, and in order
to provide guidance for Bench and Bar, this Court has reexamined the question and, after mature consideration,
has arrived at the conclusion that the true doctrine is, and
should be, the one established by the decisions holding that
the filing of the complaint in the Municipal Court, even if
it be merely for purposes of preliminary examination or
investigation, should, and does, interrupt the period of
prescription of the criminal responsibility, even if the court
where the complaint or information is filed cannot try the
case on its merits. Several reasons buttress this conclusion:
first, the text of Article 91 of the R.P.C., in declaring that
the period of prescription "shall be interrupted by the filing
of the complaint or information" without distinguishing
whether the complaint is filed in the court for preliminary
examination or investigation merely, or for action on the
merits. Second, even if the court where the complaint or
information is filed may only proceed to investigate the
case, its actuations already represent the initial step of
the proceedings against the offender. Third, it is unjust to
deprive the injured party of the right to obtain vindication
on account of delays that are not under his control. All that

If it is merely a correction of a defect, the date of the original
complaint or information should be considered. (LTB u. Ramos, G.R.
No. 41399, August 9, 1934)

878

879

The complaint or information that will interrupt the period
must be the proper information or complaint corresponding to the
offense. Here, the first Information was for trespass to dwelling, the
elements of which are entirely different from the elements of the
offense of unjust vexation. There is nothing to show that the two
offenses are related to each other. Consequently, the fling of one
does not mterrupt the prescriptive period as to the other. (People u.
Abuy, G.R. No. L-17616, May 30, 1962, 5 SCRA 222, 226-227)
Effect of filing amended complaint or information upon period of
prescription.
If the original complaint or information is filed within the
prescriptive period and the amendment was made after said period,
a distinction should be made between a new and different act
complained of and mere correction or new specifications to amplify
and give greater precision to the allegations in support of the cause
originally presented.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

The filing of the information In the court of Batangas for estafa,
even if erroneous, because it had no territorial jurisdiction over
the offense charged, tolls the running of the prescriptive period of
the crime, since the jurisdiction of a court is determined in criminal
cases by the allegations of the complaint or information, and not
by the result of proof.

The termination of a criminal case contemplated in Article 91 on
prescription of crimes refers to a termination that is final as to
amount to a jeopardy that would bar a subsequent prosecution.

Art. 91

In a case, respondent judge, in sustaining the ground of
prescription, ruled that there was no interruption of the prescriptive
period during the pendency of the case in his court, because it had
no territorial jurisdiction over the offense charged, and that "[t]he
proceedings contemplated by Article 91 are proceedings which are
valid and before a competent court."
Held: Settled is the rule that the jurisdiction of a court is
determined in criminal cases by the allegations of the complaint or
information, and not by the result of proof. It follows that the Batangas
court was vested with lawful jurisdiction over the criminal complaint
filed with it, which expressly alleged that the offense was committed
"in the Municipality ofBatangas, Province ofBatangas," and that the
proceedings therein were valid and before a competent court, until the
same court issued its order, dismissing the case and declaring itself
without territorial jurisdiction on the basis of the evidence presented
to it by both the prosecution and the accused. (People v. Galano, No.
L-42925, January 31, 1977, 75 SCRA 193, 198)
"Proceedings terminate without the accused being convicted or
acquitted."
In the case of People v. Aquino, 68 Phil. 588, 590, when the case
was dismissed upon the petition of accused Aquino, the proceeding
was terminated without the accused being convicted nor acquitted.
The period of prescription commenced to run again.
Suppose, the case was dismissed without the consent or objection
of the accused who had already been arraigned?
In this case, the dismissal is final. A cannot be prosecuted any
more for the same offense, even within the prescriptive period, on the
ground of double jeopardy.

880

Art. 91

One Lauran was charged with the crime ofgrave oral defamation
which was discovered on December 15, 1973. The information was
filed in court on January 24, 1974. On March 14, 1974, the court,
on Lauron's motion to dismiss, issued an order of dismissal, on the
ground that the preliminary investigation conducted by the fiscal did
not comply with the requirements of P.D. No. 77. Lauran had not been
arraigned. The case was refiled in court under a new information on
March 3, 1975. The crime of grave oral defamation prescribes in six
months.
Said the Supreme Court: .
"[The Court] hold[s] that the termin ation of a criminal case
contemplated in Article 91 refers to a termination that is final
in the sense of being beyond reconsideration, as in the cases of
an unappealed conviction or an acquittal."
Comment: Article 91 provides that the period of prescription
(of offenses) "shall commence to run again when such proceedings
(the fihng of the complaint or information) terminate without the
accused being convicted or acquitted." (Italics supplied.)

If the "termination x x x refers to a termination that is final
xxxasin the cases of an unappealed conviction or an acquittal,"
there would be no occasion to speak of prescription of offenses, no
matter how long a time has elapsed, because the accused is already
convicted (and he does not appeal) or acquitted.
Article 91 may be considered only when the accused who invokes
it, is being charged with and prosecuted for an offense that allegedly
has already prescribed. If the proceedings, which began with the filing
of the complaint or information, terminate in the conviction of the
accused or in his acquittal (the termination being final), how may the
question of prescription arise? Or, what period of prescription "shall
commence to run again?"
This is why the law says, "without the accused being convicted
or acquitted." In such case, the accused may still be prosecuted, but
with the previous termination of the proceedings, the question of
prescription may still arise, because the period of prescription ran
881

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

again. At the time of the new prosecution, the crime may have already
prescribed.

But, if the falsification committed by the inspectors in connection
with the counting of the votes and the preparation of election returns
was known to the protestants and their election watchers before the
filing of the election protests, the period of prescription began from
the date of the commission of the offense. (People v. Carinio, 56 Phil.
109, 114)

Art. 91

"Or are unjustifiably stopped for any reason not imputable to
him."
Thus, if the proceedings are stopped for a reason imputable
to the accused, the period of prescription does not commence to run
again.
Example:
When the accused has evaded arrest and the case has to be
archived by the court, the proceedings are stopped because of the
fault of the accused. The case cannot be tried if he is not present.

Art. 91

Prescription of violations penalized by special laws and ordinances
- when it begins to run.
Prescription shall begin to run from the day of the commission
of the violation of the law, and if the same be not known at the time,
from the discovery thereof and the institution ofjudicial proceedings
for its investigation and punishment. (Sec. 2, Act No. 3326)

(See also the case of People v. Parao, 52 Phil. 712)
The term of prescription does not run when the offender is absent
from the Philippines.
A published a libel in a newspaper and immediately left for
Hong Kong where he remained for three years. Later, he returned
to the Philippines. Can A be prosecuted for libel upon his return to
his country?
Yes. The crime of libel did not prescribe. A was absent from
the Philippines during the period when the crime would have
prescribed.
Brief trips abroad are not included In the term "absent in the
Philippine archipelago."
Several trips abroad did not constitute the absence" contemplated in Article 91. These trips were brief, and in every case the
private respondent returned to the Philippines. (Garcia v. CA, G.R.
No. 119063, January 27, 1997)
Prescription of election offenses
(1) if discovery of offense is
incidental to judicial proceedings, prescription begins when such
proceeding terminates; otherwise, (2) from date of commission of
offense.
If the discovery of the offense is incidental to judicial proceedings
in election contest, prescription begins when such proceedings
terminate.
882

Prescription of violations penalized by special laws and ordinances
when interrupted.
The prescription shall be interrupted when proceedings are
instituted against the guilty person, and shall begin to run again if
the proceedings are dismissed for reasons not constituting jeopardy.
(Sec. 2, Act No. 3326)
In Zaldivia v. Reyes, G.R. No. 102342, July 3, 1992, it was held
that the prescriptive period for violation of municipal ordinance
was not interrupted by the filing of the complaint with the Office
of the Provincial Prosecutor on May 30, 1990, as this was not a
judicial proceeding. However, Panaguiton v. Department of Justice,
G.R. No. 167571, November 25, 2008, clarified that the filing of the
complaint with the prosecutor's office signified the commencement
of the proceedings for the prosecution of the accused and effectively
interrupts the prescriptive period.
In Panaguiton, the Court stated:
The historical perspective on the application of Act No.
3326 is illuminating. Act No. 3226 was approved on 4 December
1926 at a time when the function of conducting the preliminary
investigation of criminal offenses was vested in the justices of
the peace. Thus, the prevailing rule at the time xx xis that the
prescription of the offense is tolled once a complaint is filed with
the justice of the peace for preliminary investigation inasmuch
883

Art. 91

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

as the filing of the complaint signifies the institution of the
criminal proceedings against the accused. xx x
In the more recent case ofSecurities and Exchange Commission
v. Interport Resources Corporation, et al. the Court ruled that the
nature and purpose of the investigation conducted by the Securities
and Exchange Commission on violations of the Revised Securities Act,
another special law, is equivalent to the preliminary investigation
conducted by the DOJ in criminal cases, and thus effectively
interrupts the prescriptive period.
The following disquisition in the Interport Resources case is
instructive, thus:
Whil e it may be observed that the term "judicial proceedings"
in Sec. 2 of Act No. 3326 appears before "investigation and
punishment" in the old law, with the subsequent change in
set-up whereby the investigation of the charge for purposes of
prosecution has become the exclusive function of the executive
branch, the term "proceedings" should now be understood either
executive or judicial in character: executive when it involves the
investigation phase and judicial when it refers to the trial and
judgment stage. With this clarification, any kind of investigative
proceeding instituted against the guilty person which may
ultimately lead to his prosecution should be sufficient to toll
prescription.
Prescription of violations penalized by special laws and ordinances
runs when offender is absent from the Philippines.
Unlike Article 91 of the R.P.C. that expressly states that the
term of prescription shall not run when the offender is absent from the
Philippines, there is nothing in Act No. 3326 that states that absence
from the Philippines will stop the running of the prescriptive term.
Thus, for violations of special laws and ordinances, the prescriptive
term shall run notwithstanding the offender's absence from the
Philippines.
Article 91 may apply when a special law, while providing a
prescriptive period, does not prescribe any rule for the application
of that period.
Thus, in a case where the accused is prosecuted for violation
of the Usury Law, there being no rule in Act No. 4763 regarding

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Crimin al Liability

Art. 91

the enforcement of the period of prescription established thereby,
pursuant to Article 10 of the R.P.C., the rule provided for in Article
91 of said Code shall be applied, according to which the period of
prescription of crimes shall commence to run from the time of the
perpetration of the offense and in case the commission of the same
is unknown, from the day on which the crime is discovered by the
offended party, the authorities or their agents. (People v. Tamayo,
C.A., 40 O.G. 2313)
Prescription of offenses under Republic Act No. 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act) is reckoned from the time of discovery of the
offense, if the violation was unknown at the time of commission.
Generally, the prescriptive period shall commence to run on the
day the crime is committed. That an aggrieved person "entitled to an
action has no knowledge of his right to sue or of the facts out of which
his right arises," does not prevent the running of the prescriptive
period.
An exception to this rule is the "blameless ignorance" doctrine,
incorporated in Section 2 of Act No. 3326. Under this doctrine, "the
statute of limitations runs only upon discovery of the fact of the
invasion of a right which will support a cause of action. In other
words, the courts would decline to apply the statute of limitations
where the plaintiff does not know or has no reasonable means of
knowing the existence of a cause of action." It was in this accord that
the Court confronted the question on the running of the prescriptive
period in People v. Duque which became the cornerstone of our
1999 Decision in Presidential Ad Hoc Fact-Finding Committee on
Behest Loans v. Desierto, G.R. No. 130149, and the subsequent
cases which Ombudsman Desierto dismissed, emphatically, on the
ground of prescription too. Thus, we held in a catena of cases, that
if the violation of the special law was not known at the time of its
commission, the prescription begins to run only from the discovery
thereof, i.e., discovery of the unlawful nature of the constitutive act or
acts. (Presidential Ad Hoc Fact-Finding Committee on Behest Loans
v. Desierto, G.R. No. 135715, April 13, 2011, 648 SCRA 586)
Prescription of the offense of false testimony-from time principal
case Is finally decided.
With regard to the crime of false testimony against the
defendant (Art. 180), considering that the penalties provided

884

885

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 92

therefor are made to depend upon the conviction or acquittal of the
defendant in the principal case, the act of testifying falsely does
not therefore constitute an actionable offense until the principal
case is finally decided. And before an act becomes a punishable
offense, it cannot possibly be discovered as such by the offended
party, the authorities or their agents. (People v. Maneja, 72 Phil.

256, 257-258)
This is true only when the false testimony is against the
defendant. As regards false testimony in favor of the defendant,
there is a specific penalty which does not depend on the conviction
or acquittal of the defendant. (Art. 181)

Art. 92. When and how penalties prescribe. - The penalties
imposed by final sentence prescribe as follows:
1,

Death and reclusion perpetua, in twenty years;

2.

Other afflictive penalties, in fifteen years;

3.
Correctional penalties, in ten years, with the
exception of the penalty of arresto mayor, which prescribes
in five years;
4.

Light penalties, in one year.

4.

Arresto mayor

5 years

5.

Arresto menor, other light penalties

1 year

The penalties must be imposed by final sentence.
Note the first sentence of this article which specifically requires
that the penalties must be "imposed by final sentence." Hence, if the
convict appealed and thereafter fled to the mountains, the penalty
imposed upon him would never prescribe, beca use pending the appeal,
the sentence is not final.
In prescription of crimes, it is the penalty prescribed by law that
should be considered; in prescription of penalties, it is the penalty
imposed that should be considered.
A committed the crime of falsification punishable by prision
mayor. Twelve years elapsed since the crime was discovered by the
authorities. Then, the fiscal filed an information for falsification. A was
arrested and prosecuted. During the trial, A proved two mitigating
circumstances without any aggravating circumstance. Did the crime
prescribe?

No. Although the proper penalty to be imposed is prision
correccional, the penalty one degree lower, in view of the privileged
mitigating circumstance (Art. 64, par. 5), it is the penalty of prision
mayor which is prescribed by the law for the crime that should be
considered. Article 90 uses the words, "Crimes punishable by." Hence,
the crime did not prescribe, because the time that elapsed is not more
than 15 years.

Prescription of penalties.
Prescription of penalty is the forfeiture or loss of the right of the
State to enforce the penalty imposed on a convict due to the lapse of
time from the time the convict evaded the service of his sentence.
Prescriptive period of penalties
1.

Reclusion perpetua and reclusion temporal

2.

Reclusion temporal, prision mayor, perpetual

3.

Art. 92

- 20 years

Fine as a light penalty.

or temporary absolute disqualification, perpetual
or temporary special disqualification

-15years

Prision correccional, suspension, and destierro

- 10years

886

But suppose that in the same problem, A commenced to serve
the sentence and after a month, he escaped and remained at large
for 12 years, in case he is captured thereafter, can he be required
to serve the remaining period of his sentence? No. The penalty of
prision correccional already prescribed. Article 92 uses the words
"the penalties imposed by final sentence."

Under Article 26, a fine ofless than P40,000.00 is a light penalty,
and if not less than P40,000.00, it is a correctional penalty. Under
Article 9, paragraph 3, a light felony is punishable by a light penalty,
whose fine does not exceed P40,000.00. Under Article 90, light offenses
887

Art. 93

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

prescribe in two months. If the fine imposed be exactly P40,000.00,
should it prescribe in one year as a light penalty or in ten years as
correctional penalty?
In the case of People v. Hu Hai alias Haya, 99 Phil. 725, 727,
the Supreme Court held that where the question at issue is the
prescription of a crime and not the prescription of a penalty, Article
9 should prevail over Article 26. Article 26 has nothing to do with
the definition of offenses but merely classifies fine when imposed as
a principal penalty.

Art. 93

country with which this Government has no extradition
treaty, or should commit another crime before the expiration
of the period of prescription.

Outline of the provisions:
1.
2.

The period of prescription of penalties commences to run from
the date when the culprit evaded the service of his sentence.
It is interrupted if the convict-

Illustrations:

(1)

Gives himself up,

1.

(2)

Be captured,

(3)

Goes to a foreign country with which we have no extradition
treaty, or

(4)

Commits another crime before the expiration of the period
of prescription.

2.

A committed a crime for which the law provides a fine of
1'40,000.00 as a penalty. What is the prescriptive period of the
crime? One year. The issue here is not the prescription of penalty,
because there is no final sentence and A has not evaded the
sentence. Article 9 shall prevail. Since the fine does not exceed
P40,000.00, the crime committed is a light felony.
But suppose that A was convicted, he could not pay the fine of
P40,000.00; and was made to serve subsidiary imprisonment.
Then, while serving subsidiary imprisonment, he escaped,
thereby evading the service of his sentence. What is the
prescriptive period? Ten years. The issue here is prescription
of penalty. Article 26 prevails. Since the fine is not less than
P40,000.00, it is a correctional penalty.

The period of prescription of penalties shall commence

to run again when the convict escapes again, after having
been captured and returned to prison.
Elements:
1.

That the penalty is imposed by final sentence;

2.

That the convict evaded the service of the sentence by escaping
during the term of his sentence;

The subsidiary penalty for nonpayment of the fine Is Immaterial.

3.

A fine of P525.00, being a correctional penalty (prior to
amendment of R.P.C. by R.A. No. 10951), prescribes in ten years.
That the subsidiary imprisonment could not exceed six months is
immaterial. (People v. Salazar, 98 Phil. 663, 665)

That the convict who escaped from prison has not given
himself up, or been captured, or gone to a foreign country with
which we have no extradition treaty, or committed another
crime;

4.

That the penalty has prescribed, because of the lapse of time
from the date of the evasion of the service of the sentence by the
convict.

Art. 93. Computation of the prescription ofpenalties. The period of prescription of penalties shall commence to
run from the date when the culprit should evade the service
of his sentence, and it shall be interrupted if the defendant
should give himself up, be captured, should go to some foreign

According to Article 93, the period of prescription of penalties
commences to run from the date when the culprit should evade the
service of his sentence.

888

889

Evasion of the service of the sentence ls an essential element of
prescription of penalties.

Art. 93

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
Infante v. Warden
(92 Phil. 310)

Facts: In this case, the accused was convicted of murder and sentenced
to 17 years, four months and one day of reclusion temporal. After serving
15 years, seven months and ll days, on March 6, 1939, he was granted
a conditional pardon. The condition of his pardon was that he should not
commit any crime in the future. On April 25, 1949, he was found guilty of
driving without license. He was committed to prison for violation of said
conditional pardon. Between March 6, 1939 and April 25, 1949, more than
ten years elapsed.
The accused interposed the defense of prescription, contending that
since the remitted portion of his original penalty was less than six years
(like prision correccional), the prescriptive period of that penalty was only
ten years.
Held: The defense of prescription will not prosper because there

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 93

not included in the treaty, will that fact interrupt the running of
the prescriptive period?
It is believed that it would interrupt the running of the
prescriptive period.
"Should commit another crime before the expiration of the period
of prescription."
Thus, if A, sentenced to suffer four months and 11 days of
arresto mayor, escaped from jail and remained at large for four
years, 11 months and 28 days, but on the next day he committed
theft and was arrested six months after, A can be required to serve
the remaining period of his sentence of four months and 11 days. The
reason is that A committed a crime (theft) before the expiration of
five years, the period of prescription of the penalty of arresto mayor.

was no evasion of the service of the sentence. There was no evasion of
the service of the sentence in this case, because such evasion presupposes
escaping during the service of the sentence consisting in deprivation of

liberty.
Period of prescription that ran during the time the convict evaded
service of sentence is not forfeited upon his capture.
The period of prescription that ran during the evasion is not
forfeited, so that if the culprit is captured and evades again the service
of his sentence, the period of prescription that has run in his favor
should be taken into account. (Albert)
Example: A committed a crime punishable by prision
correccional. He was convicted after trial. While serving sentence for
one month, A escaped. He remained at large for five years. Then, he
was captured. After staying in prison for two months, he escaped again
and remained at large for six years. In this case, if captured again,
A cannot be required to serve the remaining portion of his sentence,
because the penalty of prision correccional prescribes in ten years.
On two occasions, A evaded the service of his sentence for a total of
11 years.

Where accused was never placed in confinement, the period for
prescription never started to run in his favor.
The prescription of penalties found in Article 93 of the R.P.C.
applies only to those who are convicted by final judgment and are
serving sentence which consists in deprivation of liberty. The period
for prescription of penalties begins only when the convict evades
service of sentence by escaping during the term of his sentence. Since
petitioner never suffered deprivation of liberty before his arrest on
January 20, 2000 and as a consequence never evaded sentence by
escaping during the term of his service, the period for prescription
never began. (Pangan v. Hon. Gatbalite, et al., G.R. Na. 141718,
January 21, 2005)
"Escape" means unlawful departure of a prisoner from the limits
of his custody.

Suppose the Government has extradition treaty with the
country to which the offender escaped, but the crime committed is

Article 93 of the Revised Penal Code provides that the
prescription of penalties shall commence to run from the date the
felon evades the service of his sentence. Pursuant to Article 157 of the
same Code, evasion of service of sentence can be committed only by
those who have been convicted by final judgment by escaping during
the term of his sentence. "Escape" in legal parlance and for purposes
of Articles 93 and 157 of the R.P.C. means unlawful departure of
prisoner from the limits of his custody. Clearly, one who has not

890

891

"Should go to some foreign country with which this Government
has no extradition treaty."

Art. 93

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

been committed to prison cannot be said to have escaped therefrom.
(Castillo v. Torrecampo, G.R. No. 139033, December 18, 2002)
Evading the service of the sentence is not committing a crime before
the expiration of the period of prescription of penalties.

It has been asked whether or not the evasion of the service of
the sentence, being in itself a crime (Art. 157), should interrupt the
running of the period of prescription of penalties.
The clause "should commit another crime before the expiration
of the period of prescription" refers to crime committed when the
period of prescription has already commenced to run. On the other
hand, Article 93 specifically provides that "the period of prescription
of penalties shall commence to run from the date when the culprit
should evade the service of his sentence."
Hence, this evasion of the service of the sentence, which is
a requisite in the prescription of penalties, must necessarily take
place before the running of the period of prescription and cannot
interrupt it.

penal law commentator Viada said, the convict who evades sentence
is sometimes sufficiently punished by his voluntary and self-imposed
banishment, and at times, that voluntary exile is more grievous
than the sentence he was trying to avoid. (Viada y Villaseca, Codigo
Penal, Vol. III, p. 41, 5th Ed.) And all the time he has to utilize every
ingenuity and means to outwit the Government agencies bent on
recapturing him. For all this, the Government extends to him a sort
of condonation or amnesty." (Infante v. Provincial Warden, 92 Phil.
310, 325, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of Montemayor, J.J
Prescription of crimes and prescription of penalties, distinguished.

1.

In prescription of crimes, the State loses the right to prosecute
and punish the offender; in prescription of penalties, the State
loses the right to enforce the penalty.

2.

In prescription of crimes, the prosecution of the offender has not
commenced; in prescription of penalties, the offender has been
convicted by final sentence.

3.

In prescription of crimes, the period of prescription commences
from the date the offense is discovered; in prescription of
penalties, the period of prescription commences from the date
the convict evades the service of his sentence.

4.

In prescription of crimes, the period of prescription is interrupted
by the filing of the complaint or information; in prescription
of penalties, the period of prescription is interrupted if the
defendant gives himself up, is captured, goes to some foreign
country with which the Philippines has no extradition treaty,
or commits another crime before the expiration of the period of
prescription.

Acceptance of conditional pardon interrupts the prescriptive period.

The acceptance of a conditional pardon also interrupts the
prescriptive period, likening such acceptance to the case of one who
flees from this jurisdiction. (People v. Puntillas, G.R. No. 45269, June
15, 1938)
Reason why evasion of service of sentence is taken in favor of the
convict in prescription of penalties.

"If a convict under confinement, at the risk of being killed,
succeeds in breaking jail and also succeeds in evading re-arrest for a
certain period of time which by no means is short, despite the efforts
of all the instrumentalities of the Government including sometimes
the setting of a prize or reward on his head, which thereby enlists the
aid of the citizenry, the law calls off the search for him, and condones
the penalty. But during that period of prescription the escaped convict
lives a life of a hunted animal, hiding mostly in the mountains and
forests in constant mortal fear of being caught. His life far from being
happy, comfortable and peaceful is reduced to a mere existence filled
with fear, discomfort, loneliness and misery. As the distinguished
892

Art. 93

893

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 94

Commutation of sentence.

Chapter Two
PARTIAL EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL
LIABILITY
Art. 94. Partial extinction ofcriminal liability. - Criminal
liability is extinguished partially:
I.

By conditional pardon;

2.

By commutation of the sentence; and

Commutation of sentence refers to the reduction of the duration
of a prison sentence of a prisoner. (Sec. 2[o], Revised Rules and
Regulation of the Board of Pardons and Parole)

It is a change of the decision of the court made by the Chief
Executive by reducing the degree of the penalty inflicted upon the
convict, or by decreasing the length of the imprisonment or the amount
of the fine.
Specific cases where commutation is provided for by the Code.
1.

When the convict sentenced to death is over 70 years of
age. (Art. 83)

2.

When eight justices of the Supreme Court fail to reach a
decision for the affirmance of the death penalty.

3.
For good conduct allowances which the culprit may
earn while he is undergoing preventive imprisonment or
serving his sentence. (As amended by RA. No. 10592)

In either case, the degree of the penalty is reduced from death
to reclusion perpetua.

Definition of conditional pardon.

In commutation of sentence, consent of the offender is not
necessary. The public welfare, not his consent, determin es what shall
be done. (Biddle v. Perovich, 274 U.S. 480)

Conditional pardon refers to the exemption of an individual,
within certain limits or conditions, from the punishment which the
law inflicts for the offense he had committed resulting in the partial
extinction of his criminal liability. (Sec. 2fp], Revised Rules and
Regulations of the Board of Pardons and Parole)

For good conduct allowances.
Allowances for good conduct are deductions from the term of the
sentence for good behavior and for study, teaching and mentoring.
(Art. 97)
This is different from that provided in Article 29 which is an

Nature of conditional pardon.

extraordinary reduction of full time or four-fifths of the preventive

Conditional pardon delivered and accepted is considered a

contract between the sovereign power of the executive and the convict
that the former will release the latter upon compliance with the
condition.
Usual condition imposed upon the convict in conditional pardon.
In conditional pardon, the condition usually imposed upon the
convict is that "he shall not again violate any of the penal laws of the
Philippines."

894

imprisonment from the term of the sentence.
A prisoner is also entitled to special time allowance for loyalty.
(Art. 98)
Parole should be added as no. 4 in the enumeration of causes of
partial extinction of criminal liability.
The parole granted to a convict by the Board of Pardons and
Parole should be added. A parole may be granted to a prisoner after
serving the minimum penalty under the Indeterminate Sentence
Law.
895

Art. 94

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Crimin al Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 94

Definition of parole.

ls conviction necessary to revoke parole?

Parole refers to the conditional release of an offender from a
correctional institution after he has served the minimum of his prison
sentence.

The mere commission, not conviction by the court, of any crime
is sufficient to warrant parolee's arrest and reincarceration. (Guevara)

Parole consists in the suspension of the sentence of a convict
after serving the minimum term of the indetermin ate penalty, without
granting a pardon, prescribing the terms upon which the sentence
shall be suspended.
If the convict fails to observe the conditions of the parole, the
Board of Pardons and Parole is authorized to direct his arrest and
return to custody and thereafter to carry out his sentence without
deduction of the time that has elapsed between the date of the parole
and the subsequent arrest.
Reports to be submitted on Parolee/Pardonee.
(1)

A Progress Report should be submitted by the Probation
and Parole Officer to the Board of Pardons and Parole when
a parolee/pardonee commits another offense during the
period of his parole surveillance, and the case filed against
him has not yet been decided by the court.

(2)

An Infraction Report should be submitted by the Probation
and Parole Officer on violations committed by a parolee/
pardonee of the conditions of his release on parole or
conditional pardon while under supervision.

Any violation of the terms and conditions appearing in the
Release Document or any serious deviation or non-observance of
the obligations set forth in the parole supervision program shall
be immediately reported by his Probation and Parole Officer to the
Board. The report shall be called Infraction Report when the parolee/
pardonee has been subsequently convicted of another crime.
When parolee/pardonee may be ordered arrested or recommitted.
Upon receipt of an Infraction Report, the Board may order the
arrest or recommitment of the convict. If recommitted, he shall be
made to serve the remaining unexpired portion of the maximum
sentence for which he was originally committed to prison.

In a petition for habeas corpus, it was contended that the
recommitment order was premature, because it came down before
his convictions of the series of estafa committed by him during the
period of the parole. It was held that it was now rather academic
even assuming that final conviction is necessary in order to constitute
a violation of the condition of the parole. (Fortunato u. Director, 80
Phil. 187, 189)
"Without eligibility for parole."
The Supreme Court en bane issued A.M. No. 15-08-02-SC, the
Guidelines for the Proper Use of the Phrase "Without Eligibility for
Parole" in Indivisible Penalties. It aims to promote uniformity in
the court's promulgated decisions and resolutions and thus prevent
confusion. It provides that the phrase "without eligibility for parole"
is to be used to qualify the penalty of reclusion perpetua when
circumstances are present warranting the imposition of the death
penalty but which penalty is not imposed because of R.A. No. 9346.
The pertinent portion of the resolution is quoted:
xXXX

In these lights, the following guidelines shall be observed in the
imposition of penalties and in the use of the phrase "without eligibility
for parole":
( 1)

In cases where the death penalty is not warranted, there is
no need to use the phrase "without eligibility for parole" to
qualify the penalty of reclusion perpetua; it is understood
that convicted persons penalized with an indivisible
penalty are not eligible for parole; and

(2) When circumstances are present warranting the imposition
of the death penalty, but this penalty is not imposed
because of R.A. No. 9346, the qualification of "without
eligibility for parole" shall be used to qualify reclusion
perpetua in order to emphasize that the accused should
have been sentenced to suffer the death penalty had it not
been for R.A. No. 9346.

896
897

Art. 95

Conditional pardon distinguished from parole.
1.

2.

Conditional pardon, which may be given at any time after final
judgment, is granted by the President under the provisions
of the Administrative Code; parole, which may be given after
the prisoner has served the minimum penalty, is granted by
the Board of Pardons and Parole under the provision of the
Indeterminate Sentence Law.
For violation of the conditional pardon, the convict may be
ordered rearrested or reincarcerated by the President, or may
be prosecuted under Article 159 of the Code (Other Cases of
Evasion of Service of Sentence); for violation of the terms of
the parole, the convict cannot be prosecuted under Article 159.
He can be rearrested and reincarcerated to serve the unserved
portion of his original penalty.

Art. 95. Obligation incurred by a person granted
conditional pardon. An y person who has been granted
conditional pardon shall incur the obligation of complying
strictly with the conditions imposed therein, otherwise, his
noncompliance with any of the conditions specified shall
result in the revocation of the pardon and the provisions of
Article 159 shall be applied to him.

Outline of the provisions:
1.

He must comply strictly with the conditions imposed in the
pardon.

2.

Failure to comply with the conditions shall result in the
revocation of the pardon. Under Section 64(i), R.A.C., the Chief
Executive may order his arrest and reincarceration. (People v.
Aglahi, 61 Phil. 233, 235)

3.

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

He becomes liable under Article 159. This is the judicial
remedy.

898

Art. 96

Condition of pardon is limited to the unserved portion of the
sentence, unless an intention to extend it beyond that time is
manifest.
The duration of the conditions subsequent, annexed to a pardon,
would be limited to the period of the prisoner's sentence, unless an
intention to extend it beyond the term of his sentence was manifest
from the nature of the condition or the language in which it was
imposed. (Infante v. Warden, 92 Phil. 310, 314)
Illustration:
Thus, if a convict was sentenced to 12 years and one day of
reclusion temporal, as the maximum term of the indeterminate
penalty, and after serving five years, he was granted a conditional
pardon, the condition being that he should not commit any crime in
the future, that condition must be complied with by him until the
end of the seven years from the grant of the conditional pardon, it
being the unserved portion of his sentence. If he commits a crime
after the expiration of the seven years, he is not liable for violation
of the conditional pardon. The condition of the pardon is no longer
operative when he commits a new offense.
But if he commits a crime before the expiration of the seven
years, he is liable for violation of the conditional pardon.
Penalty under Article 159 of the Revised Penal Code for violation
of conditional pardon.
Under Art.159 of the R.P.C., the penalty of prision correccional
in its minimum period (6 months and 1 day to 2 years and 4 months)
shall be imposed upon the convict who shall violate a conditional
pardon. If the penalty remitted by the pardon is higher than six years,
the convict shall suffer the unexpired portion of his original sentence.

Art. 96. Effect of commutation of sentence. -- The
commutation of the original sentence for another of a different
length and nature shall have the legal effect of substituting
the latter in the place of the former.

899

Art. 97

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 97.Allowance for good conduct. - The good conduct of
any offender qualified for credit for preventive imprisonment
pursuant to Article 29 of this Code, or of any prisoner in any
penal institution, rehabilitation or detention center or any
other local jail shall entitle him to the following deductions
from the period of his sentence:

2.

3.
During the following years until the tenth year,
inclusive of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction
of twenty-fve days for each month of good behavior during
detention;
4.
During the eleventh and successive years of his
imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of thirty days
for each month of good behavior during detention; and
5. At any time during the period of imprisonment, he
shall be allowed another deduction of fifteen days, in addition
to numbers one to four hereof, for each month of study,
teaching or mentoring service time rendered.
An appeal by the accused shall not deprive him of
entitlement to the above allowances for good conduct. (As
amended by RA. No. 10592)

Amendments introduced by Republic Act No. 10592 to Article 97.
1.

Allowance for good conduct also granted to detention prisoners.
Prior to its amendment, allowance for good conduct was
not granted to detention prisoners. Thus, in the evaluation of
their petition for parole or executive clemency where eligibility
depends on the period of time served, the release of a detention
prison is correspondingly delayed for a period equal to the
good time allowance he could have earned had he been under
confinement by virtue of conviction by final judgment.
900

Increase in deduction from period of sentence.
The deduction from the period of a prisoner's sentence was
increased from -

1.
During the first two years of imprisonment, he shall
be allowed a deduction of twenty days for each month of good
behavior during detention;
2.
During the third to the fifth year, inclusive, of his
imprisonment, he shall be allowed a reduction of twenty-three
days for each month of good behavior during detention;

Art. 97

3.

a)

5 to 20 days: for first 2 years of imprisonment;

b)

8 to 23 days: from 3rd to 5th year of imprisonment;

c)

10to 25 days: 6th to 10th year of imprisonment;

d)

15 to 30 days: 11th and successive years of imprisonment

Additional deduction granted.
Aside from the deduction of from 20 to 30 days per month of
good behavior, an additional deduction of 15 days is granted for
each month of study, teaching or mentoring rendered.

4.

Effect of Appeal.
An appeal by the accused shall not deprive him of
entitlement to the above allowances for good conduct.

Application of the provisions of Article 97.
In a case decided before Article 97 was amended, the Supreme
Court held that:
The release of appellee Tan by the provincial warden, after
an imprisonment of only two years, eight months and 21 days, was
premature. Under paragraph 1, Article 97 of the R.P.C., he may be
allowed a deduction of five days for each month of good behavior
during his first two years of imprisonment, which would be 24 months
multiplied by five, or 120 days; under paragraph 2, he may be allowed
a deduction of eight days a month for the next three years. For the
balance of eight months, multiplied by eight, we have 64 days; so that
the total credit for good behavior would be 184 days, equivalent to six
months and four days. The prisoner's actual confinement of two years,
eight months and 21 days, plus his possible total credit of six months
and four days, would give the result of three years, two months and
25 days. Since the maximum term of his sentence is four years and
two months, appellee Tan has an unserved portion of 11 months and
five days. (People v. Tan, No. L-21805, February 25, 1967, 19 SCRA
433, 437)

901

Art. 97

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

No allowance for good conduct while prisoner Is released under
conditional pardon.
The reason is that the good conduct time allowance is given
in consideration of the good conduct observed by the prisoner while
serving his sentence. In this case, the accused was enjoying liberty
under a conditional pardon. He was not serving the remitted penalty
in prison. (People v. Martin, 68 Phil. 122, 125)
By a consideration of the terms of Article 97 alone, and also in
conjunction with other parts of the R.P.C., the phrase "any prisoner"
in Article 97 thereof is to be regarded as referring only to a prisoner
serving sentence. (Baking v. Director of Prisons, No. L-30603, July
28, 1969, 28 SCRA 851, 860)

TITLE FOUR
Extinction of Criminal Liability

Art. 98. Special timeallowance for loyalty. - A deduction
ofone fifth of the period of his sentence shall be granted to any
prisoner who, having evaded his preventive imprisonment or
the service of his sentence under the circumstances mentioned
in Article 158 of this Code, gives himself up to the authorities
within 48 hours following the issuance of a proclamation
announcing the passing away of the calamity or catastrophe
referred to in said article. A deduction of 2/5 of the period
of his sentence shall be granted in case said prisoner chose
to stay in the place of his confinement notwithstanding the
existence of a calamity or catastrophe enumerated in Article
158 of this Code.
This Article shall apply to any prisoner whether
undergoing preventive imprisonment or serving sentence.

Disqualification from good conduct time allowance.

(As amended by RA. No. 10592)

Recidivists, habitual delinquents, escapees, those charged
with heinous crimes and an accused who, upon being summoned
for the execution of his sentence has failed to surrender voluntarily
before a court of law, are excluded from good conduct time allowance
under R.A. No. 10592. (Rule IV, Sec. 2)

What is special time allowance for loyalty of prisoner?

Prisoners disqualified under R.A. No. 10592, such as heinous
crime convicts, but who were convicted before the law became effective
in 2013 shall be entitled to good conduct time allowance under the
Revised Penal Code. (Rule XIII, Sec. 1, 2nd par.)
Prisoners disqualified under R.A. No. 10592, such as heinous
crime convicts, and who were convicted after the law became effective
in 2013, shall not be entitled to any type of good conduct time
allowance. (Revised Implementing Rules ofR.A. No. 10592)
Non-entitlement to Good Conduct Time Allowance (GCTA) for
violation of prison rules.
A person deprived of liberty who violates prison rules within
a month shall not be entitled to the grant of GCTA for said month,
provided that such would not prejudice the imposition of other
penalties. (Sec. 3, Uniform Manual on Time Allowances and Service
of Sentence)

902

Art. 98

It is a deduction in the period of the sentence of a prisoner
who, having evaded the service of his sentence during the calamity
or catastrophe mentioned in Article 158, gives himself up to the
authorities within 48 hours following the issuance of a proclamation
announcing the passing away of the calamity or catastrophe, or who
chose to stay in the place of confinement notwithstanding the existence
of the calamity or catastrophe enumerated in Article 158.
A higher special time allowance is given to those who chose to stay
In the place of confinement.

A deduction of 2/5 of the period of his sentence shall be granted
to a prisoner who chose to stay in the place of his confinement while
a deduction of 1/5 of the period of his sentence shall be granted to
a prisoner who, having evaded the service of his sentence, gives
himself up to the authorities within 48 hours after the issuance
of a proclamation announcing the passing away of the calamity or
catastrophe.
Prior to the amendment of Article 98, only those who evaded
service of their sentence were granted special time allowance to
encourage them to surrender. Since prisoners who, despite having all
the chances to escape, chose instead to remain in their prison cells,
903

Art. 99

THE REVlSED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

have shown more convincingly their loyalty than those who escaped
and then eventually gave themselves up, they are given a higher
special time allowance for loyalty.

Three government agencies currently have supervision over
prisoners and jails, namely:

Art. 99

1)

the Bureau of Corrections, under the Departm ent ofJustice
(DOJ) which has supervision and control over their prison
facilities that house national prisoners or those servin g
prison terms of more than three years;

2)

the provincial governments, which has supervision and
control over provincial jails that house provincial prisoners
or those serving prison terms of more than six months up
to three years; and

3)

the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP )
under the Department of Interior and Local Governm ent
(DILG), which has jurisdiction over all city, municipal,
and district jails that house municipal prisoners or those
servin g prison terms ofone day to not more than six months
in municipal jails and not more than three years in city
jails.

The deduction is based on the original sentence.
Whi le this article mentions "the period of his sentence," it should
be understood that the convict is to be credited for loyalty with 2/5
or 1/5 of his original sentence, not of the unexpired portion of his
sentence.
The deduction applies to all prisoners.
The special time allowance for loyalty shall apply to any prisoner,
whether undergoing preventive imprisonment or serving sentence.
Article 158 provides for Increased penalty.
Under Article 158, a convict who evaded the service of his
sentence by leaving the penal institution where he had been confined,
on the occasion of disorder resulting from a conflagration, earthquake,
explosion or similar catastrophe or during a mutiny in which he did
not participate, is liable to an increased penalty (1/5 of the time still
remaining to be served
not to exceed six months), ifhe fails to give
himself up to the authorities within 48 hours following the issuance of
a proclamation by the Chief Executive announcing the passing away
of the calamity.
Art. 99. Who grants time allowance. - Whenever lawfully
justified, the Director of the Bureau of Corrections, the Chief
of the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and/or the
Warden of a provincial, district, municipal or city jail shall
grant allowances for good conduct. Such allowances once
granted shall not be revoked. (As amended by RA. No. 10592)

Good conduct allowance may be granted by the Director of the
Bureau of Corrections, the Chief of the BJMP, and the warden of
provincial, district, municipal or city jails.
Prior to the amendment of Article 99 by R.A. No. 10592, only
the Director of Prisons (now Director of the Bureau of Corrections)
was allowed to grant time allowance for good conduct.
904

Since city and municipal prisoners are not under the jurisdiction
of the Director of the Bureau of Corrections, the amendment to
Article 99 seeks to fast-track the application and grant of good
conduct time allowance by likewise granting to the Chief of the
Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and/or the warden of a
provincial, district, municipal or city jail, the authority to grant
time allowance for good conduct. (See Explanatory Note to Senate
Bill Nos. 116 and 1151)
Allowance for good conduct is not an automatic right. It cannot be
revoked once granted.
The allowance for good conduct is not an automatic right. It
must be granted by either the Director of the Bureau of Corrections,
the Chief of the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and/or the
warden of a provincial, district, municipal or city jail.
Allowances for good conduct, once granted, cannot be revoked.

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Title Five
CIVIL LIABILITY

Chapter One
PERSONS CIVILLY LIABLE FOR FELONIES
As a general rule, an offense causes two classes of injuries:
1.
Social injury, produced by the disturbance and alarm which
arc the outcome of the offense.
2.
Personal injury, caused to the victim of the crime who may
have suffered damage, either to his person, to his property, to his
honor, or to her chastity.
The social injury is sought to be repaired through the imposition
of the corresponding penalty; while the personal injury, through
indemnity, which is civil in nature.

Art. 100. Civil liability ofa person guilty offelony. - Every
person criminally liable for a felony is also civilly liable.

Art. 100

negligence called a quasi-delict. (Art. 2176, New Civil Code) But the
party claiming payment for the damage done cannot recover twice
for the same act or omission of the defendant. (Art. 2177, New Civil
Code)
Thus, if A was convicted of serious physical injuries through
negligence under the R.P.C., and B, the injured party, was indemnified
in the criminal case for the damages caused to him, the latter cannot
recover damages in a separate civil action for the same act or omission
of A.
Civil liability under the R.P.C. includes (1) restitution, (2)
reparation of the damage caused, and (3) indemnification for
consequential damages. (Art. 104, R.P.C.)
Basis of civil liability.
Underlying the legal principle that a person who is criminally
liable is also civilly liable is the view that from the standpoint of its
effects, a crime has dual character: (1) as an offense against the state
because of the disturbance of the social order; and (2) as an offense
against the private person injured by the crime unless it invdlves the
crime of treason, rebellion, espionage, contempt and others wherein
no civil liability arises on the part of the offender either because
there are no damages to be compensated or there is no private person
injured by the crime. In the ultimate analysis, what gives rise to
the civil liability is really the obligation of everyone to repair or to
make whole the damage caused to another by reason of his act or
omission, whether done intentionally or negligently and whether or
not punishable by law.(Occena v. lcamina, G.R. No. 82146, January
22, 1990, 181 SCRA 328, 333)

Civil liability arising from offenses.

Damages that may be recovered in criminal cases.

Every person who, contrary to law, wilfully or negligently causes
damage to another, shall indemnify the latter for the same. (Art. 20,
New Civil Code)

In crimes against property, damages based on the price of the
thing and its special sentimental value to the injured party may be
recovered, if the thing itself cannot be restored. (Art. 106, in relation
to Art. 105, R.P.C.)

Civil obligations arising from criminal offenses shall be governed
by the penal laws. (Art. 1161, New Civil Code)
The civil liability arising from negligence under the R.P.C. is
entirely separate and distinct from the responsibility for fault or

In crimes against persons, like the crime of physical injuries,
the injured party is entitled to be paid for whatever he spent for the
treatment of his wounds, doctor's fees, and for medicine, as well as

906

907

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

the salary or wages unearned by him because of his inability to work
due to his injuries.

direct assault. As the slapping did not cause any injury to the mayor,
A is not civilly liable.

Damages may also be recovered for loss or impairment ofearning
capacity in cases of temporary or permanent personal injury. (Art.
2205, New Civil Code)

A person criminally liable for a felony is also civilly liable.

Art. 100

Moral damages may be recovered in a criminal offense resulting
in physical injuries, in the crimes of seduction, abduction, rape or
other lascivious acts, adultery or concubinage, illegal or arbitrary
detention or arrest, illegal search, libel, slander or any other form of
defamation, and in malicious prosecution. (Art. 2219, new Civil Code)
Exemplary damages as a part of the civil liability may be
imposed when the crime was committed with one or more aggravating
circumstances. (Art. 2230, new Civil Code)
Civil liability ex delicto for death caused by a crime is P100,000.00
where the penalty imposed is death but reduced to reclusion
perpetua because ofR.A. No. 9346 and to P75,000.00 where the penalty
imposed is reclusion perpetua. (People w. Jugueta, G.R. No. 202124,
April 5, 2016) In addition:
(1)

The defendant shall be liable for the loss of the earning
capacity of the deceased, unless the deceased, on account of
permanent physical disability not caused by the defendant,
had no earning capacity;

(2)

He shall be liable to give support ifthe deceased was obliged
to give support under Article 291 of the new Civil Code, to
one not an heir of the deceased;

(3)

He shall pay moral damages for mental anguish to the
spouse, legitimate and illegitimate descendants and
ascendants. (Art. 2206, New Civil Code)

Art. 100

Every person criminally liable is also civilly liable. Civil liability
arising from crimes (ex delicto) shall be governed by the penal laws,
subject to the provisions of Articles 29 to 35, 2176, 2177, and 2202,
2204, 2206, 2216, 2230, 2233, and 2234 (regulating damages) of the
Civil Code and to the provisions of Rule 111, Revised Rules of Crimin al
Procedure.
Since a person criminally liable Is also civilly liable, does his
acquittal in a criminal case mean extinction of his civil liability?
The R.P.C. is silent on this point. But the Revised Rules of
Criminal Procedure provide:
"The extinction of the penal action does not carry with it
extinction of the civil. However, the civil action based on delict
shall be deemed extinguished if there is a finding in a final
judgment in the criminal action that the act or omission from
which the civil liability may arise did not exist." (Rule III, Sec.
2, par. 4, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)
Thus, the dismissal of the information or the criminal action
does not affect the right of the offended party to institute or continue
the civil action already instituted arising from the offense, because
such dismissal or extinction of the penal action does not carry with
it the extinction of the civil one. (People v. Velez, 77 Phil. 1027) In
this case, there was a pending separate civil action, arising out of the
same offense, filed by the offended party against the same defendant.

Example: A slapped the face of the mayor who was then in the
performance of his duty. Under Article 148, the crime committed is

Though the death of an accused-appellant during the pendency
of an appeal extinguished his criminal liability, his civil liability
survives. Extinction of criminal liability does not necessarily mean
that the civil liability is also extinguished. Only the criminal liability,
including the fine, which is pecuniary, but not civil, of the accused is
extinguished by his death, but the civil liability remains. (Petralba
v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 81337, August 16, 1991, 200 SCRA
644, 649-650, citing People v. Navoa, 132 SCRA 410 and People v.
Sendaydiego, 81 SCRA 120)

908

909

But if there is no damage caused by the commission of the crime,
the offender Is not civilly liable.
Thus, if the felony committed could not or did not cause any
damage to another, the offender is not civilly liable even if he is
criminally liable for the felony committed.

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Civil liability may exist, although the accused is not held criminally
liable, in the following cases:

PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION
ARISING FROM CRIME

Art. 100

1.

Acquittal on reasonable doubt. -- When the accused in a
criminal prosecution is acquitted on the ground that his
guilt has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt, a civil
action for damages for the same act or omission may be
instituted. (Art. 29, Civil Code)
Award in judgment of acquittal.
The court may acquit an accused on reasonable doubt
and still order payment of civil damages already proved
in the same case without need for a separate civil action.
The reason is the accused has been accorded due process.
To require a separate civil action would mean needless
clogging of court dockets and unnecessary duplication of
litigation with all its attendant loss of time, effort and
money on the part of all concerned. (Maximo v. Gerochi,
Jr., Nos. L-47994-97, September 24, 1986, 144 SCRA 326,
329, citing Padilla v. Court ofAppeals [129 SCRA 558})

2.

Acquittal from a cause of non-imputability.
The
exemption from criminal liability in favor ofan imbecile or
insane person, and a person under 15 years of age, or one
over 15 but under 18 years of age, who has acted without
discernment, and those acting under the compulsion of an
irresistible force or under the impulse of an uncontrollable
fear of an equal or greater injury, does not include
exemption from civil liability. (Art. 101, R.P.C.)

3.

Acquittal in the criminal action for negligence does not
preclude the offended party from filing a civil action to
recover damages, based on the new theory that the act is
a quasi-delict. (Art. 2177, Civil Code)

4.

When there is only civil responsibility. -- When the court
finds and so states in its judgment that there is only civil
responsibility, and not criminal responsibility, and that
this finding is the cause of acquittal. (De Guzman v. Alva,
51 O.G. 1311)

5.

In cases of independent civil actions. (Arts . 31, 32, 33, and
34, New Civil Code)
910

Art. 100

Provisions of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure (Rule 111)
on the prosecution of civil action arising from offenses:
Institution ofcriminal and civil actions.- (a) When a criminal
action is instituted, the civil action for the recovery of civil liability
arising from the offense charged shall be deemed instituted with
the criminal action unless the offended party waives the civil action,
reserves the right to institute it separately, or institutes the civil
action prior to the criminal action. (Sec. 1[a], 1st par.)
The reservation of the right to institute separately the civil action
shall be made before the prosecution starts presenting its evidence
and under circumstances affording the offended party a reasonable
opportunity to make such reservation.
(b) The criminal action for violation of B.P. Big. 22 shall be
deemed to include the corresponding civil action. No reservation to
file such civil action shall be allowed. (Sec. l[b], 1st par.)
When civil action may proceed independently.
In the cases
provided for in Articles 32, 33, 34, and 2176 of the Civil Code of the
Philippines, the independent civil action may be brought by the
offended party. It shall proceed independently of the criminal action
and shall require only a preponderance of evidence. In no case,
however, may the offended party recover damages twice for the same
act or omission charged in the criminal action. (Sec. 3)
When separate civil action is suspended.(a)

Afte r the crimin al action has been commenced, the separate
civil action arising therefrom cannot be instituted until
final judgment has been rendered in the criminal action;

b)

If the criminal action is filed after the said civil action has
already been instituted, the latter shall be suspended in
whatever stage it may be found before judgment on the
merits. The suspension shall last until final judgment
is rendered in the criminal action. Nevertheless, before
judgment on the merits is rendered in the civil action,
the same may, upon motion of the offended party, be
consolidated with the criminal action in the court tryin g
911

Art. 100

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
the criminal action. In case of consolidation, the evidence
already adduced in the civil action shall be deemed
automatically reproduced in the criminal action without
prejudice to the right of the prosecution to cross-examine
the witnesses presented by the offended party in the
criminal case and of the parties to present additional
evidence. The consolidated criminal and civil actions shall
be tried and decided jointly. (Sec. 2)

Judgment in civil action not a bar. A final judgment rendered
in a civil action absolving the defendant from civil liability is not bar
to a crimin al action against the defendant for the same act or omission
subject of the civil action. (Sec. 5)
Suspension by reason of prejudicial question.
A petition
for suspension of the criminal action based upon the pendency of a
prejudicial question in a civil action may be filed in the office of the
prosecutor or the court conducting the preliminary investigation.
When the criminal action has been filed in court for trial, the petition
to suspend shall be filed in the same criminal action at any time before
the prosecution rests. (Sec. 6)
Effect of reservation on right to intervene In prosecution of criminal
case.
Under Section 1 of Rule 111, what is "deemed instituted" with the
crimi nal action is only the action to recover civil liability arising from
the crime or ex-delicto. All the other civil actions under Articles 32,
33, 34, and 2176 of the Civil Code are no longer deemed instituted,"
and may be filed separately and prosecuted independently even
without any reservation in the criminal action. The failure to make
a reservation in the criminal action is not a waiver of the right to file
a separate and independent civil action based on these articles of the
Civil Code. (Casupanan v. Laroya, 388 SCRA 28, 37)
Once the offended party has reserved his right to institute a
separate civil action to recover indemnity, he thereby loses his right
to intervene in the prosecution of the criminal case. Consequently,
appellant no longer had any right to move for the reconsideration of,
much less to appeal from the decision in the criminal case, insofar
as it decided the question of civil indemnity, for appellant no longer
had any standing in the case. (Tactaquin v. Palileo, No. L-20865,
December 29, 1967, 21 SCRA 1431, 1434)
912

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 100

If the offended party in the criminal case is represented by a private
prosecutor, he cannot file an independent civil action.
If the offended party elected to claim the civil liability in the
criminal case by intervening therein through a private prosecutor and
the court did not award any civil liability because the offended party
did not present evidence, he cannot thereafter file an independent
civil action for said civil liability. The matter is already res judicata
in the criminal case. (Roa v. De la Cruz, 107 Phil. 8, 12-13)
When the accused pleaded guilty during the arraignment, so that the
offended party could not have expressly renounced his right to fi.le
the civil action or reserved the same, can the latter subsequently fi.le
a civil action for indemnity for physical and moral damages caused
by the accused?
The mere appearance of a private prosecutor in the criminal
case does not necessarily constitute such intervention on the part of
the aggrieved party as could only import an intention to press claim
for damages in said criminal case and a waiver of the right to file
a separate civil action for damages, where the accused had pleaded
guilty upon arraignment and was immediately sentenced, there being
no chance for the aggrieved party to present evidence in support of
the claim for damages and to enter a reservation in the record to file
a separate civil action. (Reyes v. Sempio-Diy, No. L-71914, January
29, 1986, 141 SCRA 208, 212-213)
An Independent civil action may be brought by the injured party
during the pendency of the criminal case.
In the cases provided in Articles 31, 32, 33, 34, and 2176 of
the Civil Code, the independent civil action may be brought by
the offended party. It shall proceed independently of the criminal
action, and shall require only a preponderance of evidence. In no
case, however, may the offended party recover damages twice for the
same act or omission charged in the criminal action. (Rule 111, Sec.
3, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)
The requirement for the reservation of the civil action does not
anymore apply to the independent civil actions under Articles 32, 33,
34 and 2176 of the Civil Code. Such actions may be filed at anytime,
provided the plaintiff does not recover twice upon the same act or
omission. (Supreme Transportation Lines, Inc. v. Andres, G.R. No.
200444, August 15, 2018)
913

Art. 100

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Article 33 of the Civil Code.
Art. 33. In cases of defamation, fraud, and physical injuries a civil
action for damages, entirely separate and distinct from the criminal
action, may be brought by the injured party. Such civil action shall
proceed independently of the criminal prosecution, and shall require
only a preponderance of evidence.
The words "defamation," "fraud," and "physical injuries" are
used in their ordinary sense. The term "physical injuries" means
bodily injury, not the crime of physical injuries. It includes attempted
homicide, frustrated homicide, or even death. (Carandang v. Hon.
Vicente Santiago, 97 Phil. 94, 96-97) Estafa is included in the term
"fraud."
Where fraud is the basis for both the civil and the criminal
actions, they are, according to law, to proceed independently. In the
same way that the civil suit can be tried, the criminal prosecution
has to run its course. (Rojas v. People, No. L-22237, May 31, 1974, 57
SCRA 243, 249)
Quasi-delicts.
Art. 2176. Whoever by act or omission causes damage to another,
there being fault or negligence, is obliged to pay for the damage done.
Such fault or negligence, if there is no pre-existing contractual relation
between the parties, is called a quasi-delict and is governed by the
provisions of this Chapter.
Art. 2177. Responsibility for such fault or negligence is entirely
separate and distinct from the civil liability arising from negligence
under the Penal Code. But the plaintiff cannot recover damages twice
for the same act or omission of the defendant.
When the final judgment In a criminal case does not state "that the
fact from which the civil might arise did not exist," extinction of the
penal action does not carry with it extinction of the civil.
The extinction of the penal action does not carry with it extinction
of the civil action. However, the civil action based on delict shall be
deemed extinguished if there is a finding in a final judgment in the
criminal action that the act or omission from which the civil liability
914

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 100

may arise did not exist. (Rule 111, Sec. 2[4th par.), Revised Rules of
Criminal Procedure)
When the accused in a criminal case for estafa (Art. 315,
l[b), R.P.C.) was acquitted because there was no conversion or
misappropriation, an element of the crime, but the evidence shows
that she really received the jewelry, then the civil action is not
extinguished. (Laperal v. Alvia, 51 O.G. 1311)
But ifin a criminal case for arson, the court states in its judgment
of acquittal that "the accused cannot in any manner be held responsible
for the fire," such declaration fits well into the exception of the rule and
actually exonerates the accused from civil liability. (Tan v. Standard
Vacuum Oil Co., et al., 91 Phil. 672, 675)
The question is whether appellants may still recover damages
from Priela, considering that he has been explicitly acquitted by
the trial court, upon the ground that "he has not been remiss in
his caution nor in his presence of mind trying to avoid" said "freak
accident." Held: Pursuant to the Rules of Court: "Extinction of the
penal action docs not carry with it extinction of the civil, unless the
extinction proceeds from a declaration in a final judgment that the
fact from which the civil might arise did not exist." In the case at
bar, the decision appealed from has not only acquitted Priela; but
also, declared that the collision, which resulted in the destruction of
appellants' car, had not been due to any negligence on his part. Since
appellants' civil action is predicated upon Priela's alleged negligence,
which does not exist, according to said final judgment, it follows
necessarily that his acquittal in the criminal action carries with it
the extinction of the civil responsibility arising therefrom. (Faraon
v. Priela, G.R. No. L-23129, August 2, 1968, 24 SCRA 582, 583)
Exception to the rule that extinction of the criminal action does not
extinguish civil action.
The civil action reserved by the complainant during the
prosecution of the criminal action will be allowed after the termination
of the criminal proceedings, only when he has the right thereto, that
is to say, when the judgment rendered is one of conviction, or, in case
the accused is acquitted, the complaint is based on some other fact or
ground different from the criminal act. For instance, a defendant was
charged with the crime of estafa through falsification of commercial
915

Art. 100

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

documents. The court acquitted him from the charge on the ground
that money had been received or retained by him pursuant to an
arrangement between the latter and the offended party, and that
the liability of the defendant for the return of the amount so received
arises from a civil contract, not from a criminal act, and may not be
enforced in the criminal case. (People v. Miranda, No. L-17389, August
31, 1962, 5 SCRA 1067, 1068-1069)
Since the court acquitted the accused on the ground that the
money had been received or retained by appellant pursuant to an
arrangement between the latter and the offended party, in order to
conceal the transaction from the other offended party, it was improper
and unwarranted to impose a civil liability in the same criminal action.
The liability of the defendant for the return of the amount so received
arises from a civil contract, not from a criminal act, and may not be
enforced in the criminal case but in a separate civil action. (People v.
Miranda, supra; People v. Pantig, 51 0.G. 5627)
Commencement of criminal action not a condition precedent to the
filing and prosecution of civil action arising from crime.
The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure permit the institution
of a civil action to demand civil responsibility arising from crime before
the institution of the criminal prosecution.

A contrary doctrine would render the right of the injured party
to indemnity a myth, and justice a farce, for the guilty party would
be able to dispose of his property. (Alba v. Acuna, 53 Phil. 380,387)
But the civil action arising from crime cannot be instituted or
prosecuted in the following cases:
1.

Afte r the criminal action has been commenced, the separate
civil action arising therefrom cannot be instituted until final
judgment has been entered in the criminal action. (Rule
111, Sec. 2, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)

2.

If the criminal action is filed after the said civil action has
already been instituted, the latter shall be suspended in
whatever stage it may be found before judgment on the
merits. The suspension shall last until final judgment
is rendered in the criminal action. (Rule 111, Sec. 2[a],
Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)
916

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 100

The rule which requires the suspension of the civil
case after the criminal action has been commenced, refers
to the commencement of the criminal action in court and
not to the mere filing of a complaint with the prosecuting
officer. (Coquia, et al. v. Cheong, et al., [Unrep.] 103 Phil.
1170)
Judgment in the civil case already promulgated cannot be
suspended by the filing of criminal action.
The provision of Section 2 of Rule 111, Rules of Court, that "after
a criminal action has been commenced, no civil action arising from the
same offense can be prosecuted, and the same shall be suspended, in
whatever stage it may be found, until final judgment in the criminal
proceeding has been rendered" does not contemplate the suspension
of a judgment already promulgated in a civil action by the filing of
a criminal complaint with the prosecution attorney charging the
wnnmng party with having introduced false documentary evidence.
(Tanda v. Aldaya, 89 Phil. 497, 504)
Section 2 of Rule 111 applies only (1) when the claimant in the civil
action is the offended party in the criminal action and (2) both cases
arise from the same offense.
Section 2 of Rule 111, Rules of Court (now Revised Rules of
Criminal Procedure), requiring the suspension of the civil action in
view of the commencement of the criminal action applies only when the
claimant in the civil action is the same offended party in the criminal
action and both cases arise from the same offense or transaction.
(Belleza v. Huntington, 89 Phil. 689, 695) (Sec. 3[b], now Sec. 2[a], of
Rule 111, was Sec. 1 of Rule 107 then)
Thus, if in the civil case, the plaintiff is the accused in the
criminal case and the defendant in that civil case is the offended party
in the criminal case, the counterclaim covering not only the sum of
P24,000.00 advanced to the plaintiff to purchase jute bags but also
the sum of Pl 71,000.00 as damages which the defendant claims to
have sustained, and the information in the criminal case being merely
confined to the former sum (P24,000.00)the claimant (plaintiff) is not
the offended party in the criminal case and both cases do not arise
from the same transaction. (Belleza v. Huntington, supra)
The rule that a civil action shall be suspended until final
judgment is rendered in criminal case, applies when the civil action
917

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

arises from the offense charged in the criminal case. (Alerta, et al. u.
Mendoza, et al., XIVL.J. 528)

mentioned in the information. Unless the record shows that an
omitted party has waived the civil liability or has reserved the right
to file a separate civil action to recover the same, such party's right
to the civil liability arising from the offense is impliedly included in
the criminal action. (People v. Despavellador, 53 O.G. 7297)

Art. 100

Section 2(a) of Rule 111 applies only to civil liability arising from
crime.
Thus, when the cause of action in the civil case is based on

Art. 100

culpa contractual and not on the civil liability arising from the

The accused may not make a counterclaim in a criminal case.

offense involved in the criminal case, Section 2(a) (Sec. 1, Rule 107,
then 3[b], Rule 111) of Rule 111, Rules of Court, does not apply and
the trial court erred in suspending the hearing of the civil case until
the final determination of the criminal case. Section 2(a) of Rule 111
contemplates a case where the offended party desires to press his right
to demand indemnity from the accused in the criminal case which
he may assert either in the same criminal case or in a separate civil
action. (Parker v. Panllio, 91 Phil. 1, 4)

The last paragraph of Section 1, Rule 111 of the Revised Rules
of Criminal Procedure states:

Culpa contractual is the basis of a civil action against a
transportation company, for instance, for its failure to carry safely
its passenger to his destination. The obligation to pay for damages
arises from contract, and not from crime.

Allegations ofdamages in information not necessary.
The court may sentence the accused to pay the offended party,
moral and material damages, even if there is no specific allegation
of such damages in the information, provided the offended party has
not expressly waived such liability or reserved his right to have civil
damages determined in a separate civil action. (People u. Vigo, C.A.,
52 O.G. 7629; People u. Soldevilla, 49 O.G. 2857; People v. Gerodias,
51 O.G. 4614)
Under Article 100 of this Code, when an information or complaint
is filed, even without any allegation of damages and the intention to
prove and claim them, it is to be understood that the offender is liable
for them. (People v. Celorico, G.R. No. 45738, VII L.J., p. 403; People

v. Oraza, 83 Phil. 633, 636)
Civil liability ofthe accused extends in favor ofpersons not mentioned
in the information.

No counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party complaint may be
filed by the accused in the criminal case, but any cause of action which
could have been the subject thereof may be litigated in a separate
civii action.
Maccay v. Nobela
(G.R. No. 145823, March 31, 2005)

Facts: An Information for Estafa was filed against accused-respondents.
After trial, the trial court found respondents innocent and ordered petitioners
to reimburse respondents P300,000.00 and to pay damages and attorney's
fees.
Held: A court trying a criminal case cannot award damages in favor
of the accused. The task of the trial court is limited to determining the guilt
of the accused and if proper, to determine his civil liability. A criminal case
is not the proper proceedings to determine the private complainant's civil
liability, if any.
The trial court erred in ordering petitioners, as part of the judgment
in the criminal case, to reimburse the P300,000.00 and pay damages to the
accused-respondents. This Court ruled in Cabaero v. Hon. Cantos (338 Phil
105) that a court trying a criminal case should limit itself to the criminal
and civil liability of the accused, thus:
[Thus], the trial court should confine itself to the criminal aspect
and the possible civil liability of the accused arising out of the crime.
The counterclaim (and cross-claim or third-party complaint, if any)
should be set aside or refused cognizance without prejudice to their
filing in separate proceedings at the proper time.

In criminal cases where the intervention of the aggrieved parties
is limited to being witnesses for the prosecution, the civil liability of
the accused should not extend only in favor of the person or persons

The appellate court erred in affirming the trial court's award of
damages by justifying it as a counterclaim. Nothing in the records shows
that respondents filed or attempted to file a counterclaim. The 2000 Rules
on Criminal Procedure prohibit counterclaims in criminal cases.

918

919

Art. 100

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Attachment in criminal cases.
When the civil action is properly instituted in the criminal action
as provided in Rule 111 the offended party may have the property of
the accused attached as security for the satisfaction of any judgment
that may be recovered from the accused in the following cases:

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 100

accordingly, be taken. The accused may seek a review of said judgment
as regards both actions. Similarly, the complainant may appeal with
respect only to the civil action. The right of either to appeal or not to
appeal is not dependent upon the other. (People v. Coloma, [Unrep.]

105 Phil. 1287)

(a)

When the accused is about to abscond from the Philippines;

Remedy ofoffended party where fiscal asks for dismissal.

(b)

When the criminal action is based on a claim for money
or property embezzled or fraudulently misapplied or
converted to the use of the accused who is a public officer,
officer of a corporation, attorney, factor, broker, agent, or
clerk, in the course of his employment as such, or by any
other person in a fiduciary capacity, or for a willful violation
of duty;

If the criminal action is dismissed by the court on motion of the
fiscal upon the ground of insufficiency of evidence, the offended party
has no right to appeal, his remedy being a separate civil action after
proper reservation is made therefor. (People v. Lipana, 72 Phil. 166
170)
'

(c)

When the accused has concealed, removed, or disposed of
his personal property, or is about to do so;

(d)

When the accused resides outside the Philippines. (Rule
127, Sec. 2, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)

Writ of attachment, etc. may be Issued in criminal cases.
Within the criminal action, with which the civil action is
impliedly instituted, the offended party may obtain the preliminary
writ of attachment. The court in which the civil action is pending is,
after the filing of the information in the criminal case, not ipso facto
deprived of the power to issue preliminary and auxiliary writs, such
as preliminary injunction, attachment, appointment of receiver, fixing
amounts of bonds, and other processes of similar nature, which do
not go into the merits of the case. (Ramcar, Inc. v. De Leon, 78 Phil.

449, 452-453; Babala v. Abato, 90 Phil. 827, 828-829)
Availability ofprovisional remedies. - The provisional remedies
in civil actions insofar as they are applicable may be availed of in
connection with civil action deemed instituted with the criminal
action. (Rule 127, Sec. 1, Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure)
From the judgment of conviction in criminal case, two appeals may
be taken.
Every criminal case involves two actions: one criminal and
another civil. From a judgment of conviction, two appeals may,
920

The reason for the rule is that the continuation of the
offended party's intervention in a criminal action depends upon tbe
continuation of such action by the provincial fiscal. Once the criminal
action is dismissed by the trial court on petition ofthe provincial fiscal,
the offended party's right to intervene ceases, and he cannot appeal
from the order of dismissal, otherwise it "would be tantamount to
giving said offended party the direction and control of the crimi nal
proceeding." (People v. Lipana, supra)
But the offended party may rightly intervene by interposing an
appeal from the order dismissing the action upon a question oflaw.

(People v. Maceda, 73 Phil. 679, 681)
Right to appeal as to civil liability.
When the court found the accused guilty ofcriminal negligence,
but failed to enter judgment of civil liability, the private prosecutor
has a right to appeal for purposes of the civil liability of the accused.
The appellate court may remand the case to the trial court for the
latter to include in its judgment, the civil liability of the accused.

(People v. Ursua, 60 Phil. 252, 254-255)
Civil liability may be added within the 15-day period, even if the
convict has started serving sentence.
Before the expiration of the 15-day period for appealing, the trial
court can amend the judgment of conviction by adding a provision
for the civil liability of the accused, and this notwithstanding that
the judgment became final because the accused had commenced the
service of his sentence. (People v. Rodriguez, 97 Phil. 349, 351)
921

Art. 100

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

This ruling applies even though an appeal from the judgment
of conviction has already been perfected. (People v. Co Ko Tong, C.A.,
51 O.G. 6337)
But after the 15-day period for appealing, the trial court cannot
amend its decision by adding thereto the civil liability. (Sese v.
Montesa, 87 Phil. 245, 247)
Prejudicial question.
This is another exception to the rule that the criminal action
shall be decided first and that the civil action should be suspended.
Prejudicial questions must be decided before any criminal
prosecution may be instituted or may proceed. (Art. 36, new Civil
Code)
A petition for the suspension of the criminal action based upon
the pendency of a prejudicial question in a civil action, may be filed
in the office of the prosecutor or the court conducting the preliminary
investigation. When the criminal action has been filed in court for
trial, the petition to suspend shall be filed in the same criminal action
at any time before the prosecution rests. (Rule 111, Sec. 6, Revised
Rules of Criminal Procedure)
For the principle on prejudicial question to apply, it is essential
that there be two cases involved, invariably a civil case and a criminal
case. If the two cases are both civil or if they are both criminal, the
principle finds no application. (Malvar v. Cruz, 14 C.A. Rep. [2s] 395
(Syllabus))
Prejudicial question defined.
A prejudicial question is one which arises in a case, the resolution
of which is a logical antecedent of the issue involved in said case,
and the cognizance of which pertains to another tribunal. (Jimenez
v. Averia, No. L-22759, March 29, 1968, 22 SCRA 1380, 1382, citing
Encyclopedia Juridical Espanola, p. 228)
It is based on a fact distinct and separate from the crime but so
intimately connected with it that it determines the guilt or innocence
of the accused.

922

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 100

Elements of prejudicial question.
The two essential elements of a prejudicial question are: (a)
the civil action involves an issue similar or intimately related to the
issue raised in the criminal action; and (b) the resolution of such issue
determines whether or not the criminal action may proceed. (Rule
111, Sec. 5, Rules of Court)
1.

The prejudicial question must be determinative of the case
before the court;

2.

Jurisdiction to try said question must be lodged in another
tribunal. (People u. Aragon, 94 Phil. 357; Rojas v. People,
57 SCRA 243)

Venue of the actions.
Spanish jurisprudence, from which the principle of prejudicial
question has been taken, requires that the essential element
determinative of the criminal action must be cognizable by another
court. This requirement of a different court is demanded in Spanish
jurisprudence because Spanish courts are divided according to their
jurisdictions, some courts being exclusively of civil jurisdiction, others
of criminal jurisdiction. In the Philippines where our courts are vested
with both civil and criminal jurisdiction, the principle of prejudicial
question is to be applied even if there is only one court before which
the civil action and the criminal action are to be litigated. But in this
case, the court, when exercising its jurisdiction over the civil action
for the annulment of marriage, for example, is considered as a court
distinct and different from itself when trying the criminal action for
bigamy. (Merced v. Diez, 109 Phil. 155, 160-161)
Examples of prejudicial question:
(1)

There was a pending appeal before the Supreme
Court wherein the principal question involved was the
genuineness of a certain document. After the presentation
of the appellant's brief, appellee presented a motion
alleging that said document was false. The Supreme Court
resolved that when the appeal was to be determined on the
merits, the said motion would be decided. At that stage of
the case, appellee filed with the City Fiscal a complaint for
falsification based on the same document. Was it proper for
923

Art. 100

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law
the fiscal to proceed with the investigation of the criminal
complaint for falsification?
Held: No. The Fiscal must wait until the case before
the Supreme Court is decided first, because if the Supreme
Court should decide that the document is genuine and has
not been substituted, such finding would be contrary to the
stand taken by the Fiscal. (De Leon v. Mabanag, 70 Phil.
202)

(2)

The pendency of a petition for judicial declaration of nullity
of the first marriage is not a prejudicial question in an
action for bigamy. The subsequent judicial declaration of
the nullity of the first marriage is immaterial because prior
to the declaration of nullity, the crime had already been
consummated. (Mercado v. Tan, G.R. No. 137110, August
1,2000)
A case for annulment of marriage is a prejudicial
question to a bigamy case ifit is proved that the accused's
consent to such marriage was obtained by means of duress,
violence and intimidation in order to establish that his act
in the subsequent marriage was an involuntary one and as
such the same cannot be the basis for conviction. (Donato
v. Luna, No. L-53642, April 15, 1988, 160 SCRA 441, 447,
citing Landicho v. Relova, 22 SCRA 731)
When civil action not a prejudicial question. - If it is
the second wife who filed the civil action against the accused
charged with bigamy, alleging that the accused by means
of force and threats forced her to marry him, the accused
cannot properly claim that the civil action is a prejudicial
question, because even if the allegation in the civil case
is true, the fact remains that the accused contracted the
second marriage voluntarily. If the second wife were the
one accused of bigamy, she could perhaps raise force or
intimidation as a defense in the charge of bigamy, because
on her part there was no consent to the marriage; hut not
the party, who used the force or intimidation. The latter
may not use his own malfeasance to defeat the action based
on his criminal act. (People v. Aragon, 94 Phil. 357, 360;
see also Donato v. Luna, No. L-53642, April 15, 1988, 160
924

Art. 100

SCRA 441, 447 where the complaint for annulment was
grounded on deceit.)
(3)

A civil case was filed for unpaid wages claimed by a number
of laborers. In that case, the obligation of defendants to
pay wages was in issue. There was then a criminal action
pending against one of the defendants in the civil case for
protracted delay in the payment of wages as penalized by
Com. Act No. 303. The defendants asked for the suspension
of the civil action until the criminal case be finally disposed
of. Must the court order the suspension of the trial of the
civil action?
No. The obligation to pay wages is a prejudicial
question, for there can be no extended delay in the payment
of such obligations unless the obligation be first proved.
(Aleria v. Mendoza, 83 Phil. 427, 429)

Compare the above case with the following case.
A and B were accused of violation of the Copyright Law. Later,
A and B brought an action for the cancellation of copyrights granted
to the complainant. Is the action for cancellation of the copyrights a
prejudicial question which must be decided first? No. Until cancelled,
the copyrights are presumed to have been duly granted and issued.
(Ocampo v. Tancinco, 96 Phil. 459, 460)
In the case ofAleria v. Mendoza, supra, the ruling is consistent
with the presumption of innocence on the part of the accused. In the
case of Ocampo v. Tancinco, the ruling is based on the presumption
of regularity in the granting and issuance of the copyrights.
When the question Is not determinative of the guilt or Innocence
of the parties charged with estafa, it is not a prejudicial question.
The alleged prejudicial question is not determinative of the
guilt or innocence of the parties charged with estafa. Even if the
execution of the receipt in the civil case was vitiated by fraud, duress
or intimidation, the guilt of the accused could still be established
by other evidence by showing that they actually received from the
complainant the sum of P20,000.00 with which to buy a fishing boat
and that instead of doing so, they misappropriated the money and
refused to return it to him upon demand. A claim to this effect is a
925

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

matter of defense to be interposed by the party charged in the criminal
proceeding. (Jimenez v. Averia, No. L-22759, March 29, 1968, 22 SCRA
1380, 1382)

Art. 101. Rules regarding civil liability in certain cases.
The exemption from criminal liability established in
subdivisions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 of Article 12 and in subdivision
4 of Article 11 of this Code does not include exemption from
civil liability, which shall be enforced subject to the following
rules:

Art. 100

An acquittal in a criminal case is not evidence of innocence In
subsequent civil action based upon the alleged criminal act.
In a civil case, the Solicitor General moved for the cancellation of
the certificate of naturalization issued in favor of the petitioner, upon
the ground that it was secured illegally and fraudulently. Among the
acts of misrepresentation and misconduct imputed to the petitioner
was the alleged maltreatment by him of Mrs. Joist. It appeared that
the Municipal Court which tried the maltreatment case acquitted the
defendant (petitioner). The court trying the civil case did not take
into account the evidence introduced in that civil case in support of
the charge of maltreatment.
It was held that the trial court erred in not taking into account
the evidence introduced in the civil case in support of the charge
of maltreatment. The Supreme Court stated that the great weight
of authority supports the rule that a judgment of acquittal is not
effective under the doctrine of res judicata in later civil proceedings,
and does not constitute a bar to a subsequent civil action involving
the same subject-matter. An acquittal in a criminal prosecution does
not constitute evidence of innocence in subsequent civil action based
upon the alleged criminal act. (Republic v. Asaad, 5l O.G. 703)
But where the state is a party to the civil action, the issues
determined by the conviction of the defendant are concluded in the
civil action. (See the citation in the same case of Republic u. Asaad.)
When to plead prejudicial question.
A petition for suspension of the criminal action based upon the
pendency of a prejudicial question in a civil action may be filed in
the office of the prosecutor or the court conducting the preliminary
investigation. When the criminal action has been filed in court for
trial, the petition to suspend shall be filed in the same criminal action
at any time before the prosecution rests. (Rule 111, Sec. 6, Revised
Rules of Criminal Procedure)

926

!

I$
3
ij

l

l

!
l

l!
I

Art. 101

First: In cases of subdivisions 1, 2, and 3 of Article 12,
the civil liability for acts committed by an imbecile or insane
person, and by a person under nine years of age, or over
nine but under fifteen years of age, who has acted without
discernm ent, shall devolve upon those having such a person
under their legal authority or control, unless it appears that
there was no fault or negligence on their part.
Should there be no person having such insane, imbecile,
or minor under his authority, legal guardianship, or control,
or if such person be insolvent, said insane, imbecile, or minor
shall respond with their own property, excepting property
exempt from execution, in accordance with the civil law.

Second: In cases falling within subdivision 4 ofArticle 11,
the persons for whose benefit the harm has been prevented
shall be civilly liable in proportion to the benefit which they
may have received.
The courts shall determine, in their sound discretion, the
proportionate amount for which each one shall be liable.
When the respective shares cannot be equitably
determined, even approximately, or when the liability
also attaches to the Government, or to the majority of the
inhabitants of the town, and, in all events, whenever the
damage has been caused with the consent of the authorities
or their agents, indemnification shall be made in the manner
prescribed by special laws or regulations.
Third: In cases falling within subdivisions 5 and 6 of
Article 12, the persons using violence or causing the fear shall
be primarily liable and secondarily, or, if there be no such
persons, those doing the act shall be liable, saving always to
the latter that part of their property exempt from execution.

927

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 101

Civil liability of persons exempt from criminal liability.
Exemption from criminal liability does not include exemption
from civil liability.
Exceptions:
1.

There is no civil liability in paragraph 4 of Article 12 which
provides for injury caused by mere accident.

2.

There is no civil liability in paragraph 7 of Article 12 which
provides for failure to perform an act required by law when
prevented by some lawful or insuperable cause.

Note:

The exemption from criminal liability does not include
exemption from civil liability in the cases provided for
in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 of Article 12. Paragraphs
4 and 7 are not mentioned. Therefore, there is also
exemption from civil liability in the cases provided for
in paragraphs 4 and 7 of Article 12.

Who are civilly liable for the acts of an insane or minor, exempt
from criminal liability?
The civil liability for acts committed by an imbecile or insane or
minor exempt from criminal liability shall devolve upon the persons
having legal authority or control over them, if the latter are at fault
or negligent.
If there is no fault or negligence on their part, or even if at fault
or negligent but insolvent, or should there be no person having such
authority or control, the insane, imbecile, or such minor shall respond
with their own property not exempt from execution.
The persons having the insane or minor under their legal
authority or control are primarily liable to pay the civil liability for
acts committed by such insane or minor. But they can avoid civil
liability by pleading and proving the defense that there was no fault
or negligence on their part.
Under Article 101 of the R.P.C., a father is made civilly liable for
the acts committed by his son if the latter is an imbecile, an insane,
under nine years of age, or over nine but under 15 years of age, who
acts without discernment, unless it appears that there is no fault or
928

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 101

negligence on his part. This is because a son who commits the act
under any of those conditions is by law exempt from criminal liability.
(Arts. 12, 1,2, and 3, R.P.C.) The idea is not to leave the act entirely
unpunished but to attach certain civil liability to the person who has
the delinquent minor under his legal authority or control. (Paleyan v.
Bangkili, No. L-22253, July 30, 1971, 40 SCRA 132, 135, citing Salen
v. Balce, 107 Phil. 748)
The provisions of the Civil Code.
The father and, in case of his death or incapacity, the mother,
are responsible for the damages caused by the minor children who
live in their company.
Guardians are liable for damages caused by the minors or
incapacitated persons who are under their authority and live in their
company.
The responsibility treated in this article shall cease when the
persons herein mentioned prove that they observed all the diligence
of a good father of a family to prevent damage. (Art. 2180, 2nd and
last pars., Civil Code)
If the minor or insane person causing damage has no parents
or guardian, the minor or insane person shall be answerable with
his own property in an action against him where a guardian ad litem
shall be appointed. (Art. 2182, Civil Code)
The final discharge of a child in conflict with the law does not
obliterate his civil liability.
The Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of2006 provides:
"SECTION 39. Discharge of the Child in Conflict with the
Law. -- Upon the recommendation of the social worker who has
custody of the child, the court shall dismiss the case against the
child whose sentence has been suspended and against whom
disposition measures have been issued, and shall order the
final discharge of the child if it finds that the objective of the
disposition measures have been fulfilled.
"The discharge of the child in conflict with the law shall
not affect the civil liability resulting from the commission of the
offense, which shall be enforced in accordance with law."
929

Art, 101

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Duty of court trying an insane.
In a fit of insanity, the accused attacked a woman with a bolo
and instantly killed her.
In declaring the accused not guilty because he is exempt from
criminal liability by reason of insanity, has the court the authority
to order him to indemnify the heirs of the deceased?
Courts, in rendering judgment in a criminal case prosecuted
against an insane, even when they hold the accused exempt from
criminal liability, must fix the civil liability of the person charged with
the watching over and caring for him or the liability of the demented
person himself with his property. (U.S. w. Baggay, 20 Phil. 142, 146147)
In the case of U.S. v. Baggay, supra, the defendant was acquitted
of murder because he was insane when he committed the act, but he
was sentenced to indemnify the heirs of the deceased in the sum of
Pl,000.00.
This ruling applies also to other cases under this article.
Who are civilly liable for acts committed by persons acting under
irresistible force or uncontrollable fear?
The persons using violence or causing the fear are primarily
liable.

Art. 102. Subsidiary civil liability of innkeepers,
tavernkeepers, and proprietors ofestablishments. In default
of the persons criminally liable, innkeepers, tavernkeepers,
and any other persons or corporations shall be civilly liable
for crimes committed in their establishments, in all cases
where a violation of municipal ordinances or some general
or special police regulations shall have been committed by
them or their employees.
Innkeepers are also subsidiarily liable for the restitution
of goods taken by robbery or theft within their houses from
guests lodging therein, or for the payment of the value thereof.
provided that such guests shall have notified in advance the
innkeeper himself, or the person representing him, of the
deposit of such goods within the inn; and shall furthermore
have followed the directions which such innkeeper or his
representative may have given them with respect to the care
of and vigilance over such goods. No liability shall attach
in case of robbery with violence against or intimidation of
persons unless committed by the innkeeper's employees.

Elements under paragraph 1:
1.

That the innkeeper, tavernkeeper or proprietor of
establishment or his employee committed a violation of
municipal ordinance or some general or special police
regulation.

2.

That a crime is committed in such inn, tavern or
establishment.

3.

That the person criminally liable is insolvent.

If there be no such persons, those doing the act shall be liable
secondarily.
Civil liability of persons acting under justifying circumstances.
There is no civil liability in justifying circumstances.
Exception:
In paragraph 4 of Article 11, there is civil liability, but the
person civilly liable is the one benefited by the Act which causes
damage to another. (See Tan v. Standard Vacuum Oil Co., 91
Phil. 672)

930

Art. 102

When all the above elements are present, the innkeeper,
tavernkeeper or any other person or corporation is civilly liable
for the crime committed in his establishment. This is known as
subsidiary civil liability of innkeepers, tavernkeepers or proprietors
of establishments.
Example: If homicide is committed in an inn or bar on a
Sunday which, according to the ordinances, should be closed, since
the innkeeper in this case violates the ordinances by opening
931

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

his establishment for business on a prohibited day, he shall be

corporations engaged in any kind of industry for felonies
comm itted by their servants, pupils, workmen, apprentices,
or employees in the discharge of their duties.

Art. 103

subsidiarily liable for the indemnity or civil liability to the heirs of
the deceased. (Guevara)
In such case, the innkeeper or owner of the establishment is
civilly liable for such crime committed therein, if the offender is
insolvent.

Art. 103

Elements:
1.

The employer, teacher, person or corporation is engaged
in any kind of industry.

The guests notified in advance the innkeeper or the person
representing him of the deposit of their goods within the
inn or house.

2.

Any of their servants, pupils, workmen, apprentices or
employees commits a felony while in the discharge of his

2.

The guests followed the directions of the innkeeper or his
representative with respect to the care of and vigilance
over such goods.

3.

3.

Such goods of the guests lodging therein were taken by
robbery with force upon things or theft committed within
the inn or house.

Elements under paragraph 2:
1.

When all the above elements are present, the innkeeper is

subsidiarily liable.
No liability shall attach in case ofrobbery with violence against
or intimidation of persons, unless committed by the innkeeper's
employees.
It is not necessary that the effects of the guest be actually delivered
to innkeeper.
In a case where the owner of a hotel disclaimed liability because
plaintiff did not deposit his properties with the manager despite a
notice to that effect posted in the hotel, it was held that actual delivery
to him or his employee of the effects of the guest is not necessary; it
is enough that they were within the inn. (De Los Santos v. Tam Khey,
C.A., 58 O.G. 7693, citing 29 Am. Jur. 89-90)

duties.
The said employee is insolvent and has not satisfied his
civil liability.

In order that an employer may be held subsidiarily liable for the
employee's civil liability in the criminal action, it should be shown:
(1) that the employer is engaged in any kind of industry; (2) that the
employee committed the offense in the discharge of his duties; and
(3) that he is insolvent. The subsidiary liability of the employer,
however, arises only after conviction of the employee in the criminal
action. (Carpio v. Doroja, G.R. No. 84516, December 5, 1989, 180 SCRA
1,7, citing Basa Marketing Corp. v. Bolinao Sec. & Inv. Services, Inc.,

117 SCRA 15)

In this case, when all these elements are present, the employer
or teacher is subsidiarily liable.
Example: A workman of a construction company stole some
things while he was making minor repairs in a house, and after being
prosecuted was found guilty by the court. The workman cann ot satisfy
his own civil liability.
Under such circumstances, the company is liable subsidiarily
for the restitution of the things or for the payment of their value.
(Guevara)
Employer must be engaged in industry.

Meaning of"industry."
Art. 103. Subsidiary civil liability of other persons. The subsidiary liability established in the next preceding
article shall also apply to employers, teachers, persons, and
932

An enterprise not conducted as a means oflivelihood or forprofit
does not come within the meaning of the term "business," "trade," or
"industry." (Clemente v. Foreign Mission Sisters, C.A., 38 O.G. 1594)
933

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

"Industry" is any department or branch of art, occupation or
business; especially, one which employs so much labor and capital
and is a distinct branch of trade. Hence, a person who owns a truck
and uses it in the transportation of his own products is engaged in
industry. (Telleria v. Garcia, C.A., 40 0.G., Supp., 12, 115)

portion of its decision, the trial court need not expressly pronounce
the subsidiary liability of the employer.

Art. 103

Hospital not engaged in industry; nurses not servants.
A hospital is not engaged in industry; hence, not subsidiarily
liable for acts of nurses. Nurses, in treating a patient, are not acting
as servants of the hospitals, because they are employed to carry out
the orders of the physicians, to whose authority they are subject.
(Clemente v. Foreign Mission Sisters, supra)
Private persons without business or Industry, not subsidiarity liable.
The car driven by S was bumped by the car of V driven by the
latter's chauffeur. The chauffeur who was found guilty was insolvent.
Is V subsidiarily liable?
No. Vis a private person who has no business or industry and
uses his automobile for private purposes. V does not fall under Article
103 of the R.P.C. (Steinmetz v. Valdez, 72 Phil. 92, 93)
The felony must be committed by the servant or employee of the
defendant in the civil case.
Thus, where the driver, who drove a jeepney without the
owner's consent, was arrested and prosecuted for, and found guilty
of, homicide through reckless imprudence, the owner of the jeepney is
not subsidiarily liable for the indemnity adjudged against the driver.
(Clarianes • Sabinosa, C.A., 55 O.G. 3846)

Art. 103

The decision convicting an employee in a criminal case is binding
and conclusive upon the employer not only with regard to the farmer's
civil liability, but also with regard to its amount. The liability of an
employer cannot be separated from that of the employee. (Yusay v.
Adil, 164 SCRA 494, August 18, 1988; Pajarito v. Seieris, 87 SCRA
275, December 14, 1978)
Before the employers' subsidiary liability is exacted, however,
there must be adequate evidence establishing that: (1) they are indeed
the employers of the convicted employees; (2) that the former are
engaged in some kind of industry; (3) that the crime was committed
by the employees in the discharge of their duties; and (4) that the
execution against the latter has not been satisfied due to insolvency.
The resolution of these issues need not be done in a separate civil
action. But the determination must be based on the evidence that the
offended party and the employer may fully and freely present. Such
determination may be done in the same criminal action in which the
employee's liability, criminal and civil, has been pronounced (Ozoa v.
Vda. de Madula, 156 SCRA 779, December 22, 1987); and in a hearin g
set for that precise purpose, with due notice to the employer, as part
of the proceedings for the execution of the judgment. (Phil. Rabbit
Bus Lines • People, 147703, April 14, 2004)
Enforcement of civil liability is upon a motion for subsidiary writ
of execution.
The subsidiary liability may be enforced only upon a motion for
subsidiary writ of execution against the employer and upon proof that
the employee is insolvent. (Basilio v. Court of Appeals, 385 Phil. 21
[2000])

Decision convicting an employee is binding upon the employer with
respect to the civil liability and its amount

"While In the discharge of his duties."

Under Article 103 of the R.P.C., employers are subsidiarily liable
for the adjudicated civil liabilities of their employees in the event of
the latter's insolvency. The provisions of the R.P.C. on subsidiary
liability - Articles 102 and 103 - are deemed written into the
judgments in the cases to which they are applicable. (Alvarez v. Court
ofAppeals, 158 SCRA 57, February 23, 1988) Thus, in the dispositive

The law makes the employer subsidiarily liable for the civil
liability arising from a crime committed by an employee "in the
discharge of his duties." This subsidiary liability does not arise from
any and all offenses that the employee may commit, but limited to
those which he shall be found guilty of in the discharge of his duties.
The law does not say that the crime of the employee must be the

934

935

Art. 103

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

one committed "while in the discharge of his duties." It could not
be contemplated that an employer will be held responsible for any
misdeed that his employee could have done while performing his
assigned tasks. Thus, it is neither just nor logical that, if a security
guard committed robbery in a neighboring establishment near the one
he is assigned to guard, or raped a woman passerby in the course of
his tour of duty, his employer should be made subsidiarily liable for
his said misdeed. In such circumstances, it cannot be said that the
crime was committed by the employee "in the discharge of his duties."
(Baza Marketing Corporation v. Bolinao Security and Investigation
Service, Inc., No. L-32383, September 30, 1982, 117 SCRA 156, 163)
The fact that the owner of the car was not riding therein at the
time of the accident and did not know that the chauffeur had taken
the car, clearly shows that the accident did not occur in the course of
the performance of the duties for which said chauffeur had been hired.
His service is confined to driving his master's car as the latter ordered
him. The owner of the car was not subsidiarily liable. (Marquez v.
Castillo, 68 Phil. 568,571)
The subsidiary liability of the employer is not determined in the
criminal case against the employee. Reservation not necessary.
The subsidiary liability of the master or employer provided
for in Article 103 of the R.P.C. is not litigated in connection with
the criminal prosecution of the employee, pupil, etc. Reservation
of the right to bring action by the injured party against the master
or employer is not necessary. The rule of res adjudicata cannot be
invoked for or against one who was not a party to the cause in which
the former judgment was rendered. (Phil. Railway Co. v. Jalandoni,
C.A., 40 O.G. 19, Supp. 11, 19)
Subsidiary liability of employers, etc., "for felonies committed by
their xx x employees."
The word "committed," as used in Article 103, implies that the
employee was convicted of the felony with which he was charged in
the criminal case.
There can be no automatic subsidiary liability of defendantemployer under Article 103 of the R.P.C., where his employee has not
been previously criminally convicted. There having been no criminal
936

TITLE FIVE

Civil Liability

Art. 103

conviction of the employee wherein his civil liability was determined
and fixed, no subsidiary liability under Article 103 can be claimed
against defendant-employer. (Jamelo v. Serfno, No. L-26730, April
27, 1972, 44 SCRA 464, 467)
Employer has the right to take part in the defense of his employee.
It is true that an employer is not a party to the criminal case
instituted against his employee, but he has subsidiary liability
imposed upon him by law. It is his concern to see to it that his interest
be protected in the criminal case by taking virtual participation in the
defense of his employee. He cannot leave him to his own fate because
his failure is also his. (Miranda v. Ma/ate Garage & Taxicab, Inc., 99
Phil. 670, 675)
Certified copy of decision sufficient to prove offense committed by
servant or employee.
Judgment of conviction of servant or employee in the absence
of any collusion between the defendant and the offended party binds
the persons subsidiarily liable. The plaintiff can rely solely on the
judgment of conviction.
Common sense dictates that a finding of guilt in a criminal case,
in which proof beyond reasonable doubt is necessary, should not be
nullified in a subsequent civil action requiring only a preponderance of evidence to support a judgment. (Martinez v. Barredo, 81 Phil.
1, 3)
Employer is subsidiarily liable for the full amount against employee.

R was the driver of a Halili bus. B was the driver of a jeepney.
The two vehicles collided through the reckless imprudence of both
drivers, causing serious physical injuries on G. R and B were convicted
of serious physical injuries through reckless imprudence and were
sentenced solidarity to pay an indemnity of P3,670.00 to G. As Rand
B could not pay the indemnity by reason of insolvency, G sued the
owner of the bus.
Held: Halili was liable for the full amount of P3,670.00, and not
merely 1/2 thereof, but without prejudice to the right ofaction against
B for contribution. (Gonzales v. Halli, G.R. No. L-11521, October 31,
1958)
937

Art. 103

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

No defense of diligence of a good father of a family.
It will be seen that neither in Article 103 nor in any other article
of the R.P.C., is it provided that the employment of the diligence to be
expected of a good father of a family in the selection of his employees
will exempt the parties secondarily liable for damages, as is provided
in Article 1903 in connection with Article 1902 (now Arts. 2176 and
2180) of the Civil Code, which treat of liabilities arising from acts or
omissions not punishable by law. (Arambulo v. Mera/co, 55 Phil. 75,
78-79; Yumul • Pampanga Bus Co., 72 Phil. 94, 97)
Article 103 is applicable to violations of Revised Motor Vehicle Law.
The defendant is subsidiarily liable for indemnities even if its
driver was convicted under the Revised Motor Vehicle Law, because
Article 103 of the Code is applicable by virtue of its Article 10.(Copiaco
v. Luzon Brokerage, 66 Phil. 184, 190-191)
Articles 102 and 103 of the Revised Penal Code are not repealed by
Article 2177 of the new Civil Code.
Article 2177 of the Civil Code expressly recognizes civil liabilities
arising from negligence under the Penal Code, only that it provides
that the plaintiff cannot recover damages twice of the same act or
omission of the defendant. (Manalo v. Robles Trans. Co., Inc., 52 0.G.
5797)

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Lastly, teachers or heads of establishments of arts and trades
shall be liable for damages caused by their pupils and students or
apprentices, so long as they remain in their custody. (Art. 2180, Civil
Code)
In motor vehicle mishaps, the owner is solidarily liable with his
driver, if the former, who was in the vehicle, could have, by the use
of due diligence, prevented the misfortune. It is disputably presumed
that a driver was negligent, if he had been found guilty of reckless
driving or violating traffic regulations at least twice within the next
preceding two months.
If the owner was not in the motor vehicle, the provisions of
Article 2180 are applicable. (Art. 2184, Civil Code)
Unless there is proof to the contrary, it is presumed that a
person driving a motor vehicle has been negligent if at the time of
the mishap, he was violating any traffic regulation. (Art. 2185, Civil
Code)
The responsibility of two or more persons who are liable for a
quasi-delict is solidary. (Art. 2194, Civil Code)
Persons civilly liable in the absence of those criminally liable, the
civil responsibility being a necessary part of the criminal liability.
1.

Innkeeper, tavernkeeper, and any other person or corporation
who committed violation of municipal ordinance or some general
or special police regulation, and the person who committed a
crime in his establishment cannot be found or is insolvent.

2.

Innkeeper, for robbery with force upon things or theft of goods
of guests lodging therein, provided the guests notified the
innkeeper in advance of the deposit of their goods within the inn,
and provided further that such guests followed the directions
of the innkeeper with respect to the care of and vigilance over
such goods.

3.

The employer who is engaged in any kind of industry, for the
crime committed by his employee while in the discharge of his
duties.

4.

Those having an imbecile or insane person or minor exempt from
criminal liability under their legal authority or control, if they

The provisions of the Civil Code.
The owners and managers of an establishment or enterprise are
likewise responsible for damages caused by their employees in the
service of the branches in which the latter are employed or on the
occasion of their functions.
Employers shall be liable for the damages caused by their
employees and household helpers acting within the scope of their
assigned tasks, even though the former are not engaged in any
business or industry.
The State is responsible in like manner when it acts through
a special agent; but not when the damage has been caused by the
official to whom the task done properly pertains, in which case what
is provided in Article 2176 shall be applicable.
938

Art. 103

939

Art. 103

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

are at fault or negligent, for acts committed by the imbecile,
insane or minor.
5.

Persons who acted under the compulsion of irresistible force or
under the impulse of uncontrollable fear are civilly liable if the
person who used violence or who caused the fear is insolvent or
cannot be found.

Chapter Two
WHAT CIVIL LIABILITY INCLUDES
Art. 104. What is included in civil liability. - The civil
liability established in Articles 100, 101, 102, and 103 of this
Code includes:
1.

Restitution;

2.

Reparation of damage caused;

3.

Indemnification for consequential damages.

Civil liability In criminal cases.
The first remedy granted by law is restitution of the thing taken
away by the offender; if restitution cannot be made by the offender
(Art. 105), or by his heirs (Art. 108), the law allows the offended
party reparation. (Art. 106; People v. Mostasesa, 94 Phil. 243, 244) In
either case, indemnity for consequential damages may be required.
(Art. 107)
There are crimes where there is no civil liability.
There are crimes where only one or none at all of these civil
obligations is possible.
Thus, in theft or robbery when the property taken is recovered
- only reparation, if any damage, will be allowed.
In assault upon a person in authority which caused no physical
injuries, not one of them is possible.
In some crimes, the three civil obligations in Article 104 may
be declared and enforced. Thus, for the crime of occupation of real
property in Article 312, the defendant may be required:

940

(a)

to restore the real property occupied (restitution);

(b)

to repair the damages caused to it (reparation); and
941

(c)

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 104

to indemnify the offended party for all the consequential
damages he has sustained due to the commission of the
crime. (indemnification)

Examples of 1.

Restitution
in theft, the culprit is duty-bound to return
the property stolen.

2.

Reparation
in case of inability to return the property
stolen, the culprit must pay the value of the property stolen;
in case of physical injuries, the reparation of the damage
caused would consist in the payment of hospital bills and
doctor's fees to the offended party.

3.

Indemnifications for consequential damages
his salary or earning.

Art. 105

Art. 105. Restitution How made . - The restitution ofthe
thing itself must be made whenever possible, with allowance
for any deterioration or diminution of value as determined
by the court.

The thing itself shall be restored, even though it be
found in the possession of a third person who has acquired
it by lawful means, saving to the latter his action against the
proper person who may be liable to him.
This provision is not applicable in cases in which the
thing has been acquired by the third person in the manner

and under the requirements which, by law, bar an action for
its recovery.

the loss of

When property taken away ls not recovered, the court must order
the accused to restore it to its owner or, as an alternative, to pay
its just value.
When in due judgment of conviction the court did not grant the
accused the alternative to return the thing which he had appropriated
or to pay its just value, the court is in error. (People v. Fortuno, 73
Phil. 429, 430)
Civil liabilities distinguished from pecuniary liabilities.
Article 104, providing for three forms of civil liabilities, and
Article 38, providing for the order of payment of pecuniary liabilities,
may be distinguished, as follows:

"The restitution of the thing itself must be made whenever possible."
Under Article 105 of the Revised Penal Code, the appellant
is obliged to return the items he took from the offended parties. If
appellant can no longer return the articles taken, he is obliged to
make reparation for their value, taking into consideration their price
and their special sentimental value to the offended parties. Hence,
the Court directs the appellant to return the pieces of jewelry and
valuables taken from the offended parties as enumerated in the
Information and proven during trial. Should restitution be no longer
possible, appellant shall pay the offended parties the value of the
stolen pieces of jewelry and valuables as determined by the trial
court in the amount of P336,000.00. (People v. Evangelia, G.R. No.
181902, August 31, 2011)

1.

Both include (a) the reparation of the damage caused, and
(b) indemnification for consequential damages;

The convict cannot, by way of restitution, give to the offended party a
similar thing of the same amount, kind or species and quality.

2.

While civil liabilities include restitution, pecuniary
liabilities do not include restitution, because the latter refer
to liabilities to be paid out of the property of the offender.
In restitution, there is nothing to pay in terms of money,
as the property unlawfully taken is returned; and

3.

Pecuniary liabilities include (a) fine, and (b) the costs of
the proceedings. Civil liabilities do not include them.

Appellants claim that since the property (tobacco) involved in the
criminal case is a fungible thing and that, in accordance with Article
1963 of the Civil Code, the obligation of one who receives money or
fungible things is to return to the creditor the same amount of the
thing owed, of the same kind or species and quality, they should be
allowed to return only the equivalent.

942

Held: The civil liability of the appellants is not governed by the
Civil Code, but by Articles 100-111 of the Penal Code. The sentence
should be for the return of the very thing taken (restitution), or, ifit
943

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

cannot be done, for the payment of its value (reparation). The purpose
of the law is to place the offended party as much as possible in the
same condition as he was before the offense was committed against
him. (People v. Mostasesa, 94 Phil. 243,244)

If the thing is acquired by a person who knows it to be stolen,
he is an accessory and he is also criminally liable.

Art. 105

Is Article 105 properly applied to the forfeiture of the house built
with the money malversed by a public officer?
In the case of Garcia v. Bituin, CA-G.R. No. 12297-R, September
24, 1958, the Court of Appeals applied Article 105 to the forfeiture of
the house built with the money malversed by a public officer.
"With allowance for any deterioration or diminution of value."
Thus, if the property stolen while in the possession of the thief
suffers deterioration due to his fault, the court will assess the amount
of the deterioration and, in addition to the return of the property,
the culprit will be ordered to pay such amount representing the
deterioration.
"The thing Itself shall be restored, even though it be found In the
possession of a third person who has acquired it by lawful means."
The general rule is that the owner ofproperty illegally taken by
the offender can recover it from whomsoever is in possession thereof.
Whoever may have been deprived of his property in consequence
of a crime is entitled to the recovery thereof, even if such property
is in the possession of a third party who acquired it by legal means
other than those expressly stated in Articles 559 and 1505 of the Civil
Code. (See U.S. v. Sotelo, 28 Phil. 147)
The fact that the accused was sentenced to pay its value, does
not bar the recovery of the article by the owner from anyone holding
it. (Gacula • Martinez, 88 Phil. 142, 145)
"Who has acquired it by lawful means."
.
The second paragraph of Article 105 provides that the thing
itself shall be restored, even though it be found in the possession of
a third person who has acquired it by lawful means.

Art. 105

Under the Civil Code, the person who has lost any personal
property or has been unlawfully deprived thereof cannot obtain its
return without reimbursing the price paid therefor, only when the
possessor thereof acquired it in good faith at a public sale.
Article 559 of the Civil Code (R.A. No. 386) provides: The
possession of movable property acquired in good faith is equivalent
to a title. Nevertheless, one who has lost any movable or has been
unlawfully deprived thereof, may recover it from the person in
possession of the same.
If the possessor ofa movable lost or of which the owner has been
unlawful ly deprived, has acquired it in good faith at a public sale, the
owner cannot obtain its return without reimbursing the price paid
therefor.
Must be acquired (1) "at public sale," and (2) "in good faith."
A was convicted of estafa for having pawned the jewels which
had been given to him by B to be sold on commission. Having found
that the jewels had been pawned by A to a pawnshop, B fled a petition
in court to require the owner of the pawnshop to restore said jewels.
Held: The owner of the pawnshop may be obliged to make
restitution of the jewels, because although he acted in good faith, he
did not acquire them at public sale. (Varela v. Finnick, 9 Phil. 482,
484)
The court which convicted the accused of estafa may summon
the owner of the pawnshop and, after hearing him, order the return
of the jewels pawned to him without reimbursement of the amount
of the pledge. The pawnshop owner may seek his remedy from the
person who pawned the jewels. (Reyes v. Ruiz, 27 Phil. 458, 460-461)

Thus, even if the property stolen was acquired by a third person
by purchase without knowing that it had been stolen, such property
shall be returned to the owner.

Where the purchaser of the stolen carabao was held not
criminally liable, he should nevertheless restore the carabao to the
lawful owner, without reimbursement of the price, since he did not
purchase the carabao at a public sale. But said purchaser may sue
the thief for the recovery of what he had paid. (U.S. v. Soriano, 12
Phil. 512, 515)

944

946

Art. 105

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Restitution cannot be ordered before final Judgment.
The things involved in an estafa case, which are in the custody
of a possessor in good faith, cannot be returned by the trial court to
the alleged offended party before final judgment is rendered in the
estafa case. Restitution would be premature in that case, because the
mere filing of a criminal action for estafa is no proof that estafa was
in fact committed. (Chua Hai v. Kapunan, Jr., 104 PHiL. 110, 114-115)
When the third person acquired the thing "in the manner and under
the requirements which, by law, bar an action for its recovery."
Restitution shall not be ordered by the court when the thing
has been acquired by the third person in the manner and under the
circumstances which, by law, bar an action for its recovery.
1.

2.

Thus, an innocent purchaser for value of property covered
by a Torrens Title, cannot be required to return the same to
its owner who has been unlawfully deprived of it, because
Section 39 of Act No. 496 specially protects the title of an
innocent purchaser.
When sale is authorized, the property cannot be recovered.
Where the owner of personal property delivered it to
another for the purpose of sale, the fact that the latter
sold it at a price lower than that fixed does not prevent the
passing of title to the purchaser and the property cannot
be recovered by the previous owner. It was not the sale of
the jewels for a lower price that constituted the crime of
estafa, but the act of misappropriating the proceeds of the
sale.

A person who is not a party in the case cannot recover In the criminal
action any indemnity from the accused.
Example: A stole a caraballa belonging to B. A sold it to C for
P100.00. In the case where A was charged with theft of the caraballa,
the court ordered C to return the animal to B and ordered A to
indemnify C in the sum of P100.00. Can C recover the P100.00 in
the same case? No. In selling the animal to C, A pretended to be the
owner thereof, thereby committing estafa, which is another offense.

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 105

and its subsequent sale by the thief to a third person constitute distinct
crimes of theft and estafa and the offended parties are different, being
the owner and purchaser, respectively. (U.S. v. Barambangan, 34
Phil. 645, 646)
When the liability to return a thing arises from contract, not from a
criminal act, the court cannot order its return in the criminal case.
Thus, when after trial the court finds that a sum of money was
received by the accused from the complainant as a loan, and for that
reason dismisses the criminal case for estafa, it cannot order the
accused to pay the amount to the complainant, because his liability
to return it arises from civil contract, not from a criminal act, and
may not be enforced in the criminal case. (People u. Pantig, 97 Phil.
749, 750)
Restitution may be ordered, even if accused is acquitted, provided
the offense is proved and it is shown that the thing belongs to
somebody else.
As a rule, if the accused is acquitted, the court should not order
the return of the property to its alleged owner. But if it is shown that
the ring belonged to, and was in the possession of, somebody else,
and that it was stolen from him, but the identity of the thief was not
established by the prosecution, and the accused pawned it in the
pawnshop from which it was recovered, the court should order its
return to the owner. In this case, the offense was proved but not the
identity of the offender. (People v. Alejano, 54 Phil. 987, 989)
Example of cases where restitution was ordered.
(1) In a case of malversation of public funds under Art. 217,
par. 4 of the R.P.C., the Court ordered the accused to pay the City of
Caloocan the amount subject of the malversation. (Mesina v. People,
G.R. No. 162489, June 17, 2015)

(2) In a treason case, the defendant was ordered to return the
sum of P3,900.00 to the person from whom he took the same when
he committed the treasonous act. (People v. Logo, 80 Phil. 377, 379)

The person convicted of theft cannot be condemned to indemnify
the purchaser of the stolen animal, because the stealing of the animal

(3) In an abduction case, the defendants were ordered to return
the P10.00 taken by them from the offended girl. (U.S. w. Banila, 19
Phil. 130, 134)

946

947

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

(4) The return of the usurious interest collected in violation
of the Usury Law is in the nature of restitution of a thing criminally
obtained. (People v. Caldito, 72 Phil. 263, 265)

order payment of his salaries corresponding to the period of his suspension
because his right to the same was not involved in the case. This ruling does
not apply to defendant's right
in case of acquittal
of reinstatement
because this matter would seem to be involved in the case of malversation albeit as a mere incident - because conviction ofthe offense charged results
necessarily in a denial ofsuch right to reinstatement in review ofthe penalty of
disqualification provided by law. If this is the inevitable result of conviction,
reinstatement should also follow acquittal.

Art. 105

Salary of acquitted accused may not be ordered paid In criminal
cases.
The payment of salary of an employee during the period of
suspension cannot, as a general rule, be properly decreed by the court
in a judgment ofacquittal. It devolves upon the head ofthe department
concerned, and is discretionary with him. (People v. Manigo, 69 Phil.
496, 497)
Neither the R.P.C. nor the Rules ofCourt on criminal procedure
vests in the court, authority to grant such relief. No issue was joined
on whether the accused was entitled to the payment of his salary
during suspension. (Manila Railroad Co. v. Baltazar, 93 Phil. 715,
717-718)
The Court has authority to order the reinstatement of the accused
acquitted of a crime punishable by the penalty of perpetual or
temporary disqualification.
People v. Consigna
(G.R. No. L-18087, August 31, 1965)
Facts: Pablo A. Consigns, then property clerk of the Division
Superintendent of Schools for Surigao del Norte, and Prospero E. Borja,
warehouseman of the NAMARCO, Surigao Branch, were charged with the
crime of willful malversation of government property. After trial, the court
rendered judgment of acquittal and ordered both accused to be reinstated to
their former positions.
Issue: Whether or not the trial court, besides acquitting accused, had
the authority to order their reinstatement.
Held: According to Article 217 of the R.P.C., a party found guilty of
malversation of public funds shall be punished with imprisonment and the
additional penalty ofspecial perpetual disqualification. It is clearly inferable
from this that his conviction necessarily results in his dismissal from public
office he occupied at the time he committed the offense.

Art. 106

The above ruling was applied in the case ofPeople v. Villanueva, G.R.
No. L-18769, May 27, 1966, where the accused, who was acquitted, was
charged with the crime of infidelity in the custody of documents. Article
226, R.P.C., which defines the crime, prescribes the additional penalty
of temporary special disqualification in its maximum period to perpetual
special disqualification. Under Article 31, R.PC., the penalties of perpetual
or temporary disqualification shall produce the effect of deprivation of the
office affected.

Art. 106. Reparation - How made. -- The court shall
determine the amount of damage, taking into consideration
the price of the thing, whenever possible, and its special
sentimental value to the injured party, and reparation shall
be made accordingly.

Reparation will be ordered by the court if restitution is not possible.
Thus, when the stolen property cannot be returned because it
was sold by the thief to an unknown person, he will be required by
the court, if found guilty, to pay the actual price of the thing plus its
sentimental value to its owner.
If there is no evidence as to the value of the thing unrecovered,
reparation cannot be made. (People v. Dalena, CA., G.R. Nos. 11387R and 11388-R, October 25, 1954)
What reparation includes.

The case ofPeople v. Daleon, L-15630, March 24, 1961, is not controlling
because the ruling in said case was simply to the effect that upon acquitting
one charged with malversation of public funds, the court has no authority to

Under this provision, the repair of the material damage caused
by the robbers in breaking doors, wardrobes, etc., in addition to the
value of the thing taken, may be assessed and included as part of the
reparation to be paid by the robbers.

948

949

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

In a rape case, the accused was ordered to pay the value of the
woman's torn garments. This is reparation which is distinct from the
indemnity. (U.S. v. Yambao, 4 Phil. 204, 206)

Indemnity refers generally to crimes against persons; reparation
to crimes against property.

Art. 107

Civil damages are limited to those caused by and flowing from the
commission of the crime.
The civil damages which may be recovered in criminal action
are limited to consequential damage caused by, and flowing from, the
commission of the crime of which the accused is convicted.
Thus, if a person was convicted of estafa for not having returned
a bicycle which he had rented at the rate ofl'l.50 a day, the court may
only impose as indemnity or reparation the value of the bicycle, but
cannot further order him to pay the rents of said bicycle corresponding
to the days during which the owner of the same was deprived of its
use.
The unpaid hire of the bicycle arose under the contract of hire
and did not result from the commission of the crime. The amount
corresponding to the unpaid hire is recoverable in a civil action. (U.S.
v. Dionisio, 35 Phil. 141, 143)
Payment by the insurance company does not relieve the offender
of his obligation to repair the damage caused.
The accused contends that inasmuch as the owner of the car
damaged was already paid his damages by the insurance company,
he should not be required to pay such damages caused by him.
Held: That payment by the insurance company was not made
on behalf of the accused, but was made pursuant to its contract with
the owner of the car. But the insurance company is subrogated to the
right of the offended party as regards the damages. (People v. Reyes,
C.A., 50 O.G. 665)

Art. 107. Indemnification - What is included. Indemnification of consequential damages shall include not
only those caused the injured party, but also those suffered
by his family or by a third person by reason of the crime.

960

Art. 107

Indemnity is ordinarily the remedy granted to the victims of
crimes against persons; reparation, to the victims of crimes against
property.
Example of damages caused the Injured party.
In physical injuries, the injured party is entitled to be paid for
whatever he spent for the treatment of his wounds, doctor's fees and
for medicine, and furthermore, his salary or wages unearned by him
because of his inability to work due to the injuries received by him,
the damages sustained by him beca use of the loss of a limb or the
lessening of his earnin g capacity, etc. (Guevara)
Indemnity for medical services still unpaid may be recovered.
In the case of Araneta v. Arreglado, 104 Phil. 529, 531, the
Supreme Court held that, taking into account the necessity and cost
of corrective measures to arrest the degenerative process taking
place in the mandible and restore the injured boy to a nearly normal
condition, surgical intervention was needed, for which the doctor's
charges would amount to P3,000.00 while removal of the scar on the
face obviously demanded plastic surgery, the indemnity granted by
the trial court should be increased.
It should be noted that even if there was no actual payment of
the doctor's fee, the amount necessary to pay the doctor for surgical
operation was taken into account in awarding the damages.
Example of damages suffered by the family.
The chauffeur of defendant, through reckless imprudence,
bumped a carretela, resulting in the death of four passengers.
Chauffeur was convicted.
Plaintiffs brought action against defendant on its subsidiary
liability as employer of the guilty chauffeur. Lower court sentenced
defendant to pay, by way of indemnity, P500.00 to each family of the
victims.
Defendant contended that since there were only three families
involved, because two of the victims as brothers pertained to one
family, it should pay only Pl,500.00 instead of P2,000.00.
961

TITLE FIVE

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 107

Held: The parents or heirs of the two deceased have suffered
double damages by reason of the death of their two children, with the
consequence that it is just to indemnify them in the same measure
for the death of each. (Copiaco v. Luzon Brokerage Co., Inc., 66 Phil.
184, 192)
Contributory negligence on the victim's part reduces the civil
liability of the offender.
Contributory negligence on the victim's part could warrant a
mitigation of offender's liability for damages in homicide through
reckless imprudence. The aggregate amount of damages to which the
plaintiff is entitled is reduced by twenty per cent (LBC Air Cargo v.
CA, G.R. No. 101683, February 23, 1995)

Civil Liability
Damages In crimes and quasi-delicts.

In crimes and quasi-delicts, the defendant shall be liable for
all damages which are the natural and probable consequences of the
act or omission complained of. It is not necessary that such damages
have been foreseen or could have reasonably been foreseen by the
defendant. (Art. 2202, Civil Code)
In crimes, the damages to be adjudicated may be respectively
increased or lessened according to the aggravating or mitigating
circumstances. (Art. 2204, Civil Code)
The amount of damages for death caused by a crime or quasidelict shall be at least P75,000.00, even though there may have been
mitigating circumstances. In addition:
(1)

The defendant shall be liable for the loss of the earning
capacity of the deceased, and the indemnity shall be paid
to the heirs of the latter; such indemnity shall in every case
be assessed and awarded by the court, unless the deceased
on account of permanent physical disability not caused by
the defendant, had no earning capacity at the time of his
death;

(2)

If the deceased was obliged to give support according to the
provisions of Article 291, the recipient who is not an heir
called to the decedent's inheritance by the law of testate or
intestate succession, may demand support from the person
causing the death, for a period not exceeding five years,
the exact duration to be fixed by the court;

(3)

The spouse, legitimate and illegitimate descendants and
ascendants of the deceased may demand moral damages
for mental anguish by reason of the death of the deceased.
(Art. 2206, Civil Code)

When civil indemnity may be increased on appeal.
The civil indemnity may be increased only if it will not require
an aggravation of the decision in the criminal case on which it is
based. In other words, the accused may not, on appeal by the adverse
party, be convicted ofa more serious offense or sentenced to a higher
penalty to justify the increase in the civil indemnity. (Heirs ofRillorta
v. Firme, No. L-54904, January 29, 1988, 157 SCRA 518, 522)
Damages recoverable in case of death.
They are:
1.

Civil liability ex delicto. (Art. 2206, Civil Code; Mallillin v.
People, G.R. No. 215366, March 18, 2015; People v. Villalba,
G.R. No. 207629, October 22, 2014; People v. Lucero, G.R.
No. 179044, December 6, 2010)

Art. 107

2.

For the loss of the earning capacity of the deceased. (Art.
2206, par. [l], Civil Code)

3.

Support in favor of a person to whom the deceased was
obliged to give, such person not being an heir of the
deceased. (Art. 2206, par. (2), Civil Code)

Clvll Indemnity and moral damages are mandatory without need
of allegation of proof other than the death of the victim in murder
and homicide.

4.

Moral damages for mental anguish in favor of spouse,
descendants and ascendants of the deceased. (Art. 2206,
par. [3], Civil Code)

5.

Exemplary damages in certain cases. (Art. 2230, Civil Code)

Civil indemnity and moral damages are mandatory without need
of allegation and proof other than the death of the victim, owing to
the fact of the commission of murder or homicide. (Espineli v. People.
G.R. No. 179535, June 9, 2014; People v. Orias, G.R. No. 186539, June
29, 2010, 622 SCRA 417, 437-438)

952

953

Art. 107

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Damages for crimes qualified by circumstances where the death
penalty may be imposed.
In People v. Gambao, G.R. No. 172707, October 1, 2013, the
Supreme Court increased the amounts of indemnity and damage
where the penalty for the crime committed is death but which cannot
be imposed because of R.A. No. 9346, as follows:
1.

P100,000.00 as civil indemnity;

2.

P100,000.00 as moral damages which the victim is assumed
to have suffered and thus needs no proof; and

3.

P100,000.00 as exemplary damages to set an example for
the public good.

All damages awarded shall earn legal interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of finality of judgment until fully paid.
(People v. Joson, G.R. No. 206393, January 21, 2015)
Effect of Republic Act No. 9346 on civil indemnity for heinous
crimes.
It should be understood that the debarring of the death penalty
through R.A. No. 9346 did not correspondingly declassify those crimes
previously catalogued as "heinous." The amendatory effects ofR.A. No.
9346 extend only to the application of the death penalty but not to the
definition or classification of crimes. True, the penalties for heinous
crimes have been downgraded under the aegis of the new law. Still,
what remains extant is the recognition by law that such crimes, by
their abhorrent nature, constitute a special category by themselves.
Accordingly, R.A. No. 9346 does not serve as basis for the reduction
of civil indemnity and other damages that adhere to heinous crimes.
(People v. Bon, G.R. No. 166401, October 30, 2006)
Award of clvil Indemnity Is not dependent on the actual imposition
on the death penalty but on the fact that qualifying circumstances
warranting the imposition of the death penalty attended the
commission of the offense.
While the new law prohibits the imposition of the death penalty,
the penalty provided for by law for a heinous offense is still death and
the offense is still heinous. Consequently, the civil indemnity for the
victim is still Pl00,000.00. In People v. Quiachon, G.R. No. 170235,
August 31, 2006, 500 SCRA 704, 719, the Supreme Court explained
954

Art. 107

that even if the penalty of death is not to be imposed on appellant
because of the prohibition in R.A. No. 9346, the civil indemnity of
P75,000.00 (now P100,000.00) is still proper because, following the
ratiocination in People v. Victor, 292 SCRA 186, the said award is
not dependent on the actual imposition of the death penalty but on
the fact that qualifying circumstances warranting the imposition of
the death penalty attended the commission of the offense. (People v.
Regalario, G.R. No. 174483, March 31, 2009, 582 SCRA 738, 761)
Damages for rape.
Civil indemnity is automatically awarded upon proof of the
commission of the crime by the offender. (People v. Baun, G.R. No.
167503, August 20, 2008, 562 SCRA 584, 602)
Civil indemnity, which is mandatory in a finding of rape is
distinct from and should not be denominated as moral damages which
are based on different jural foundations and assessed by the court
in the exercise of sound discretion. The award of moral damages, on
the other hand, is automatically granted in rape cases without need
of further proof other than the commission of the crime because it
is assumed that a rape victim has actually suffered moral injuries
entitling her to such award. In addition, the award of exemplary
damages is justified under Article 2230 of the Civil Code if there is
an aggravating circumstance, whether ordinary or qualifying. (People
v. Lucena, G.R. No. 190632, February 26, 2014)
Civil indemnity for rape with homicide.
The civil indemnity for rape with homicide is now set at
P100,000.00. (People v. Robles, G.R. No. 124300, March 25, 1999,
People v. Bantilan, G.R. No. 129286, September 14, 1999)
Civil liability for rape by sexual assault.
A victim of rape by sexual assault is entitled to an award of
P30,000.00 as civil indemnity and P30,000.00 as moral damages with
interest at the rate of6% per annum from date offinality ofjudgment.
(People • Crisostomo, G.R. No. 196435, January 29, 2014)
Civil indemnity is separate and distinct from the award of moral
damages which is automatically granted in rape cases. Moral damages
are additionally awarded without need of further pleading or proof;
955

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

it is presumed that the victim necessarily suffered injury due to the
odiousness of the crime. (People v. Hermocilla, 527 SCRA 296)

Life expectancy is based on the American Expectancy Table of
Mortality and is computed using the formula: 2/3 x (80- age of the
deceased at the time of death).

The amount of damages for death caused by a crime ls Increased
from time to time by the Supreme Court.

In the absence of proof, living expenses is estimated to be 50%
of the gross annual income. (People v. Lara, G.R. No. 171449, October
23, 2006, citing People v. Dinamling, G.R. No. 134605, March 12,
2002, 379 SCRA 107, 124)

Art. 107

Article 2206 of the Civil Code provides that:
"The amount of damages for death caused by a crime or
quasi-delict shall be at least three thousand pesos even though
there may have been mitigating circumstances x xx."
The amount of P3,000.00 referred to in the above article has
already been increased by the Supreme Court first, to P6,000.00
in People v. Amansec, 80 Phil. 426, and then to P12,000.00 in the
case of People v. Pantoja, G.R. No. 18793, promulgated October 11,
1968. As per the policy adopted by the Court en bane on August 30,
1990, the amount of civil indemnity for death caused by a crime was
increased to P50,000.00. (People v. Teehankee, Jr., G.R. Nos. 11120608, October 6, 1995) In People v. Jugueta, supra, moral damages was
set at P100,000.00 where the penalty imposed is death but reduced
to reclusion perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346, and to P75,000.00
where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua.
The indemnity for death caused by a quasi-delict used to be
pegged at P3,000.00, based on Article 2206 of the Civil Code. However,
the amount has been gradually increased through the years because
of the declining value ofour currency. (Pestano v. Spouses Sumayang,
G.R. No. 139875, December 4, 2000)
In quasi-delicts, the contributory negligence of the plaintiff shall
reduce the damages that he may recover. (Art. 2214, Civil Code)
No proof of pecuniary loss is necessary in order that moral,
nominal, temperate, liquidated or exemplary damages may be
adjudicated. The assessment of such damages, except liquidated ones,
is left to the discretion of the court, according to the circumstances of
each case. (Art. 2216, Civil Code)
Indemnity for Lost Earnings.
The indemnity for the loss of the victim's earning capacity is
computed as follows:
Net earning capacity = Life expectancy x (Gross annual income
- living expenses)
956

Art. 107

Documentary evidence should be presented to substantiate a claim
for loss of earning capacity.
The rule is that documentary evidence should be presented
to substantiate a claim for loss of earning capacity. By way of
exception, damages therefore may be awarded despite the absence
of documentary evidence if there is testimony that the victim was
either (1) self-employed, earning less than the minimum wage under
current labor laws, and judicial notice is taken of the fact that in the
victim's line of work, no documentary evidence is available; or (2)
employed as a daily-wage worker earning less than the minimum
wage under current labor laws. (People v. Mallari, G.R. No. 145993,
June 17, 2003, 404 SCRA 170)
Computation of award for loss of earning capacity is based on the
life expectancy of the deceased.
In the computation of the award for loss of earning capacity of
the deceased, the life expectancy of the deceased's heirs is not factored
in. The rule is well-settled that the award of damages for death is
computed on the basis of the life expectancy of the deceased, and not
the beneficiary. (Philippine Airlines, Inc. v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No.
54470, May 8, 1990, 185 SCRA 110, 121, citing Davila v. Philippine
Airlines, No. L-28512, February 28, 1973, 49 SCRA 497)
Compensation for loss of earning capacity, not required that the
victim ls gainfully employed.
To be compensated for loss of earnin g capacity, it is not necessary
that the victim, at the time of injury or death, is gainfully employed.
Compensation of this nature is awarded not for loss of earnings but
for loss of capacity to earn money. In Cariaga v. Laguna Tayabas
Bus Company, No. L-11037, December 29, 1960, 110 Phil. 346, the
957

Art. 107

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Supreme Court awarded to the heirs of the victim a sum representing
loss of his earning capacity although he was still a medical student at
the time of injury. However, the award was not without basis for the
victim was then a fourth year medical student at a reputable school;
his scholastic record, which was presented at the trial, justified an
assumption that he would have been able to finish his course and pass
the board in due time; and a doctor, presented as witness, testified as
to the amount of income the victim would have earned had he finished
his medical studies. (People v. Teehankee, Jr., G.R. Nos. 111206-08,
October 6, 1995)
Temperate Damages.
Under Article 2224 of the Civil Code, temperate or moderate
damages (which are more than nominal but less than compensatory
damages) may be recovered when the court finds that some pecuniary
loss was suffered but its amount cannot be proved with certainty.
(Victory Liner, Inc. v. Gammad, G.R. No. 159636, November 25, 2004)

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 107

inspection of the site of the Mayon Ceramics Corporation. His
actual income however has not been sufficiently established so
that th[e] Court cannot award actual damages, but, an award
of temperate or moderate damages may still be made on loss
or impairment of earning capacity. That Pleno sustained a
permanent deformity due to a shortened left leg and that he
also suffers from double vision in his left eye is also established.
Because of this, he suffers from some inferiority complex and is
no longer active in business as well as in social life. In similar
cases as in Borromeo v. Manila Electric Railroad Co., 44 Phil.
165; Coriage, et al. v. LTB Co., et al., L-11037, December 29, 1960,
and in Araneta, et al. v. Arreglado, et al., L-11394, September 9,
1958, the proper award of damages were given."

Temperate damages may be awarded if income of victim is not
sufficiently proven.

Article 2224 of the Civil Code which provides that temperate
or moderate damages, which are more than nominal but less than
compensatory damages, may be recovered when the court finds that
some pecuniary loss was suffered but its amount cannot be proved
with certainty, was applied in the cases of People v. Singh, 412 Phil.
842, 859 (2001), and People v. Almedilla, G.R. No. 150590, August
21, 2003, 409 SCRA 428, 433, to justify the award of temperate
damages in lieu of damages for loss of earning capacity which was
not substantiated by the required documentary proof.

In Pleno v. Court ofAppeals, G.R. No. L-56505, May 9, 1988, 161
SCRA 208, 224-225, the Supreme Court sustained the trial court's
award of P200,000.00 as temperate damages in lieu of actual damages
for loss of earning capacity because the income of the victim was not
sufficiently proven, thus -

In the Singh case, the Supreme Court awarded P200,000.00 by
way of temperate damages, in lieu of the P5,760,000.00 awarded by
the trial court as damages for loss of earning capacity of the deceased
since the prosecution did not present sufficient evidence to prove the
deceased's income.

"The trial court based the amounts of damages awarded to the
petitioner on the following circumstances:

In the Almedilla case, the Supreme Court did not compute
damages for loss of earning capacity on the basis of the widow's
testimony that her deceased husband was earnin g P22,000.00 a month
and P10,000.00 from his sideline. Instead, the widow was awarded
P25,000.00 as temperate damages.

When no documentary evidence of burial or funeral expenses is
presented in court, the amount of P50,000.00 as temperate damages
shall be awarded. (People v. Jugueta, supra)

XXX

"As to the loss or impairment of earning capacity, there is
no doubt that Pleno is an ent[re]preneur and the founder of his
own corporation, the Mayon Ceramics Corporation. It appears
also that he is an industrious and resourceful person with
several projects in line, and were it not for the incident, might
have pushed them through. On the day of the incident, Pleno
was driving homeward with geologist Longley after an ocular
958

Temperate damages to be awarded if the court finds that some
pecuniary loss has been suffered but its amount cannot be proven
with certainty.
Anent the actual damages awarded to Eulogio amounting to
P250,000.00, as indemnifi cation for the burned house, [the Court]
959

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 107

note[s] that said amount representing the value of the burned house
was merely given by Eulogio as an estimate. It was not substantiated
by any document or receipt. For one to be entitled to actual damages,
it is necessary to prove the actual amount of loss with a reasonable
degree of certainty, premised upon competent proof and the best
evidence obtainable by the injured party. (People v. Dela Cruz, G.R.
No. 168173, December 24, 2008, 575 SCRA 412, 446-447)
Instead, [the Court] award[s] temperate damages in accordance
with Article 2224 of the Civil Code, providing that temperate damages
may be recovered when the court finds that some pecuniary loss has
been suffered but its amount cannot, from the nature of the case, be
proven with certainty. (People v. Berando, G.R. No. 177827, March
30, 2009; People v. Almoguerra, 461 Phil. 340, 362 [2003)) It is
thus reasonable to expect that the value of the house burned down
amounted to at least P200,000.00.(People v. Murcia, G.R. No. 182460,
March 9, 2010)
Moral Damages.
Moral damages may be recovered in the following and analogous
cases:
(1)

A criminal offense resulting in physical injuries;

(2)

xxx;

Art. 107

Moral damages in rape.
In crimes of rape, moral damages may additionally be awarded
to the victim, without need for pleading or proof of the basis thereof
XXX

x x x [T]he fact that complainant has suffered the trauma of
mental, physical and psychological sufferings which constitute the
bases for moral damages are too obvious to still require the recital
thereof at the trial by the victim, since the court itself even assumes
and acknowledges such agony on her part as gauge of her credibility.
What exists hy necessary implication as being ineludibly present need
not go through a testimonial charade. (People v. Prades, 293 SCRA
411)
In People v. Arizapa, G.R. No. 131814, March 15, 2000, 328
SCRA 214, P50,000.00 was awarded as moral damages without
need of pleading or proving them, for in rape cases, it is recognized
that the victim's injury is concomitant with and necessarily results
from the odious crime of rape to warrant per se the award of moral
damages. In People v. dugueta, supra, the amount was increased
to P100,000.00 where the penalty imposed is death but reduced
to reclusion perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346, and to P75,000.00
where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua.
Exemplary Damages.

(3)

Seduction, abduction, rape, or other lascivious acts;

(4)

Adultery or concubinage;

(5)

Illegal or arbitrary detention or arrest;

(6)

Illegal search;

(7)

Libel, slander or any other form of defamation;

(8)

Malicious prosecution;

(9)

xxx;

(10) xxX.

The parents of the female seduced, abducted, raped, or abused,
referred to in No. 3 of this article, may also recover moral damages.
xx x. (Art. 2219, Civil Code)
960

Nature of Exemplary Damages.
Exemplary or corrective damages are imposed, by way of example
or correction for the public good, in addition to the moral, temperate,
liquidated or compensatory damages. (Art. 2229, Civil Code)
Also known as "punitive" or "vindictive" damages, exemplary
or corrective damages are intended to serve as a deterrent to serious
wrong doings, and as a vindication of undue sufferings and wanton
invasion of the rights of an injured or a punishment for those guilty
of outrageous conduct. These terms are generally, but not always,
used interchangeably. In common law, there is preference in the use
of exemplary damages when the award is to account for injury to
feelings and for the sense of indignity and humiliation suffered by a
person as a result of an injury that has been maliciously and wantonly
inflicted, the theory being that there should he compensation for the
hurt caused by the highly reprehensible conduct of the defendant
961

THE REVISED PENAL CODE

TITLE FIVE

Criminal Law

Civil Liability

- associated with such circumstances as willfulness, wantonness,
malice, gross negligence or recklessness, oppression, insult or fraud
or gross fraud - that intensifies the injury. The terms punitive
or vindictive damages are often used to refer to those species of
damages that may be awarded against a person to punish him for his
outrageous conduct. In either case, these damages are intended in
good measure to deter the wrongdoer and others like him from similar
conduct in the future. (People v. Catubig, 416 Phil. 102 (2001))

without having been issued by competent authority a license to drive
a motor vehicle, willfully operated a BHP dump truck and drove it in a
negligent and careless manner as a result of which he hit a pedestrian
who died from the injuries sustained by him. (People v. Medroso, Jr.
62 SCRA 245, 252 (1975))
"

Art. 107

Exemplary damages may be given when one or more aggravating
circumstances are present.
In criminal offenses, exemplary damages as a part of the civil
liability may be imposed when the crime was committed with one or
more aggravating circumstances. Such damages arc separate and
distinct from fines and shall be paid to the offended party. Art. 2230,
Civil Code)
Exemplary damages may be given only when one or more
aggravating circumstances are alleged in the information and proved
during the trial. (People u. Moran, Jr., G.R. No. 170849, March 7,
2007)
This kind of damage is intended to serve as a deterrent to serious
wrongdoings, and as a vindication of undue sufferings and wanton
invasion of the rights of an injured or a punishment for those guilty
of outrageous conduct. (People u. Cabinan, G.R. No. 176158, March
27, 2007)
Exemplary damages cannot be recovered as a matter of right.
Exemplary damages cannot be recovered as a matter of right;
the court will decide whether or not they should be adjudicated. (Art.
2233, Civil Code)
While the amount of the exemplary damages need not be proved,
the plaintiff must show that he is entitled to moral, temperate or
compensatory damages before the court may consider the question
of whether or not exemplary damages should be awarded. (Art. 2234,
Civil Code)
With respect to the exemplary damages awarded by the trial
court, the same are justified by the fact that the herein appellant

Art. 107

Exemplary damages may be awarded where the circumstances of
the case show the highly reprehensible or outrageous conduct of
the offender.
Being corrective in nature, exemplary damages can be awarded,
not only in the presence of an aggravating circumstance but also
where the circumstances of the case show the highly reprehensible
or outrageous conduct of the offender. In much the same way as
Article 2230 prescribes an instance when exemplary damages may
be awarded, Article 2229, the main provision, lays down the very
basis of the award. Thus, in People v. Matrimonio, the Court imposed
exemplary damages to deter other fathers with perverse tendencies or
aberrant sexual behavior from sexually abusing their own daughters.
Also, in People u. Cristobal, the Court awarded exemplary damages
on account of the moral corruption, perversity and wickedness of the
accused in sexually assaulting a pregnant married woman. Recently,
in People v. Cristino Canada, People v. Pepito Neverio and People v.
Lorenzo Layco, Sr., the Court awarded exemplary damages to set a
public example, to serve as deterrent to elders who abuse and corrupt
the youth, and to protect the latter from sexual abuse.
It must be noted that, in the said cases, the Court used as
basis Article 2229, rather than Article 2230, to justify the award
of exemplary damages. Indeed, to borrow Justice Carpio Morales'
words in her separate opinion in People v. Dante Gragasin y Par,
G.R. No. 188106, November 25, 2009, 605 SCRA 807, 817-821,
"[tlhe application of Article 2230 of the Civil Code strictissimijuris in
such cases, as in the present one, defeats the underlying public policy
behind the award of exemplary damages - to set a public example
or correction for the public good." (People u. Combate, supra)
Indemnification for consequential damages In homicide through
reckless imprudence.
An accused who was found guilty of the crime of Reckless
Imprudence Resulting to Homicide with Double Serious Physical

962
963

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Injuries and Damage to Property was ordered to pay the following
civil liabilities:

Where the messenger of the Bureau of Forestry stole treasury
warrants which were not cashed, no pecuniary loss was suffered by
the governm ent. Consequently, no indemnity can be properly imposed
on the messenger who was convicted. (People v. Neria, 71 Phil. 506,
507)

Art. 107

(a)

PS0,000.00 as civil indemnity for the death of Dionesio, Sr.;

(b)

P30,000.00 as moral damages for the mental anguish
suffered by the family;

(c)

P200,000.00 for the medical expenses incurred;

(d)

P25,000.00 for the expenses incurred during the wake and
the burial;

(e)

P30,000.00 for the damaged motorcycle;

(D)

P60,000.00 for the loss of earnin g capacity; and

(g)

P30,000.00 as attorney's fees.

Art. 107

In a robbery case, the indemnity for the goods taken by the
accused amounting to P2,000.00 was eliminated, because there was
no allegation in the information as to the value of the goods taken.
(People v. Tundia, G.R. L-2576, May 25, 1951, 89 Phil. 807 [Unrep.])
The indemnity cannot be assessed on speculation or guesswork.
(People v. Dalena, CA-G.R. No. 11387-R, October 25, 1954)

All monetary awards for damages shall bear interest at the rate
of six percent (6%) per annum from the date of finality of judgment
until fully paid. (Gonzaga v. People, G.R. No. 195671, January 21,
2015)

It is necessary for a party seeking the award of actual damages
to produce competent proof or the best evidence obtainable to justify
such award. Only substantiated and proven expenses, or those that
appear to have been genuinely incurred in connection with the death,
wake or burial of the victim shall be recognized in courts. The courts
will not rely merely on supposition or conjecture. (People v. Jamiro,
279 SCRA 290)

Distinction between civil indemnity and moral damages.

Moral damages in accident cases.

Jurisprudence has elucidated that the award authorized by the
criminal law as civil indemnity ex-delicto for the offended party, in
the amount authorized by the prevailing judicial policy and aside
from otber proven actual damages, is itself equivalent to actual or
compensatory damages in civil law. For that matter, the civil liability
ex-delicto provided by the R.P.C., that is, restitution, reparation and
indemnification, all corresponds to actual or compensatory damages
in the Civil Code, since the other damages provided therein are
moral, nominal, temperate or moderate, liquidated and exemplary
or corrective damages, which have altogether different concepts and
fundamentals. (People v. Prades, 293 SCRA 411)

Moral damages could be recovered if a pedestrian was injured or
killed by a motor vehicle due to the negligence of its driver. (Alcantara
v. Surro, 93 Phil. 472, 480; Castro v. Aero Taxicab Co., 82 Phil. 359,
378)
But no moral damages can be claimed by an injured passenger
in an action against the bus owner based on culpa contractual. Said
moral damages are not allowed under Article 2219 of the Civil Code.
The negligent driver was the one who caused the moral damages not
the bus owner. (Cachero v. Manila Yellow Taxicab Co., 54 O.G. 6599)
Claim for damages does not determine jurisdiction of court.

Actual damages must be proved.
Except as provided by law or by stipulation, one is entitled to
an adequate compensation for such pecuniary loss suffered by him
as he has duly proved. Such compensation is referred to as actual or
compensatory damages. (Art. 2199, Civil Code)

Section 19(8) of B.P. Big. 129 (Judiciary Reorganization Act
of 1980) as amended by R.A. No. 7691, states that Regional Trial
Courts shall exercise exclusive original jurisdiction in all other cases
in which the demand, exclusive of interest, damages of whatever
kind, attorney's fees, litigation expenses, and costs or the value of

964

965

Art. 107

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

the property in controversy exceeds One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) or, in such other cases in Metro Manila, where the
demand, exclusive of the abovementioned items exceeds Two hundred
thousand pesos (P200,000.00).

2.2

Where the crime committed was not consummated:
a.

Civil indemnity and Damages.
In People v. Jugueta, supra, the Supreme Court en bane
summarized the civil indemnity and damages that should be awarded
in criminal cases, as follows:
1.

For those crimes like, Murder, Parricide, Serious Intentional
Mutilation, Infanticide, and other crimes involving death of a
victim where the penalty consists of indivisible penalties:
1.1

Where the penalty imposed is death but reduced to reclusion
perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346:
a.

Civil indemnity

Pl00,000.00

b.

Moral damages

1'100,000.00

c.
1.2

1.1

P100,000.00

b.

1.2

Frustrated:

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

ii.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

iii.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

Attempted:
i.

Civil indemnity

P25,000.00

ii.

Moral damages

iii.

Exemplary damages

P25,000.00
P25,000.00

Where the penalty imposed is Death but reduced
to reclusion perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346:
a.

Civil indemnity

P100,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P100,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P100,000.00

Where the crime committed was not consummated but
merely attempted:

i.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

a.

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

ii.

Moral damages

P75,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

iii.

Exemplary damages

P75,000.00

C.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

Attempted:

2.1

Where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua, other
than the above-mentioned:

i.

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

ii.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

a.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

iii.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P75,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

F75,000.00

Where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua, other
than the above-mentioned:
a.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

b.

Moral damages

1'75,000.00

c.

Frustrated:
i.

For Simple Rape/Qualified Rape:

Where the crime committed was not consummated:
a.

2.1

Exemplary damages

b.

II.

Art. 107

Exemplary damages

P75,000.00

2.2

Where the crime committed was not consummated, but
merely attempted:
a.

Civil indemnity

b.

Moral damages

P25,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P25,000.00

P25,000.00

966
967

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 107

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

III. For Complex crimes under Article 48 of the Revised Penal
Code where death, injuries, or sexual abuse results, the civil
indemnity, moral damages and exemplary damages will depend
on the penalty, extent of violence and sexual abuse; and the
number of victims where the penalty consists of indivisible
penalties:
1.1

1.2

In Robbery with Intentional Mutilation, the amount of
damages is the same as the above if the penalty imposed is Death
but reduced to reclusion perpetua although death did not occur.
1.2

Where the penalty imposed is Death but reduced
to reclusion perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346:
a.
b.

Civil indemnity
Moral damages

c.

Exemplary damages

P100,000.00
P100,000.00
P100,000.00

1.3

Where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua, other
than the above-mentioned:
a.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

b.
c.

Moral damages
Exemplary damages

P75,000.00
P75,000.00

2.1

The above Rules apply to every victim who dies as a
result of the crime committed. In other complex crimes where
death does not result, like in Forcible Abduction with Rape, the
civil indemnity, moral and exemplary damages depend on the
prescribed penalty and the penalty imposed, as the case may
be.

1.1

Where the penalty imposed is Death but reduced
to reclusion perpetua because of R.A. No. 9346:
a.

Civil indemnity

P100,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P100,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P100,000.00

For the victims who suffered mortal/fatal wounds and
could have died if not for a timely medical intervention
the following shall be awarded:
"
a.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P75,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P75,000.00

For the victims who suffered non-mortal/non-fatal injuries:
a.

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

Where the penalty imposed is reclusion perpetua, other
than the above-mentioned:
a.

Civil indemnity

75,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P75,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P75,000.00

In Robbery with Intentional Mutilation, the amount
of damages is the same as the above if the penalty imposed
is reclusion perpetua.

IV. For Special Complex Crimes like Robbery with Homicide,
Robbery with Rape, Robbery with Intentional Mutilation,
Robbery with Arson, Rape with Homicide, Kidnapping with
Murder, Carnapping with Homicide, or Carnapping with Rape,
Highway Robbery with Homicide, Qualified Piracy, Arson with
Homicide, Hazing with Death, Rape, Sodomy or Mutilation
and other crimes with death, injuries, and sexual abuse as
the composite crimes, where the penalty consists of indivisible
penalties:

Art. 107

2.2

2.3

For the victims who suffered mortal/fatal wounds and
could have died if not for a timely medical intervention
the following shall be awarded:
"
a.

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

For the victims who suffered non-mortal/non-fatal injuries:
a.

Civil indemnity

b.

Moral damages

P25,000.00
P25,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P25,000.00

968
969

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

Art. 107

In Robbery with Physical Injuries, the amount of damages
shall likewise be dependent on the nature/severity of the wounds
sustained, whether fatal or non-fatal.

VI.

A. In the crime of Rebellion where the imposable penalty
is reclusion perpetua and death occurs in the course of the
rebellion, the heirs of those who died are entitled to the following:

The above Rules do not apply if in the crime of Robbery
with Homicide, the robber/s or perpetrator/s are themselves
killed or injured in the incident.
Where the component crime is rape, the above Rules shall
likewise apply, and that for every additional rape committed,
whether against the same victim or other victims, the victims
shall be entitled to the same damages unless the other crimes of
rape are treated as separate crimes, in which case, the damages
awarded to simple rape/qualified rape shall apply.
V.

In other crimes that result in the death of a victim and the
penalty consists of divisible penalties, i.e., Homicide, Death
under Tumultuous Affray, Infanticide to conceal the dishonour
of the offender, Reckless Imprudence Resulting to Homicide,
Duel, Intentional Abortion and Unintentional Abortion, etc.:
1.1

1.2

Where the crime was consummated:
a.

Civil indemnity

P50,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

Where the crime committed was not consummated, except
those crimes where there are no stages, i.e., Reckless
Imprudence and Death under tumultuous affray:
a.

Frustrated:
i.
ii.

b.

Civil indemnity

P30,000.00

Moral damages

P30,000.00

Attempted:
i.

Civil indemnity

P20,000.00

ii.

Moral damages

P20,000.00

If an aggravating circumstance was proven during the trial,
even if not alleged in the Information, in addition to the above
mentioned amounts as civil indemnity and moral damages, the
amount of P50,000.00 exemplary damages for consummated;
P30,000.00 for frustrated; and P20,000.00 for attempted, shall
be awarded.
970

Art. 107

a.

Civil indemnity

b.

Moral damages

P100,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P100,000.00

P100,000.00

B. For the victims who suffered mortal/fatal wounds in the
course of the rebellion and could have died if not for a timely
medical intervention, the following shall be awarded:

C.

a.

Civil indemnity

P75,000.00

b.

Moral damages

P75,000.00

c.

Exemplary damages

P75,000.00

For the victims who suffered non-mortal/non-fatal injuries:
a.

Civil indemnity

b.

Moral damages

P50,000.00

C.

Exemplary damages

P50,000.00

P50,000.00

VII. In all of the above instances, when no documentary evidence of
burial or funeral expenses is presented in court, the amount of
P50,000.00 as temperate damages shall be awarded.
Article 2206 of the Civil Code provides that the minimum
amount for awards of civil indemnity is P3,000.00, but does
not provide for a ceiling. Thus, although the minimum amount
cannot be changed, increasing the amount awarded as civil
indemnity can be validly modified and increased when the
present circumstance warrants it.
Attorney's fees In criminal cases.
The recovery of attorney's fees in the concept of actual or
compensatory damage is allowed under the circumstances provided
for in Article 2208 of the Civil Code, one of which is when the court
deems it just and equitable that attorney's fees and expenses of
litigation should be recovered. (People v. Bergante, et al., 120369-70,
February 27, 1998)

971

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Article 2208 of the Civil Code allows the recovery of attorney's
fees in cases when the defendant's act or omission has compelled the
plaintiff to litigate with third persons or to incur expenses to protect
his interest and in any other case where the court deems it just and
equitable that attorney's fees and expenses of litigation should be
recovered.

.
The action to demand restoration, reparation and
indemnification likewise descends to the heirs of the person
injured.

Art.108

[The Court] affirm[s] the award of P30,000.00 for attorney's fees
made by the trial court and the appellate court. Under Article 2208
of the Civil Code, attorney's fees and expenses of litigation may be
recovered when exemplary damages have been awarded, as in this
case. (Espana v. People, G.R. No. 163351, June 21, 2005)
Interest should be added to the damages awarded.
Interest at the rate of six percent per annum should likewise
be added to the damages awarded. (People v. Tabongbanua, G.R.
No. 171271, August 31, 2006, 500 SCRA 727) This rule would be
subsequently applied by the Court in several cases such as Mendoza
v. People, G.R. No. 173551, October 4, 2007, 534 SCRA 668; People
v. Buban, G.R. No. 170471, May 11, 2007, 523 SCRA 118; People
v. Guevarra, G.R. No. 182192, October 29, 2008, 570 SCRA 28863;
People v. Regalario, G.R. No. 174483, March 31, 2009, 582 SCRA;
and People v. Dolorido, G.R. No. 191721, January 12, 2010, among
other cases.
Civil liability not part of the punishment
As the civil liability is not part of the punishment for the crime,
the action of the Supreme Court in affirming the judgment as to the
guilt and punishment of the accused and of reversing it as to the
question of damages, with instructions to try the civil branch of the
case, does not constitute double jeopardy. (U.S. v. Heery, 25 Phil. 600,
611)

Art. 108

The heirs of the person liable has no obligation if restoration is not
possible and the deceased left no property.
Thus, ifA stole a ring which he later sold to an unknown person
and after A's conviction by final judgment, A died but he left no
property to meet the reparation, A's heirs cannot be made to repair
the damage. But if A left property, the heirs may be required to pay
out of the proceeds of the property of A. The same thing may be said
with respect to indemnification.
Civil liability is possible only when the offender dies after final
judgment.
If the obligation is liquidated, that is, if the offender before
his death was condemned by final judgment to make restitution,
reparation, or indemnification, the offended party may make effective
his claim by following the procedure provided for in Rule 86 of the
Rules of Court, that is, by filing a copy of the judgment of conviction
against the deceased with the court taking cognizance of the testate
or intestate proceedings.
If the death of the offender took place before any final judgment
of conviction was rendered against him, the action for restitution,
reparation, or indemnification must necessarily be dismissed, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 89, paragraph 1, of this
Code. (Guevara)
Indemnity not possible in acquittal, right of heirs of deceased.

Art. 108. Obligation to make restoration, reparation for
damages, or indemnification for consequential damages and
action to demand the same Upon whom it devolves. - The
obligation to make restoration or reparation for damages and
indemnification for consequential damages devolves upon the
heirs of the person liable.
972

The charge of murder was dismissed by the court because it was
covered by the amnesty proclamation. The court, however, allowed
an indemnity to be paid by the accused in favor of the heirs of the
deceased.
Held: The case having been dismissed by the court, no judgment
for indemnity was proper in the criminal proceeding.
973

Art. 109

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

But the heirs of the deceased have a right to enforce the civil
responsibility of the accused in their favor in a civil action. (U.S. v.
Madlangbayan, 2 Phil. 426, 428-429)

Art. 110

should also be liable for a greater amount as against every accessory.
Care should also be taken in considering the number of principals
versus that of accomplices and accessories. (People v. Tampus, et al.,
G.R. No. 181084, June 16, 2009)
Illustration:

Art. 109. Share of each person civilly liable. --- If there
are two or more persons civilly liable for a felony, the courts
shall determine the amount for which each must respond.

Apportionment of civil liability.
The entire amount of the civil indemnity, together with the moral
and actual damages, should be apportioned among the persons who
cooperated in the commission of the crime according to the degree
of their liability, respective responsibilities and actual participation
in the criminal act. Salvador Viada, an authority in criminal law, is
of the opinion that there are no fixed rules which are applicable in
all cases in order to determine the apportionment of civil liability
among two or more persons civilly liable for a felony, either because
there are different degrees of culpability of offenders, or because of
the inequality of their financial capabilities. On this note, he states
in his commentaries on the 1870 Penal Code of Spain that the law
should leave the determination of the amount of respective liabilities
to the discretion of the courts. The courts have the competence to
determine the exact participation of the principal, accomplice, and
accessory in the commission of the crime relative to the other classes
because they are able to directly consider the evidence presented and
the unique opportunity to observe the witnesses.
[The Court] must stress, however, that the courts' discretion
should not be untrammelled and must be guided by the principle
behind differing liabilities for persons with varying roles in the
commission of the crime. The person with greater participation in
the commission of the crime should have a greater share in the civil
liability than those who played a minor role in the crime or those who
had no participation in the crime but merely profited from its effects.
Each principal should shoulder a greater share in the total amount of
indemnity and damages than every accomplice, and each accomplice
974

With respect to the civil liability, the indemnity of P6,000.00
awarded by the Court should be apportioned as follows: the principal,
Dungo-an Abao, shall be liable primarily for P3,000.00; and the four
accomplices (petitioners) shall be liable primarily and in solidum
among themselves for P3,000.00. The subsidiary liability of all of them
shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Article 110 of
the R.P.C. (Lumiguis w. People, G.R. No. L-20338, April 27, 1967, 19
SCRA 842, 847) The last sentence means "that, in case of insolvency
of the accomplices, the principal shall be subsidiarily liable for their
share of the indemnity; and in case of the insolvency of the principal,
the accomplices shall be subsidiarily liable, jointly and severally, for
the indemnity due from said principal." (People v. Cortes, 55 Phil.
143,150)

Art. 110. Several and subsidiary liability ofprincipals,
accomplices, andaccessories offelony - Preference inpayment.
- Notwithstanding the provisions of the next preceding

article, the principals, accomplices, and accessories, each
within their respective class, shall be liable severally (in
solidum) among themselves for their quotas, and subsidiarily
for those of the other persons liable.
The subsidiary liability shall be enforced, first against
the property of the principals; next, against that of the
accomplices; and lastly, against that of the accessories.
Whenever the liability in solidum or the subsidiary
liability has been enforced, the person by whom payment has
been made shall have a right of action against the others for
the amount of their respective shares.

975

Art. 111

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 111

Civil and subsidiary liabilities of principals.

Example of the application of Article 111.

When there are principals and accessories in the commission
of the crime of theft of large cattle valued at P200.00, the principals
are solidarily liable for P150.00 which represents their quota
and subsidiarily liable for P50.00 representing the quota of their
accessories. (People v. Tocbo, CA., 45 0.G. 2571)

.
Suppose A after having stolen a diamond ring worth P1,000.00,
gives it to B who, not knowing the illegal origin of same, accepts it.
Later B sells the nng for P500.00 to a foreigner, who immediately
leaves the country. As the ring cannot be returned, the remedy
available to the offended party is to obtain from the offender the
reparation equivalent to the value of the ring. In case A is insolvent
B shall be subsidiarily liable in the sum not exceeding P500.00 which
is the gratuitous share in the commission of the crime. (Guevara)

Civil and subsidiary liabilities of accomplices.
The principal is primarily liable for his own part of the indemnity.
The several accomplices are jointly and severally liable for the portion
adjudged against them and are subsidiarily liable for the portion of
their principal in case of the latter's insolvency. (People v. Bantagan,
54 Phil. 834, 841)

Art. Ill. Obligation to make restitution in a certain
case. - Any person who has participated gratuitously in the

The fortune of the innocent person must be augmented by his
participation in the proceeds of the crime.
It is necessary that his fortune has been augmented by his
participation in the proceeds of the crime. If he merely participated
in the eating of the stolen property, he is not obligated to make
restitution, because his fortune was not enhanced thereby. (1 Viada,
Codigo Penal, 4th Ed., p. 550)

proceeds of a felony shall be bound to make restitution in an
amount equivalent to the extent of such participation.

Not criminally liable.
The person who participated gratuitously in the proceeds of a
felony referred to in this article is not criminally liable.
Must not be an accessory.
If the person who participated gratu.itously in the proceeds of the
felony knew that the property came from an illegal source, he is an
accessory and he is not only civilly liable, but also criminally liable.
"Participated gratuitously."
This article has reference to a case of an innocent person who
has participated in the proceeds of a felony through the liberality of
the offender. In other words, he should not have paid for the stolen
property which he received from the offender.
If the innocent person paid for the article, because he bought it
Article 105 applies.
"
976

977

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

Art. 112

defamation must be brought within one year. (Tejuco v. E.R. Squibb
& Son Phil. Corp., 103 Phil. 594, 595)
Civil liability is extinguished by subsequent agreement between
the accused and the offended party.

Chapter Three
EXTINCTION AND SURVIVAL OF CIVIL
LIABILITY
Art. 112. Extinction of civil liability. - Civil liability
established in Articles 100, 101, 102, and 103 of this Code shall
be extinguished in the same manner as other obligations, in
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Law.

Civil liability is, therefore, extinguished:
(1)

By payment or performance;

(2)

By the loss of the thing due;

(3)

By the condonation or remission of the debt;

(4)

By the confusion or merger of the rights of creditor and
debtor;

(5)

By compensation;

(6)

By novation.

On March 31, 1959, an agreement was entered into between
appellant and complainant whereunder the former agreed to refund to
the latter, in stated installments, the sum of$1,210.89, representing
the overpayments made for the account of Alfonso Marte, Jr. This
agreement was partly executed inasmuch as appellant had made
the down payment of Pl 70.00 thereon, as well as seven installments
of P15.00 each or an aggregate amount of P275.00. Although the
criminal action remained unimpaired, this subsequent agreement
entered into between appellant and complainant was, in effect, a
novation of the civil liability of appellant. This was well within the
right of the parties to do inasmuch as the civil aspect ofa crime may
be compounded by subsequent agreement or otherwise extinguished
by the same causes for the extingu.ishment of civil obligations under
the Civil Law. (Arts. 23 and 112, R.P.C.) Since novation is a recognized
mode of relatively extinguishing a civil obligation, it follows that
appellant's civil liability arising from the crime was superseded by
the novatory agreement. Complainant's recourse is to enforce the
agreement aforesaid. It has become improper to make an award for
civil indemnity at this instance. (People v. Tablante Vda. de Marte,
CA., 65 O.G. 1328, February 10, 1969)
Effect of condonatlon of civil liability.

Other causes of extinguishment of obligations, such as
annulment, rescission, fulfillment of a resolutory condition, and
prescription, are governed elsewhere in this Code. (Art. 1231, Civil
Code)
Prescription is one of the modes of extinguishing obligations
according to Article 1231 of the Civil Code. Where a civil action for
damages due to an alleged libel was brought more than one year after
the cause of action accrued, said action is barred by prescription.
Article 1147 of the Civil Code provides that a civil action for

978

The offended party in a criminal case executed an affidavit
in which he swore to the following: "That in conscience I hereby
withdraw, condone, dismiss and waive any and all claims, civil,
criminal or administrative, that I may have against Amancio Balite
due to or by reason of the misunderstanding which brought about
the filing of the said criminal case." It was held that affidavit of the
offended party necessarily wiped out the civil indemnity of P5,000.00
granted by the lower court.
Express condonation by the offended party has the effect of
waiving civil liability with regard to the interest of the injured party.
For civil liability arising from an offense is extinguished in the same
979

THE REVISED PENAL CODE
Criminal Law

TITLE FIVE
Civil Liability

manner as other obligations, in accordance with the provision of the
civil law. (Balite w. People, No. L-21475, September 30, 1966, 18 SCRA
280, 290)

"Notwithstanding the fact that hex xx has not been required to serve
the same (sentence) by reason of amnesty, pardon, commutation
of sentence, or any other reason."

Art. 113

Civil liability may arise from (1)

Crime,

(2)

Breach of contract (culpa contractual), or

(3)

'Tortious act (culpa aquiliana).

The first is governed by the R.P.C. The second and the third are
governed by the Civil Code. The civil liability from any of those three
sources is extinguished by the same causes enumerated.
Offender is civilly liable even if stolen property is lost by reason
of force majeure.
Where it appears that a person has been deprived of the
possession of his property, the malefactor is responsible to the owner
either (1) for the return of the property or (2) for the payment of its
value if it cannot be returned, and this whether the property is lost or
destroyed by the act of the malefactor or that of any other person, or
as a result of any other cause or causes. (U.S. w. Mambang, 36 Phil.
348, 349; see Article 1268, Civil Code)
Thus, even ifthe cattle stolen by the accused died from rinderpest
while in the possession of the constabulary during the pendency of
the trial, in case of conviction, the accused are still liable civilly for
the reasonable value of the said cattle.

While amnesty wipes out all traces and vestiges of the crime,
it does not extinguish the civil liability of the offender. (U.S. v.
Madlangbayan, 2 Phil. 426, 428-429)

A pardon shall in no case exempt the culprit from the payment
of the civil indemnity imposed upon him by the sentence. (Art. 36,
par. 2, Revised Penal Code)
Application for probation affects only the criminal aspect of the
case.
Probation is defined as "a disposition under which a defendant,
after conviction and sentence, is released subject to conditions imposed
by the Court and to the supervision of a probation officer." (Sec. 3,
P.D. No. 968 [Probation Law]) The "conviction and sentence" clause
of the statutory definition clearly signifies that probation affects only
the criminal aspect of the case. If under Article 113 of the R.P.C., the
obligation to satisfy civil liability continues notwithstanding service
of sentence or non-service due to amnesty, pardon, commutation of
sentence, or any other reason, there is no reason why an application
for probation should have an opposite effect insofar as determination
of civil liability is concerned. (Budlong v. Apalisok, No. L-60151, June
24, 1983, 122 SCRA 935, 938-939, 941)

Art. 113. Obligation to satisfy civil liability. - Except in
case of extinction of his civil liability as provided in the next
preceding article, the offender shall continue to be obliged to
satisfy the civil liability resulting from the crime committed by
him, notwithstanding the fact that he has served his sentence
consisting of deprivation of liberty or other rights, or has not
been required to serve the same by reason of amn esty, pardon,
commutation of sentence or any other reason.

980

Art. 113

981

